AGAINST JEROME OSORIVS Bishop of Siluane in Portingall and against his
slanderous Inuectiues. An Answer Apologeticall: For the necessary defense of
the Evangelical doctrine and verity.

First taken in hand by M. Walter Haddon, then undertaken and continued by M.
John Fox, and now Englished by James Bell.

Esaias. Cap. 11. 65.

There shall no man hurt, nor slay an other in all my holy hill, says the
Lord.

JESUS CHRISTVS


AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Anno. 1581.

To the Christian Reader.
EXperience has taught me (gentle Reader) that it is very dangerous in this
troublesome age to co^mitt any thing to Printe for thy behoof. So farreforth
has that frettyng ca^ker of carping curiosity prevailed: So busily pryeth in
every Printers shop that wayward churl Zoilus: So diverse and variable are
the wits and dispositions of our age, readyer to break down open roades
thorough other men's hedges, then to stop never so little a gappe with any
frythe of their own. To such be it answered, that the greatest barkers be not
commonly the best byters: and it falls out for the more part, that such
bytesheepe curres smell of the cudgel, when the gentle hounds feed of the
croomes. And so I leave them to them selves, whose sinister Judgment as I
little regard, so I groape not after their praise. Only my purpose is to
profitt the unlettered English men: Amongst whom the gentle natured will
interpret the best, and findyng ought amiss, will with courtesy rather
correct (I trust) then with carpyng condemn the course of my labors, for
whose only behoof and benefitt I adventured upon this translation, and
published the same in Printe. Some bytternesse of speech will now and then
occur, which at the first blushe may happily breed some offense. But if we
call to remembrance the sharpenes of speech, uttered by king David, by the
Apostle Paul, and by all the holy ones them selves almost, in their feruencie
of zeal, against the Enemies of God, and adversaries of the Cross of Christ,
this offense will be less offensive in respect of the opposed adversary, whose
mouth ruffleth and runs over every where, with more then Ruffianlike and
rascallike terms against our most dread Sovereign, against her highness
Nobility, against her subjects, and the whole state of her most gracious
Government, to the utter defacing of the Gospel of Grace: which no true
hearted Englishman can endure to Read without grievous anguishe of mind. This
licentious lauishenesse of railing tongue sithence outraged so monstruously,
was convenient to be met withal with some liberty of free speech: That so
the gentle Prelate, being otherwise squeymishe to hear shrewde words, might
hereafter learn to write more modestly, and more beseemyng his Pastoral
dignity and function, and geaue less occasion of just reproach. The rest I
commend to thy gentle consideration, requiryng none other guerdon at thy
hands for my travail, then thy friendly acceptaunce, and some spare of thine
idle time, to be employed in perusing for thy better instruction. So shall thou
encourage me (as knowledge shall increase and opportunity serve) to acquaynte
the with the fruits of the rest of my labors, Which I shall hereafter
undertake by the conduct of Gods holy Spirit: who enlighten thine heart with
spiritual understanding, to the glory of his name, and the establishement of
thy Faith, Farewell.

Thy fellow servant in the Lord. James Bell.
To the right honorable and my very good Lord Phillippe Earl of Arundell,
grace, peace, and spiritual consolation in Christ Jesus.
IT might justly be wondered (right honorable) that in this so bright a
Sunneshyne of the Gospel of Grace, so plentyfully ouerspreading this noble
Island with such resplendisau^t beams, so many English Endimions could
continue so long, so amazedly dazeled of sight, as not to be able to lift up
the eyes of their sleepy affections to conceive, much less to pearce into the
amyable closettes thereof: If the old ancient Enemy of mankind, and sworn
adversary of all true Religion, were not more vigilaunt to lulle in security,
then those sluggardes are willing to be awakened out of their lamentable
blindness. For if we behold the most happy course of this our floorishing
continuance in sincere Religion, if we ponder with upright ballaunce of
unstained affection, the glorious manifestation of the ancient Apostolic
doctrine, and withal look into the marvelous discovery of that counterfaict
Synagogue of Rome, who could not but wonder at so blockishe in sensibilitie in
so manifest light? A man would have thought, though Satan hadd transformed him
self into an Angel of light, that yet he should not so long have prevailed,
especially amongst so sharp sighted Deuines, so cunnyng caruers of
Scriptures, and profou^de Doctors of School, where a thorough Anatomy is
usually made of all manner of Arts, discipline and doctrine. A man would have
thought that of all other knowledge, the heavenly doctrine of Christ, being of
all parts so forcible and mighty in operation, so able of it self to draw,
move, stir, renew and change men, to search, examine, to cut to the quick,
to open the filthy soars of sin, to lance the festered impostumes of our
foul affections, to pearce the inward and most secrett parts of the heart, to
sack and subuerte the kingdom of Satan, and destroy his whole army, could
with the authority and majesty thereof, have stayed, holden back, and
crushed in pieces, all the devises, attemptes, and cou^termoyles of Satan's
ministers, in such sort, as that either with admiration amazed they might be
astonyed, or with their mouths stopped they might be utterly confounded. Such
is the strength of the Gospel, according to that which we read, Never man
spoke like unto this man. John. 7. John. 7.


Yet lo such is the careful watchefullnesse of that Emperor of darkness,
as will not suffer the careless drowsinesse of our Scribes and Pharisees to
acknowledge their promised Messiah, though he come amongst his own: yea
though with their eyes they see the blind restored to sight, the dumme to
speak, the deaf to hear, and the very man of Sin to sit in the chair of
pestilence, moyling, turmoyling, peruertyng, subuertyng, razing, defacyng,
reuelyng, and ruffling in all manner of horrible abominations. But even as the
Jews deluded by that fanaticall Spirit, conceived a vain and foolish
opinion of their Messiah, as that he should come with worldly pomp, in
Princely magnificence, after the manner of some earthly Potentate, to make them
Lords of the earth: Even so our more then Iewishe Romanistes, carried with
like phancie in their forged Vicar of Christ, and bewitched with false
persuasion of the stately Royalties of their visible glorious Synagogue, have
their minds busied about nothing so much, as about the magnifieng, exaltyng,
and glorifieng thereof, blazing abroad to the world the vain glitteryng shows
of stagelike ceremonies, frivolous traditions, peltyng devises, and drowsy
dreams of their own idle brains, which they deliver over as so many Oracles
from heaven, contrary to the express word of the Testament of Grace, which
does minister to all men abou^dauntly, all things sufficient for the obteinyng
of everlasting health and salvation.

The whole earth swarmeth every where with their books and wrytinges
testifieng the same: and this our Age is to to much pestered with them, the
Authors of which notwithstanding already are, or may be satisfied (if they
were not altogether cast over into a reprobate mind) with the manifold
au^sweres of many learned Fathers, and faithful servants of God, even to the
full. So might this ghostly Bishop Jerome Osorius, upon the learned answer
made by M. Haddon, to the slanderous Libell of his, presumptuously pearching
to her highness with flattery and lies, have stayed his course, and by scile^ce
provided more wisely for his creditt and good name, which otherwise hadd not
been made so notably infamous to the world, if this railing Reply against M.
Haddon had not been published abroad.

But who can tell, whether it has pleased the Lord to raise up this Iambres
against Moses? and to stir up this proud Popish Holofernes, a most
notable champion of that Roman Nabuchadnezer to make so proud a challenge
against his poor City Bethulia? who can tell if the Lord have appointed this
Semey to rail so outragiously against our David? who can tell if God have
hardened the heart of this Pharao, that so his people Israel might with greater
glory pass fromout that miserable captivity of that oppressing Egypt? Great
is the God of Israel, and marvelous in his works. He it is, who by the only
touch of a small rod, divided the readd Sea, and made the same to become
dry land, and a passable way for his people, retournyng the waves thereof
upon the pursuyng Enemy, to the utter overthrow of Pharao, his Charettes, and
all his hoaste. He it is, that gave the headd of that stought warrior
Holofernes into the hands of a seely woman. He it is, that caused the rodd of
Aaron to eat up all the rods of thenchauntours, and Sorcerers of Egypt. He
it is, that with the only breath of his mouth has daunted the insolency of
this Popish challenger, who being esteemed amongst our English Papists, the
most notable Prelate of our Age, is now by the hand of a weak English Pastor
discovered in his colors, to be naught else, then a vain bablyng Rhetorician
full of words, altogether void of matter.

All which notwithstanding, such is the malicious peruersenes of the world,
that he only and alone bears the price, and carries the greatest creditt
and estimation of all the writers of our time, every whose sentence is reputed
an Oracle from heaven: The odd man of the whole world Jerome Osorius: not able
to be answered, much less to be confused by any Protestaunt whatsoever. It
was heartily wished, That the Author him self would have delivered his
trauayles herein in the English tongue, that so the unlettered English man, by
the Arguments herein comprised, might have been able to stop the mouths of
the wayward English cauillers, and supporters of his quarrel. But he respected
an other end, though not so plausible to his own countrymen, yet much more
commodious for the general common weal of Christendom. For he right well
perceived, though Osorius roaued at England by name, that yet he bent his
shot against the general state of all Christianity, and therefore most
necessary, that as Osorius made his challenge known to the whole world, so the
world also might be made acquainted with the encounter (I would have said) the
utter overthrow of the same. The benefit whereof, though have redounded to
many particular persons within this Realm, yet has not been so universal, as
was needful in respect of the multitude, who only regardyng the name and
fame of the man, will (as I said before) scarsely be persuaded, that he may
possibly be answered.

I pass over the worthy praises, which the book it self most justly
deserves, both in excellency of matter, and in worthynes of the manner, as the
faithful servant of Christ, M. John Fox has handled it. Yet this I dare
promise, and boldly pronounce, that all men that will, may by readyng,
embracyng, believing, and followyng the doctrine contained in this book, be
thoroughly furnished, as well with the most especial and principal points of
Christian Religion, namely, our Justification, Election, Regeneration, and
Redemption by the only merit and mean of the most pure, and precious
bloodshed of that immaculate Lamb, slain before the foundatio^s of the world
were laid, to the singular comfort of their souls: as also by the Arguments
herein contained, armed at all points, against all assaults, and practizes of
all the massemoungers, meritemou^gers, pardonmoungers, Confessionmoungers, and
all other of the Popish rabble whatsoever in the world. As to the translation I
dare not affirm otherwise, the^ that I have travailed therein faithfully,
accordying to the measure of grace, which the Lord has geauen me, not
doughtyng but it will atteyne the wished success, if me^ will but vouchsafe,
with the same simplicity of eye, and willingness of heart to read, search,
examine, and stand upright in perusing of the same, with the which I have to my
poor ability trauayled therein. Certes my purpose was to profitt my country
men generally all.

These fruits of my labors I have thought good to present, and dedicate to
your honorable patronage, moved hereunto by the most commendable report, and
opinion that all men do conceive of your honors godly zeal, and zealous
godlynes, to the singular glory of your name, and unspeakable comfort of all
the godly. To the well acceptyng and good liking whereof, I judge it not
altogether so necessary to seek by any other circumstaunce, and persuadible
speeches to enduce your honor, save only the bare consideration of the
wonderful fruit, that may be reaped by readyng the contents, namely,
proceedyng from so well known a Spirit, of so godly and faithful a servant
of God. Wherein albeit the translation atteyne not to so absolute excellency
and perfection, as the dignity of the matter does require (as of right it
ought have been delivered in such wise, as should not in any respect diminishe
the worthynes of the Author) yet for as much as it retcheth the end, whereunto
it was directed, namely, the benefitt of the Church of God, and the utter
overthrow of that malignaunt Church of Satan and his ministers, I dought not
but your honor will vouchsafe thereof accordyngly.

Jesus Christ the Son of our heavenly, eternal, and everlasting Father
preserve your honor in all spiritual grace, and heavenly wisdom, prosper
your proceedinges, establish your faith, fructify your studies, multiply your
consolations, and direct all your ways, finally bless your hearts desire,
with increase of much honor in this world, to the glorifieng of your body and
soul, in that immortal and glorious kingdom of heaven for ever and ever.
Amen.

Your honors in the Lord. James Bell.
To the most Renowned and Puissaunt Prince Sebastian king of Portingall
everlasting grace, peace, and most prosperous Reign in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.
IF I hadd undertaken this enterprise, not being enduced more of earnest
consideration of the cause I take in hand, and present necessity of the time,
then of any allurement of private commodity, or presumptuous oftentation, or
vayneglorious persuation of mind (most Renowned and virtuous Prince king
Sebastian) I should not only have been accoumpted blameworthy in the Judgment
of all the godly, but also have wilfully plunged my self into deserved
obloquy of all the world: that being a poor despised abject, a seely wretched
vnderlyng, so mere a stranger, and so far severed from you by distaunce of
place, without all manner of acquaintance either of name, or of Title, neither
called nor co^me^ded by any desert, nor by any person commanded hereunto, dare
so boldly presume to write unto your highness being the mirror of all
Princely dignity. But as the occasion that moved me to attempt your Majesty,
seemed of no small importance: so the opportunity of the matter it self
yielded unto me no less evident Argument of assured affiaunce and audacitie
(though in utter apparaunce unseemly) yet pardonable (I trust) upon due
examination of the cause. And yet besides this alleged necessity emplyeng
reasonable excuse, I wanted not many others as commendable aids to defend my
enterprise, if like example applied in like cause may be allowable. For if
Jerome Osorius being as then but a private man, no less estraunged from the
Society of this common weal of ours, then a professed Enemy to the Religion,
which we embrace in England, provoked either of some vain glorious
oftentatio^, or of greedy desire to maintain his own Religion, and to deface
ours, under zeal of pretensed good will and affection borne, durst be so bold
not only to write so long and tedious an Epistle to our most Royal excellent
Queen Elizabeth, but also so vnprouokedly to aduertize her highness of matters
inconvenient, dangerous to her souls health: why should I be condemned of
insolency? if inflamed with sincere inclination of most humble duty toward
the most valiant Prince Sebastian king of Portingall, no less famous in
Princely virtues, then valiau^t in administration of power, if allured by the
notable Report of his incomparable bounty, do send most humble greetyng in the
Lord Jesus, in two or three words to his Majesty, in recommendyng his
highness to the gracious protection of the almighty, with no less increase
of perfect peace and tranquillity to him and his by Letter, then inwardly I
wish to his Majesty from the bottom of my heart. Neither do I see any reason
to the contrary, why I should be more embraced in co^ceipte, and driven from my
endeavor, having so many notable commendations uttered by every godly
personadge in the behalf of the famous king Sebastian, Renowned in each Coast
for his excellency in prowess, and Noblesse in dignity: sithence Osorius
through the pleasant blast of the Trompe of fame, has presumed so far upon
the unspeakable clemency of our Queens most excellent Majesty, whom he never
saw: when as also her highness of her aboundaunt grace has with so great
lenity entertained the Letters of Osorius, and so gently perused them (though
otherwise perhaps unworthy so noble a personadge) why should not I persuade
my self to obtain as much, yea more rather of your Princely magnificence, and
heroical clemency, especially sithence it cann not be credible that king
Sebastian being a man, cann any ioate be inferior to Elizabeth a woman Queen,
in any Princely orname^tes or duty of Humanity?

But there will some peradventure be found not far from amongst us, to who^
this comparison which I do make betwixt us two Osorius and me, will seem in no
respect agreeable: for as much as he being a constaunt friend to the true and
Catholic Church (as they will allege) does take upon him a most
comme^dable and necessary cause: But my defense, they will say, of set purpose
proclaimyng open war against the most ancient Catholic Church, against
sincere Religion, against the approved supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, has
been always hitherto atteinted by Judgment of all Monarchs, and by consent
of all degrees condemned and banished^ and ought not by any means be admitted
into the Courts and ears of Princes, as matter exempt from all protection and
privilege of godly Laws. This Objection is no new thing, and whereof I have
long ago well and advisedly debated with my self, yea the very self same
thing (most Royal king) wherein I am become at this present your Majesty's
most humble Suppliaunt, and whereof I determined to beseech your highness in
the bowels of our Lord God (whose authority and person you do represent in
your Realm) that ye would vouchsafe due consideration, Jerome Osorius Bishop
of Syluain bandyng and enforcing all his knowledge and skill against the
professed doctrine of our Religion publicly received in England, has
published in Printe three famous Libelles under the Title of an Answer to
Master Haddon: for Reply whereof we have framed according to our slender
capacity this Apology, how conveniently to the purpose I have not to say, to
what success it will come, is in the hands of the Lord, surely for the
garnishment of phrase and Style thereof I have no great regard. For this our
contention tends not to the blazyng of excellency in eloquence, neither
treat we here of the delicacy and finesse of speech, neither descant we like
Minstrelles of warblyng of stringes, ne yet toss we our questions to and fro
in vaunt of bravery of wit, Sophisters use to argue of moates in the Sun in
their triflyng and Dunsticall Schools: But we dispute as Deuines in matters of
greatest importance, of true righteousness, of the way to eternal salvation,
and everlasting damnation, and of the true woshippyng of allmighty God. This
Apology or Answer to the quarrellsome and slau^derous reproaches of Osorius,
how simple soever it appear, we have thought for no man so meet to be
presented, as to your Majesty (most excellent king Sebastian) whom we most
humbly crave and desire to be both a wittnes and a Judge of the controversy.

As for the questions wherewith Osorius does inueigh against us, we suppose are
already well known to your grace. Now therefore the petition that we desire
to obtain of your highness is this in effect. That for as much as Osorius
has uttered all his cunnyng and eloquence by all means he may possibly to
deprave us (who^ he unhonestly reprocheth by the name of Lutheranes) not only
unto your Majesty, but to all other Princes of Christendom also, thereby to
bring us into unappeasable hatred, it may please the Royal Majesty of all
godly Princes, not to conspire to geaue sentence against us, before the matter
be heard and debated betwixt us. And your highness especially (most noble king
of Portingall) having already seen the clamours and brables of Osorius, being
the best and chiefest Arguments that he uses to deface the orders and
observation of our profession, will vouchsafe also with like equity and
patience of mind, to admit our confutation thereof into your presence:
whereby each party being discovered according to truth, your highness may more
certainly determine of the cause. There is a notable Law and an oath
established in the Judgments of the ancient Athenians: To hear with both
ears, that indifferent ears should be open to each party. But what manner of
custom is used now a days in this perplexity and co^bate of opinions, where
Bishops armed with the authority of Princes do stand raunged in main
battle against the manifest verity, and do so bend the whole consent of
their faith to the one party that all liberty once to mutter is utterly cut
of from the other party?

But here may some contrary doubtfullnes paradue^ture trouble your Royal
thought, not so much proceedyng from your gracious nature, as whyspered into
your godly ears by the subtle and slanderous practizes of glaueryng glosers:
who under the counterfaict vysour of this glorious cou^terfaict Church, have
wonderfully bewitched the eyes and ears of many noble personadges, and under
pretense of succeeding course of many years, do make glorious bragges, that
this newfangled Church, wherein the Romish Bishop in enthronized is the only
Catholic Church, and the supremacy thereof to be only obeyed, alleadgyng the
same Church to be the Empress and gouernesse of all other Churches, and which
of right ought to be esteemed above all Kings and Emperors, as over the which
Christ has substituted the Bishop of Rome his sole Vicar and Vicegerent
earth: and therefore that all degrees ought and may safely submitt themselves to
the authority and determination of that Church, as which being continually
vpholden by the power and blessing of the holy Ghost, was never seen hitherto
to have erred, ne yet could by any means swerve one title from the right line
and known trade of the true faith taught in holy Scriptures. And that all
other persons whatsoever sequestering themselves from the prescript Rules and
Cannons of that Church, cann not choose but run headlong into wandryng
errors, amazed blindenes, and extreme maddnes. Wherefore those Lutheranes and
Hugonoughtes are worthily to be expelled from the unity of that Church, and
deservedly adjudged to fire and fagottes as most dampnable heretics, not
worthy of any favorable protection, no not their writings so much as to be
touched with any ma^s hands, because they dare presmou^te once to quacke
against the supremacy of that Angelicke Ierarchy.

As touching which slanderous surmises, albeit nothing cann be more falsely
and shamefully imagined, then those Sorcerous enchau^tementes, it is wonder,
how much this poisoned Dolldreanche has betyppledd the senses of many great
personadges, and has so long prevailed in great admiration with sundry
estates, through the only ignorance of learning and overmuch credulity of
godly Princes: until of late by the incomprehensible providence of Almighty
God, the worthy Art of Emprintyng was erected, by means whereof good Letters
and Books came to the Mart: and Printers shoppes discovered the foggy and
darkened clouds of this old mothe eaten barbarousnes. Hereby it came to
pass, that the tedious and deep doungeons of lothesome ignorance being
surprised with a certain new and clear dawnyng day of purer doctrine, as also
of all other liberal Sciences began to shine abroad, nor will leave (I
trust) to ouerspread his brighte glisteryng beams daily more and more, until
with the inaccessible brightenes thereof it do either thoroughly vanquishe the
whole kingdom of darkness, or at the least change the same into some better
countenance. And to the end we may conceive assured hope of good success
herein, two things do minister unto us especial comfort. Whereof the one
consists in the mearcy of the Lord, the other remains in your hands that
be Kings and Princes next under the God, being the Lords watchmen. For the
first we have an infallible Argument which cann never deceive, the assured
testimony of Jesus Christ, who has prophesied in his holy Scriptures, that the
same shall be brought to pass: the greater part whereof we have already
experimented to be accomplished in these our days. That the Lord with the
breath of his mouth shall confound the pride of the Beast so arrogantly
vaunting him self in his holy Temple. For the next: Apoca. 17.
And the ten horns (says he) which thou did see upon the Beast, are those
^enne Kings, which shall abhor the Babylonicall Strampett, and shall make
her desolate and naked, and shall devour her flesh, and burn her Carcass in
flames of fire: for the Lord has inspired into their hearts to bring this to
pass, even as it has pleased him. Apocal. 17.

Wherefore awake you noble Princes and Christian Captains, march on in Gods
name: Atchieue an exployte worthy your noble Race, and be no longer trained
with the traiterous sleightes of subtle sycopha^tes: but pursue with the power
the godly guidyng of the Lord of hosts. Amongst whom I most humbly call upon
your highness (most singular Pattern of Princely Royalty) not to the end to
teaze you to exercize cruelty against that viperous generation. Only my
petition is (that for the love you bear to Jesus Christ, and your own souls
health) ye vouchsafe to deliver simple innocents from the bloody jaws of
those rauenyng Wolves, and horrible blouddsuckers. That enterchaunge of things
being made, the true and pure word of God may be heard what it teaches. And
that ye let lowse the reins of their licentious insolency no longer, so that
they do not hereafter abuse you, as the Jews did handle our Lord Jesus Christ,
whose face^ when they had blindefolded, they beat his body with whippes. There
has been to many broils already amongst us Christians: to much Christian
blood has been spilte: to much cruelty and horror has been exequuted, whiles
you in the mean space (in whose power rested the stay of this outrage) either
wincked at their bootchery, or at the least, left poor innocents succourlesse
in their slaughter houses. How long shall this Romish Nymrod vaunt in his
throne? how long shall he make a scorn of your patience (most excellent
Princes) when will your Royal hearts and noble courage daunte his pride? when
will you resume into your hands the whole sword of Justice, the better part
whereof the Romish Russian has bereft you? when will you surcease to be
bondeslaues unto them, whom the mighty God has made vassalles to your lawful
Regiment? how long will ye suffer your mouths to be mooseled, and your eyes
muffeled with such blind errors contrary to the manifest light of the
Gospel? If the questions (whereof arises our controversy) were so hard and
intricate, that they exceeded your capacities, I would not have entruded my
self into your presence with this manner of persuasion, but would have referred
my self rather to the censure of the learned. But for as much as this Religion
of Gods holy Gospel, which we profess, is so resple^disant in the eyes and
ears of all men, as the bright shyning Sun in whott Summers day, the
doctrine (I say) wherewith we are enstructed, which preaches Repentance to
the bruysed conscience, which again imputes unto the penitent persons free
righteousness and deliverance from Sin by faith without works in Christ
Jesus only, which forbids Idolatry, which restrayneth to add or diminish
any title from the prescript rule of holy Scriptures, which forbids the
invocation of the dead and prayeng to strange Gods, which acknowledges the
humanity of Christ the Son of God to be in no place, but at the right hand
of the Father, which approves honest and honorable estate of Wedlock in all
persons indifferently: which has made all food and sustenaunce both fish and
flesh without choice (being received with thankesgeuyng) subject to the
necessary use of man, which takes away all confidence and affiaunce usually
ascribed unto merits and works, which calls us away from the opinion of
souls health, to be set in observation of prescribed days and months: which
reduces us from the naked elements of the world, from worshippyng of signs
and outward ceremonies, which (I say) clears our hearts and minds from the
bondage of men's traditions and dreams, and does ensure and establish us in
mearcy and grace: which allureth all persons indifferently to the readyng of
holy Scriptures: which denies to no man the participation of the Cup of the
new Testament in the blood of Jesus Christ: which abbridgeth all Ministers of
the word from desire of all worldly superiority. And to stay here from the
reckoning up of all the rest, which are more notable and manisest then the
bright shynyng Sun in mydday, what cann your Majesty atchieue more worthy,
or more beseemyng your high excellency, then to admit into the secrett
closett of your soul this most evident truth of heavenly discipline? If your
highness be not as yet made acquainted therewith: or if ye know the same to be
infallible and true, that ye will no longer shrowde under your protection such
pestilent errors already disclosed and repugnaunt to the known verity:
wherewith your grace may one day hereafter paraduenture desire to be shielded
before the dreadful Judgment seat of the Lord of hosts, according to the
promise of Jesus Christ. And the truth (says he) shall deliver you. John. 8.

And if your highness shall be persuaded, that this reformation of Religion,
whereof I have treated, does not apperteigne to your estate, or to the charge
of seculer Princes: what does the words of Osori. emporte the^? whereas writing
of our gracious Queen Elizabeth, he does so carefully admonish her Majesty to
vouchsafe especial regard to know, what the glory of Christ means, what the
law of the Lord teaches, and how much the rule of sacred religion does exact
of her highness. Again whereas in the same Epistle he does very learnedly
pronounce, that the special duty of Princely government ought to be wholly
employed to the preservation of true and pure Religion? Page 10. But else
otherwise if your grace do thoroughly conceive that is most true, that the
gracious restitutio^ of gods holy word does no less concern the furtherau^ce
of the Gospel, then the preservation of your Royal estate, and Salvation of
your subjects, I most humbly then beseech you (most noble king) by that
redoubled link of piety, wherewith you are first bound unto the Lord: That
as your Majesty shall plainly perceive this cause which we are entered upon,
not to varye or decline any jot awrye from the true touchestone of the lively
word never so little, that your highness of your excellent clemency will
vouchsafe to aduertize your Bysh. Osorius: That being myndfull of his
profession he do behave him self in debatyng the state of Religion, in the
vprightenes of judgment so as the cause requires, and from henceforth he
desiste from backbyting his neighbors with clamorous lyeng, and slanderous
reproaches, who have rather deserved well of him, then in any respect offended
him. If he be of opinion that errors ought to be rooted out of the Church,
let him first convince those for errors, which he gaynesayth, and show him
self abler man to make proof by Argument, the^ to resist with only
cauillyng: By such means will he be deemed a more profitable member of the
Church, and procure him self less hatred. It is an easy matter for every
common rascal to vomitt out disdaynefull names of infamous persons as
Protagoras, Diagoras, Cicloppes, Blindsinckes, Epicures, gortellguttes, and
monsters. But it fitteth comlyer for learned men, and more profitable for the
Christian congregation, to lay aside distompered choler, and instruct the
unlearned, and reclayme the obstinate with sound Arguments and express
testimonies of the Scriptures. If this order be not observed, every carter may
soon by authority claim to be a common rayler. An other method of writing
was requisite in Osorius more effectual to edify, then as he has uttered in
his books. For this suffices not for him to revile men with odious names, as
calling them madd, impudent, childish and infau^tes, and to declame whole
common places used against heretics. I do know and plainly confess. That it
is most necessary to oppugn erroneous sects and heresies. But it is not
error forthwith that has somewhat a bitter smatclie, and is unsavory to every
queysie stomach, neither is it always truth, that is plausible to each
fond and dotyng fantasy.

But wise men ought chiefly have considered, how every man's assertion is framed
to the agreablenes of the word of God. Yet now a days I cann not tell how, the
carte is set before the horse, and the preposterous frowardnes of some persons
have brought to pass, that because men shall not be guided by the Gospel,
they will run before it, and so men's imaginatio^s shall not obey but bear
the principal Banner before. But where as the right squaryer of Christian
faith has none other sure foundation but that only, which is grounded upon
the holy Scriptures, our duty hadd been to direct the buildyng of our Religion
by this line and level, and to ram fast the wallworkes hereof with this
cemente and mortar. But now I cann not tell how it is so come to pass, that
many do work guyte contrary. For they despise this well fenced order, and
having as little regard to the meaning and purporte of the word, they raise to
them selves a Church (which they call Catholic) and the same they assign to
be the only guide and gouernesse: yet notwithstanding they make no
demonstration whether it be the Church of Christ yea or nay. But measuryng the
same by the only Title of the Romish See, through swiftenesse of opinion, do
affirm her to be such a Church, as cann by no means go astray, and
whatsoever this Church does denou^ce and command, the same they do most
greedely catch after with the whole bente of their faith, and defend it with
tooth and nail. Out of this sincke were plumped at the first men's traditions,
and sundry prejudicial opinions, as certain unreprovable determinations, they
call them Unwritten Verities which by leisure they do co^ferre with the
Scriptures, but in such sort, that whatsoever shall seem to serve for their
purpose, they Canonize the same as inviolable: but if ought be found contrary
to their expectation, then either they submitt it to the Judgment of the
Church, or with violent wrestyng, do rack the same to color their suggestions.

And hereof sprang all that Darnell and Cockell of errors and dissensions,
because many men did fashion their faith after this frameshapen chaungelyng,
and not after the simple conduct of the word. In which Church when they
perceived those and such other doctrines to be embraced, as these, to wit,
that the Romish See ought to be supreme Empress over all other Churches: that
Purgatory must be believed: That Pardons were necessary: that vows made to
remain unmarried were meritorious: That Mounckery and cowled profession hadd a
certain wonderful perfection: That Images ought to be worshipped: Saints
prayed unto: and that the Grace and deservings of Jesus Christ could not of it
self suffice to the attaynement of Salvation: That no man could obtain
righteousness through faith without works. That Christ him self flesh, blood,
and bones was contained and sacrificed in the Mass under bare accidents: That
lay persons should be denied the use of readyng the Scriptures, and
participatyng the cup of the Lord. All these and many other like drugges,
though they never could find in the lively wellsprynges of holy Scriptures,
yet because they perceive them to be shryned in the Decrees and Decretalles of
Rome, they do constauntly believe that they must be of as autentique
authority, as if they were so many Oracles lette^ down from heaven. Hereby
comes to pass, that under the vysour of the Church, sundry deformed byshapes
of doctrine are fostered up in the Church: and under the pretense of Christ,
the true Gospel of Christ is in no small danger to be utterly defaced. So
that the lamentable complaynte uttered by Chrysostom, could never so aptly be
applied as to this our Age: Many do walk (says he) under the name of
Christians, but very few in the truth of Christ. But because we have debated
these matters with Osorius hereafter at large, I will not deteigne your Royal
Majesty with any further Register thereof.

It remains, that we make humble intercession to almighty God the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his immeasurable mearcy and love, wherewith he
disdayned not to disclose him self unto mankind by his Son, he will
vouchsafe to beautify and establishe, and with his mighty power and
outstretched arm to defend and make permanent from all errors and bloody
bootchery the true light of his holy Gospel, the bright beams whereof has
already enlightened the earth. We beseech him likewise, that by the Trompett
and dew administration of his Gospel, the kingdom of darkness may daily
more and more be subverted, and the Church and kingdom of his Son Jesus
Christ may be dispersed abroad, over the face of all the earth, and preached
thorough our all Nations and tounges. Lastly we pray, that he will endue all
Christian Kings and Princes being set in aucthority, and especially the
puissaunt and victorious Sebastian King of Portingall, with all Princely
ornaments, to enriche him with all perfect and absolute clemency, in virtue
and true godliness, and to enlighten him with the knowledge of his glorious
countenance, and establishe his throne, to the setting forth of his glory, and
advancement of his Church, through the merits of the same our Lord Jesus
Christ: who grant you in this world millions of his grace, and in the world to
come life everlasting.

Amen.
Faults escaped in them printyng with correction of the same. Wherein note
that the figures direct to the Foland and A. B. to the first and second Page.
FOl. 3. b. President, Presidentes, ibidem. is verified, which is verified. 15.
b. life hereof like hereof. 15. b. groundewordes, groundeworkes. 16. a. endyng,
enduyng. 23. b. iugglyng, ianglyng. 4.2. a. you say, lay you. 43. b. can with,
can not with. 46 b. slander, slaunderer. 56. b. in a, by a. 61. a. known, an
unknown, ibidem. to the, of the. 66. b. was no little, was little. 96. b. with,
which. 97. a. pity, pictie.105. a. of him, in him.106. b. ofter, after.10^. b.
that may, that we may.111. b. excludes, excluded.112. a. in other, in an
other. 114.b. Sophistically, a Sophistical lie. ibidem, rather of the, rather
the.116. a. of a. for a.117. a. requires, required.118. a. geauen, be
geauen.122. b. they do, they that do, ibidem, the sentence, these
sentences.130. b. not one no, not one.135. b. object, obiecteth.136. a. of
Luthers own works, he alleges Luthers own words.136. b. deny,
denies.137. b. do to, to do. 137.b. nature, the nature.151. a. frames,
frame.165. a. do thteach, does teach. 177. a. judged, be judged.190. a.
delivered, be delivered.195. a. to only, to the only. 208. a. ear, are.231.
a. is it not.237. b. may be not, may not be.239. b. includes, included.258. b.
finally which, finally in which.259. a. not but wonder, not wonder.266. a.
against, again.275. a. is neither, as neither.278. b.to the, by the.280. a. to
credit no, no credit to.285. a. Minister, Minster. 286. a. fourth, a
fourth.292. a. ye, he.293. b. circumuerted, circumuented.300. b. against,
again.303. b. pass, to pass.305. a. successors, predecessors.313. a.
pardon, pardoned.329. b. nevves, new.336. a. same, the same. ibidem. yea,
ye.357. b. Romeo. Rome do.360. b. this, these.373. b. dot, do not.379. a.
hundred, hyndred.392. a. by, be.426. b. proved, provided.430. a. our, your.437.
a. sword, word.446. a. seduced, enduced.446. b. I he, it he.462. b. this,
these, 504. b. herefore there, hereof therefore.

To the godly Reader Walter Haddon sends greetyng in our Lord Jesus Christ
A Few years past a certain Portingall named Jerome Osorius wrate a tedious
Epistle to the Queens Maiestic: In the which he imagined many monstrous
errors to be frequented in our church, and with reprochful railing most
irreverently depraved the professors of the Gospel. This public quarrel
against my nature country troubled me not a little: To some particular points
whereof I thought good to answer, although not to all in general. Partly,
because I wated time thereunto, and partly because I supposed, that Osorius was
deluded by some malicious report of our adversaries: and therefore I hoped, the
man would have been somewhat satisfied with mine answer. There passed over
one year^ or two, and I in the mean time appointed the Queens highness Agent
in Flaunders, was lydgear in Bruges. At what time one Emanuell Dalmada a
Portingall borne, Emanuell Dalmada a Portingall, Bishop of Angrence.
Bishop of Angrence suddenly sprang up in Bruxelles. This worshypfull Prelate
undertaking the defense of his friend Jerome Osorius did stuff a great Uolume
full of wounders and brabbles, and in the end of his book, caused certain
ougly pictures to be portrayde, thereby to deface my personage as much as he
might. I perused this Apology (for to be entitled that co^fused llipe) I
never saw so foolish and unsavory a writing, full ofskoffes and absurdities,
which two being taken away, there remained else nothing besides. Whereupon I
debated with my self a whiles, whether I might answer the doltish Ass: But
at the last I determined to despise the scely wretched dottarde, as one not
only altogether unlettered, but also so dull and blockysh by nature, and many
times so void of common sense, that he became a iestyng stock among the wiser
sort of his own fraternity. About two years sithence my familiar friend
Thomas Wilson returnyng from Portingall into England, Thom^ Wilson.
brought over from thence at the request of Osorius, certain Volumes of Osorius
framed into three books: whereof one he delivered severally unto me. I received
it gladly, and perused the same over once or twice, trustyng that Osorius being
now enstalled a Bishop would be much more modest the^ before. But the matter
fell quite contrary. For in steed of a Liuill and sober person, I find him a
most frivolous Sophister, for a grave Divine nine, a childish counterfaite: and
for a discrete bishop, a most impudent rayler. Hereunto was added such store of
vanity, and proud hawtynes, that in respect of him, Thraso might be well
adjudged a very discret person. I sorrow to speak so much, for it had been
more acceptable to me, and more honesty for him (according to the ordinary
course of common conference) to have debated our matters friendly, and quietly,
rather then to co^bat together with such tauntyng and snatchyng. But sithence
Osorius disputes not as a Bishop, neither will I argue to him as to a Bishop.
Neither is it requisite, that I should be myndefull of Osorius estate, sithence
he forgets his own and mine also. And it stands with good reason, that if
he have taken any pleasure in evil speaking, he loase the same in evil
hearing. Here of (gentle Reader) I thought good to premonishe the: partly, that
thou may perceive the, course and process of our writing: partly, that if I
shall seem sometimes somewhat to sharp in mine answer, thou may impute
it to the enforcement of mine adversary, rather then to the bitterness of my
nature. Now I will request two things of thee. The first is: that as I shall
have briefly and thoroughly confuted the most foolish and spiteful braules of
Osorius, so thou will be co^te^t therewith, not requiring many words in
matters of so small substance. For albeit Osorius can lunite to him self no
measure nor end of pratlyng, yet will I so temper my talk, that I neither
abuse thy leisure, nor mine own. Not because it is a hard thing, but a matter
rather of no difficulty to fill whole Uolumes with scribbling and toys: But
that it is odious to be accused of yt self same fault, whereof a man does
condemn an other. My last request is, That thou yield thine attentive mind
void of parcialitie in opinions: which two if thou grant unto me. It shall
easily appear (I trust) both that I have no less godly, then necessarily
entered into the honest defense of my country. And thou also as plainly
perceive, how maliciously and wickedly England has been accused and depraved
by her cursed enemy Osorius.

Farewell.
An Answer of Walter Haddon, to the railing Inuectiues of Jerome Osorius.
IN the entrey of this Tragedy, this prattling brawler has framed a long
discourse to show, Osorius begins with a double excuse.
how my book certain years after the publicatio^ thereof came to his hands,
wherein he supposed to find some mystical matter. As though to know, when he
received my book were any jot to yt purpose, whereof we do entreat: or as
though any man may doubt, whether a writing sold in every shop, might in
four years space be transported into Portingall. Or that mine answer
publicly Imprinted, could by no means else be brought to Osorius, unless
that worshipful Prelate of Angrence, had come over into Flanders. Nay surely.
For as this makes little to the matter to know when, or at what time my book
came to your sight, so is it not credible that you wanted him four years
after the Imprinting. And there is no doubt, but that there were messe^gers
enough, that would have conveyed the same unto you, though this Bishop of
Angrence had never seen Bruxels, yea though he had never been borne. And
therefore this frivolous painted Preface of yours might have been spared
altogether, if it had not been accompanied with two jolly mates. The one, that
ye might up this means yield your honorable testimony of your friend Emanuell,
who^ you aduau^ce for his excellency above the skies. But you come to late
Osorius for this your carrion Emanuell departing from Flaunders, has left
behynd him a most evident monument of his folly, bewrayng his blockyshnesse:
wherein alone he has uttered so many proofs of his ignorance, and
impudency, that no man will believe you, though you extol his worthynes with
an oath. Wherefore if you have any delight in his fellowship, use the same rather
in covert in your own country at home: for else where Osorius shall never get
honor or honesty by praising Emanuell. The second part of your narration
declares the laudable custom of your country, where books of corrupt
Religion may not be admitted: and therefore that Emanuell durst not commit mine
answer unto you, unless he had first obtained license thereunto. What do I
hear? Are our books so daily infamed with the slanderous accusations of your
fraternity, and yet so curiously detained from you, whom the world does
acknowledge the most sturdy champions of the Romish Sea? By what example, with
what reason, with what learning do you justify this? For where as our writers
do publicly inueighe against your Ierarchy, and wholly convince your
superstitions, it is enacted by your Canon Law, and reason yeldeth no less,
that the writings of your adversaries should be delivered unto your Doctors
and Pillars of the Church pardye, that you may burn them and broyle the
Authors of them, if they come in your claws. Reason does require this, and
custom has this far forth prevailed with you. This is also established by
your doctrine. And yet only Portingall is so squeymish at our writings, that
Osorius being himself the most courageous champion of the Romish faculty,
may not handle any leaf thereof: Emanuell Bishop of Angrence in Portingall a
Popish Inquisitour.
no, nor Emanuell a Bishop of Angrence may not dare to send any title thereof to
his familiar and fellow Osorius, though otherwise Emanuell be a most pestilent
enemy of the Gospel, a visitour (as he reports of him self) and an
Inquisitour of heretics. O pleasant parasites. O delicate devises, Tully
has a pretty sentence worthy to be noted in this place, which says. That he
can not but wonder to ese, how two Southsayers talkyng together can refrain
from open laughter, when they make mention of their blind superstitious
opinions. Even so do I much marvel truly, how you two worshipful Prelates
ca^ keep your countenaunces, when you meet together using such fond and
dotyng ceremonies touching the reiectyng of our books. When I name you, I
comprehend you two alone, your self, and your sweet brother Emanuell: of the
rest because I know no certeintie, I conceive friendly as reason requires.
After this superstitious nycetie, you begin to declare the causes that moved
you to inueigh against my poor defense. Two causes showed by Osorius why he
writes against M. Haddog.
And here you note if especial causes, whereof the one you assign to the
holiness of Religion, which being defiled by me, you must of necessity
purify again. As though I accused your Religion, and did not rather defend
our own: or as though I moved this controversy first, and not rather provoked
by you, did undertake the defense of my country against your malicious
snarling, except perhaps ye be of opinion, that a Porting all borne may with
greater reason cauil against England, then an English man stand to succor the
same. But we will see hereafter whereunto this tends.

Your second cause you say proceeded of dutiefull charity, The second part of
the excuse of Osorius.
that so you might deprave me for some lack of modesty, in that to your
judgment my writings do represent I know not what arrogancy, so that I
seem to you in some places to over reach so much, as standing still amassed in
mine own co^ceite, I seem to gape after my friends co^mendations. This is a
new kind of charity truly, with such viperous ra^cour of words to charge
your Christian brother of that horrible crime of arrogancy, whom you never saw
nor knew. Romans 2.
S. Paul does detest this charity, pronouncyng that man inexcusable which
judges an other. And therefore redreth a reason: Because (says he) in that he
judges an other he condemns him self. In this therefore Osorius being him
self a most vain and arrogant man bewrays his own beastly canckred
stomach, vpbraydyng hawtines to Haddo^, especially sithe^ce the demeanor of
Haddon by the testimony (I trust) of such as do know him, does as far
differ from all hawtines, as the poisoned Pamphlet of Osorius is void of all
civility and shamefastness. But what shall I say to this babbler, who is so
captious, that he will not admit one good word of my mouth? For he utterly
disdayneth the praises that I do give him: as where I denounce him to be
artificial in his words and phrases, he thinks I mock him, or else that I
do so commend his vtteraunce in style, as otherwise I do discommend him for
lack of judgment and knowledge. You are to to nyce Osorius to prye so
narrowly into your own praises. And yet to confess the truth simply, you are
not to be reprehended for it. For thus I judged at the first, and even the same
I judge of you still, that you are plentifully flowyng in very apt words, but
are so drowned in them, that you have very slender or no understanding at all
in science. Neither shall I need any long search to discover the same: for in
your gallant writing, even at hand is there a very exquisite discourse upon
this word Private, the which I will so express by piece meal, that all the
world may discern how much skill and wit is in Osorius.

The name of a private person, what it signifies
First you repeat my words, in the which I seem to reprehend your
saweynesse, that being a Private man, a mere stranger to our common wealth,
so far distaunt by land and sea, would yet so malapertly write to the Queens
Majesty. And forthwith you move a deep question, and desire to know, what I
thought this word Private might signify? There is no Carter but knows it,
and you (if you doubt thereof) must be sent to women and children to school.
Then you demand whether it be a word of reproach? As though you do at any time
doubt hereof? wherein you do err very childishly: For this name Private does
always signify a difference in degree, but is never named by way of Reproach.
But you are not yet contented, and require to be taught farther whether all
persons, that be not Masters of Requests, ought to be restrained from their
Princes presence? Whom ever heard you say so? And how came this into your
brains, vain Tritler? As it seemly for an old man, yea and a bishop to
dance thus in a net? And does Osorius so openly show him self so unskillful
in all men's sight and hearing? But at the last you come to the prick, yt
seems most to rub you on the gal. Ye do vpbraide me (say you) with this
name Private, as though ye judged it a word of Reproach. This is your own
dream Osorius very fit for so rotten a mazer. Did I name you to be a Private
man? And what if I did? were you not so in deed? Truly all me^ knew this to
be true. For when you wrote your letters to the Queens Majesty, you had not
yet purchased the dignity of a Bishop as you are now: yea long time after the
receipt of your famous Epistle, it was reported that you were a bishop elect.
But I did object this name Private, as in Reproach ye say, how I pray you? when
as this name Private is in no respect contuinelious? nay rather is many times
applied (as your self do know) to most honest and honorable Personages. That
you may therefore know plainly what my meaning was therein, and withal learn
some wit of me: By this word Private, I had respect to your estate only, as
when being a Private person scarce peepyng out of your cowle, and not yet
credited with administration of any public function, it was nothing sitting
for your personage to be an entermedler in fore in Princes causes, such
especially, as were already established, and most firmly ratified by express
Edict and agreeable consent of all Estates, meaning hereby to call you home from
your unadvised rashness nothing seemly for your degree, This was my purpose.
This I thought, and by this means of friendly advise I supposed you would the
better be reclaymed to some modesty being otherwise indiscreet by nature. And
yet ye make no end of your triflyng, for immediately you proceed on this wise.

As though you would say, that I came of some clownes race, and fostered in
some base Villadge, and never beheld any king in the face, and therefore had
committed some heinous offense worthy of punishment, that durst presume to
write to Queen Elizabeth, whom for the honor due to Princely Majesty I
always name Gracious. Are ye not ashamed of so many lies couched into one
sentence? As though I took any exception to your birth or parentage, or that I
could be ignorant that you had seen a kings personage, knowing for
certeintie, that ye were daily conuersaunt in the kings Court? or as though I
were displeased with your writing to the Queens Majesty, whenas I did
reprehend nothing in you, but your sawey arrogancy and slanderous pen in
matters of so great importau^ce? and wherewith you were nothing acquainted? or
as though this your tedious quarrel about this word Private did ought else, but
bewray you gross ignorance, and shameless impudency? Whereof the one
denounces how void you are of learning: the other, how you dare impudently
attempt all things: which may be easily discerned by your proud speech
aunexed thereunto. For before I was (say you) advanced to be a Bishop, I did
surmou^t many of your order in favor, authority and dignity. I pray you Sir,
whether does the modesty of a Christian Prelate appear here, or that
disdaineful craking of that glorious soldier in Plautus? Plautus in milite
glorioso.
I was borne the day after Jupiter which came of Opis etc. what should I here
say, but we have thus in a stage of Osorius newly Sprung up a proud braggyng
Thraso, and under the visour of a most reverend Prelate, a most vain painted
Peacocke: who to make his folly more apparaunt demau^deth of me a profou^d
question. To what end letters were devised at the first? Whether to make such
as are absent by distaunce of place acquainted with enterchau^ged affairs? Yes
forsooth M. Doctor. Even so do Scholemaisters instruct their boys in common
Schools. And what hereof I pray you?

Wherefore then do you impute this (say you) as a fault into me? that being
distau^t and severed from your Queen so far by land and sea, of very love
that I owe to her Majesty I advertised by letters her highness of matters
apperteining to the establishment of her estate? I blamed you nothing because
you wrote, but because you bent the force of your pen so maliciously and
slanderously against my Native country, which is no less dear unto me then
Portingall is unto you: herein surely I noted in you no less default of love,
then defect of wit, knowing that you are familiarly acquainted with that
comicall nippe, videl. Are your own business so nothing worth the lookyng
unto at home, that you may so carefully attend the affairs of others, yea
those also, which concern you nothing at all? But here you have not pleasure
enough to dance in a net your self, unless you draw me also into the same
rebuke of folly with you, making me to speak words, which were never mine,
but of your own devising as though I should in this speech write unto you.

Acknowledge now I pray you, this your unadvised remeritie of tongue, for such
is your talk: with what face dare you presume to attempt the Queens Majesty
by letters? being a man never trained in Court, never advanced to any office
in the common weal, as altogether unskillful in the Civil Law, nor have at
any time exhibited to the Prince any Bills or Supplications, which of right
belongs to me only and such as I am. And thus concludyng upon my words. If
you do not perceive (say you) how Childish this sentence is, I must needs a
diudge you a man more then half fra^ticke. These be yours, and your own
foolish lying words properly (Osorius) forged in that hammerhead of yours.
First you would have me to yield, that those words be mine, which I never
knew, nor were once in my thought, as that I should utter such monstrous
speeches, whereof I never dreamed so much as one syllable, and which Mydas would
not acknowledge if he were now alive, much less any wise or sober person would
blu^der out, unless he had been instructed thereunto by this vain glorious
Gentleman Osorius. As to that you term me to be more the^ blockish, if I do
not understand how childish your former sentence is, I do gladly yield and do
simply confess my self a natural dolt, if I could seem ignorant in either
of these both, either in reknowledging that your Momish communication by you
applied unto me to be very doltish, or your self also the deuisor thereof to
be as wise as Walthams Calfe. Both these I do know and acknowledge, and this
much more also. That where you abuse my name to color your scoffing toys, if
you were not already enstalled a brawlyng Bishop, you might be invested a
delicate Sicophant. And where as you accuse me as one yt does prohibit godly
personages from their due access to her Majesty, chargyng me also with
ambition: I trust my daily conversation will clear me of both those crimes,
where in as mine innocence shall appear the greater to all me^, so much the
less will your venomous quarrel prevail to crack my credit with any person
that knows me. It seems also unto you, that I am a man of very mean
capacity, that in this baseness of mine estate I become so lofty and stately:
how lofty I pray pouedo I challenge to my self any preehemine^ce before others
in favor, authority, or dignity? yet were not your self ashamed to brag of
these Titles when you were but a Private man. Do I boast that I surmou^t others
in wit or learning? yet you a little after spare not to vaunt the same of your
self most arroga^tly. I would to God (Osorius) I would to God that your horned
cockescombe did no more puff you up in pride, the^ my seely humble bills of
Requests do me. Truly the^ should your three Inuectiues have vomited less
slanders and reproaches, and denounced you a more charitable man, and far
deeper Divine. Ye take further occasion yet to charge me, because I affirmed,
that you accused all England guilty of horrible novelty: I perceive I must
now pluck of your spectacles, and turn you to your own Epistle, where you
have set down these words.

For if after this doctrine of this new Gospel and new Religion was brought
into England, there were brought therewithal also honesty and integrity of
life. etc. Then a little after. But if none of those were performed through the
study of this new doctrine: nay rather if ever sithence, all rashness,
unshamefastness and lechery have been embraced in all places, if intolerable
pride and arrogancy have now taken suter footing then before, if seditio^s,
vprores and rebellio^s have been more easily raised, if treason have more
boldly attempted the Royal Majesty, and have more freely pursued the blood of
Princes, etc. What now? Do you not hereby name condemn all England of a
certain new Gospel? and do you not accuse this Gospel to be the very forge
of all wickedness? I confess (say you) that I accuse England, but not all
England. But have you any smatch is Logic? Who that will praise or disprayse
London, Olyssipone, England or Portingall by name, does he not understand all
England thereby and all Portingall? O chattering Rethorician, but lumpish
Logicia^: which can not conceive that an indefinite proposition (to use a
schole term) does retain the efficacy of an universal. And whereas you
write, that it is reported unto you, that a great number of our subjects do
remain in their old Mumpsimus: either this is not true (as it is most untrue)
or if it were true: it would easily argue you to be a common liar. Who have
slaundered all England with a certain new Religion in generally, and yet
allege no person particularly. You turn this also to my reproach, that
promising to undertake the defense of my country against you, without any
dissente of mind, yet contrary to promise, I do wonderfully dissente from you.
What? may any man or beast judge me so mad, that I would promise to differ
from mine adversary without any contrary affection of mind? what have I the^
professed? what have I spoken? mine answer is extant, I refer me to be
tried by the same. Wherefore with good reason you should have pardoned me, if I
an English man borne, the Queen highness subject, did in mine answer unto you
deal somewhat franckly, without all ra^cour of mind (without all bitterness
of dissension. etc. I make promise to dispute with you without all disagreeyng
of stomach, without all bitterness of contention: but you pervert my saying,
as if I would differe from you without contradiction of consent. Which no man
ca^ honestly promise, much less perform. Are you not ashamed of this your
cold and frivolous quarrel? Surely you may be ashamed thereof. But this childish
fault is common with you, as I will make evident hereafter in place fit for the
same.

Then ensues your lamentable complaint concerning the death of the Bishop of
Rochester. Sir Thom More.
Thomas Moore and certain Charterhouse Monckes, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester.
who were (you say) must cruelly murdered, and that England has ever sithence
remained in marvelous infamy. Uerely I confess, that Moore and Rossens. were
both endued with great store of singular learning, and lament to see such
excellent learned men run headlo^g into such absurd and pesfile^t error, as
to prefer a foreine and extraordinary power before their liege and
sovereign King. But when as it was enacted by the law of the land, that this
crime should be deemed high Treason, it was requisite, that all such subjects
as would wilfully infringe that law, should incur the punishment provided in
that behalf. As for the Charterhouse Monckes, the loss was the less, how
much more they lived to them selves, unprofitable to their country, and could
allege nothing in their defense but custom and contumacie. The Statutes and
Laws in that behalf provided, could not justly be challe^ged, or accounted
blameworthie, nor were at any time, unless with you, and such as you are,
whose disliking we accept for our praise. Other trifles of mine answer you
hunt after with a great kennell of superfluous words, plodding often upon one
thing. But I will pass, the^ over because you note nothing in them worthy
defense.

Two points you carpe at in ye ordering of our laws: the one is, that every
man particularly may not give his voice, as though any common wealth does admit
such custom? Su^mons are made by words, by courts, by hundreds, but it was
never seen that every particular person should be required by Poll. And
therefore that sentence of Liuie. The greater part prevails oftentimes against
the wiser, has always been seen in all ancient ages, and our predecessors
also, that a special choice being selected out of all estates, the same should
be adjudged for law, which the greater number approved, and not that which the
fewer liked of: what order observe you in making you laws? Do you take
together Cobblers, Tynkers, Butchers, Cooks, Mullettours. etc. and other like
dregs and outcastes of the people, and enquire their several opinions? or do
ye reduce your infinite multitude to the choice of your wiser Citizes? But ye
accuse this in us, that our voices are wrested out from us violently, and
against our wills: No truly: there is no where else more freedom: which is
well known to all me^ that are but meanly acquainted with the proceedings of
our assemblies, which we name our Parliament. But here you urge us with
examples, and with insatiable practfling, you run back again to Moore and
Rochester, and demand. What those holy and most pure persons had committed? A
very small offense pardye: More, and Rochester rightly co^uicted and condemned
for traitors by the law.
and I can not tell how they offended nothing at all: forsooth they were
condemned for high treason, which is accoumpted the most execrable and horrible
fact under heaven. But here you cavil and say, that force was used in the law,
or in the judgment against them. Neither of the^ both Sir. It was orderly
proceeded against them according to the ancient custom and statutes of the
Realm. For when as they violated the duty of allegeau^ce, which they did owe
unto their country ordinances, and to their liege and sovereign Lord,
lineally descended and true inheritour of the Crown, and erected to the^
selves a foreine Romish monarche through their waywardnes of opinion, they were
worthily punished as decestable traitors to their country. But in this point
they seemed unto your judgment propre holy and pretty Religious men: what then
Sir? We expect not your bald sentence, nor esteem it of a rushe. We do not
prejudice you in your ordinances, no more is it meet that you should
entermedle with us in our Statutes. Whereas you have placed in your headroll
the terrors of imprisonement and chains, and the horrible punishments that
our late Bishops do endure, we do plainly confess that this their rebellious
obstinacy, whereby they refuse the most lawful authority of their sovereign
Princes established by the laws of the la^d, ought to be yoked and tamed with
extremest punishments provided in that behalf. Neither was any injury done
unto those men in administration of Justice, as you do imagine. But they were
worthily dismissed from all benefit of law for their intolerable pride, and
pestilent example, that refused to be ordered by the express and known
authority of the law. Lament you therefore, and howl as loud as ye list, they
were nevertheless rightfully punished. For in all well ordered commonweals,
high treason has been always accoumpted most horrible, and worthy of death.

You praise your purpose of writing to the Queens Majesty as procoedyng of a
very zealous affection, that you bear to the truth, and to the public sauetie
of souls: and this you auowe with a very solemn protestation. Osorius is
writing to our Queen under pretense of charity and goodwill covers extreme
hatred against true Religion.
Touching the secrets of your thoughts, I refer you over to God who^ you
take to witness herein. But as far as men may discern by your words and
phrases of speech. That style of yours is enflamed as hoate as fire against
the truth of God, and against the public state of our salvation. And yet you
bear fair wether with us, and would make us believe, that you conceive no
malice against us, but love us with a bag full of love. The rather because you
do understand ye some English me^ have your Epistle in great admiration I wene.
If this be true, what obtain you else hereby, but to be esteemed ye most
uncivil person of all me^, that ca^ find in your heart to render so churlish a
requital for such gay benefits? But I do not condemn all England (say you) I
do only confute the errors of some which have brought this new Religion
into England. You name England by general words, once, twice, thrice: you
barcke against ye whole state of our religion: you accuse all ye laws made
touching the same: you do violently rend in pieces our whole Ecclesiastical
government with most unshamefast cauillatio^, you inueigh against the honest
conversation of our manners with most outrageous slanders. And yet to untwyne
your self out of this manifest flame of cancred malice, you would seem to
charge but a few, whom you call seditious Schismatiques to their country. Not
so (my good Lord) you may not so escape. England understands the Latin tou^g
very well, is also of a ripe judgment, and is myndfull what her self has
done, and ca^ not forget, how much and how grievously you have diffamed her: nor
will not admit this your painted satisfaction in three words, especially being
manifestly false: when she thoroughly co^sidereth ye ouerlauish backbytinges of
the rest of your laboursome volume. And whereas you persuade your self to have
just cause of quarrel because you write in the behalf of Religion: herein
truly you bewray your ignorance, even as in all the rest of your doings: For
albeit you be appointed a Sphepheard over the sheep of Siluan in Portingall,
you may not therefore sheare the fliece from English and foreine sheep,
unless you had been called thereunto by lawful authority: unless Paul
paraduenture did appoint over every congregation several pastors in vain:
especially when as the same Paul does charge every of us with our vocation (I
use here his own words) and commands us to abide in the same. As for you
Sir, I beseech you, who has called you unto us? or how will you preach unto us
being not sent? for I do here gladly use the simple words of the Scriptures.
True charity is sooner prete^sed in words the^ truly performed in deeds.
Your burning charity I trow, is so whote, that if your bold bragges may be
believed, you will shed your blood in the defense of Religion. Be not to bold
Bayard. It is an easy matter (Osorius) to despise a tempest in a quiet calm,
but if any perilous flaw shall happen, the very sound thereof I fear me, will
make our glorious Thraso eftsoons to thrust his head in a mousehole. But if
you be of such invincible courage, stand to your tackle at home, and as need
shall require, hasarde your life for your own sheep. We have pastors of our
own, and several Sees, we need no raungyng Prelate out of Protingall.

Afterward you believe that I can not show you, how that you enforce your
writing of malice, rancour and greedy lust to cauil, because as you propes, you
were hereunto moved of very love only, and pure denotio^: Truly if you may be
a witness in your own cause, you will easily persuade what you list. But if
it be lawful to urge your own Epistle against you as reason requires, there
is nothing more easy, then to show by evident demo^stration your incredible
despite and viperous hatred against our Preachers. Where every sentence does
swarm with manifest stinges of Scorpion like venime. At the last you come
down nearer to the flat accusation it self: the which because I perceived so
farced with pestilent poison, and creepyng for covert into the Queens highness
presence: I took it in very ill part, that my country was so cruelly and
wickedly accused and slau^dered by you: wherefore I desired to have the causes
set down, the persons named, the times noted, and all circumstaunces to be
described, that we might have some sure ground to begin our controversy upon.
Here our clamorous titiuiller takes occasion to scorn my to to foreward
diligence, being him self most ridiculous in confounding all things, making
mingle mangle of all things, distributyng nothing into his parts, openyng
nothing distinctly: And believes forsooth, that I came to late when Rethoricke
was a dealing. Surely my Lord you are come time enough to the dole. For in this
controversy which is now betwixt us, I doubt not but I shall sear you with so
good a whote iron, that the very Printe thereof shall remain whiles the world
does endure as a perpetual testimony of your gross ignorance. Yet foreward
proceeds his worshypfull Maistershyp and deeply debateth upon old rules and
principles of schools, and at the last concludes very gravely, that in
criminal and judicial causes due order of circumstaunces ought to be
observed: But that his Epistle is of an other hew, altogether of the
perswadyng kind. What do I hear? is not your raylyng backbityng Epistle a
most slanderous accusation and execrable Inuectiue?

No (you say) for the Judge and the place of Judgment wa^ted and there was no
trespassour somonned. Ueryly you are a very untoward scholar, that have so
soon forgotten the lesson your Master taught you, especially being beaten
into you with so many express examples. A good fellowship Sir. What does
Cicero, when he declameth against L. Piso and Gabinius? does he not accuse
the^? Cicer. Orat. in Lucium Pisonem.
if you seek for the Guildhall here and the offenders, there was neither of
them. For the matter was determined in the Counsel Chamber amongst the
Senators. And yet no man of any found judgment will deny that they were
accused, and that all circumtau^ces of time and place were ripped up against
the^. The same order is to be seen in his second Phillip. Cicer. Phillip. 2.
in Anthoniu^.
against Anthonius, and in the Inuectiue which he made against Saluste. In
Salustiu^.
Many like examples may be showed, but these being the Presidens of your
Masters shop chiefly, will suffice to convince you of Childishe ignorance:
But you affirm that your quarellsome Epistle lacks no argument: for that we
yield unto all those heinous crimes, which you throw out against us. It is
untrue: we deny all, in the same plight as you have set them down. And for
your own part, if you had any sparcle of shame or honesty, you would never have
defiled your paper with so manifest a lie. You rush upon me with a sharp battry
of words, as though I did not perceive what were comely, nor could discern
what ye cause does require. Those be yours Osorius your own drousie dreams,
as I have made manifest by your own schoolemaister Tullie, the same is also
apparaunt enough by your own Epistle, which I can vouche against you for a most
evident witness. You say that you have reckoned up many monsters of Religion.
I confess it. and in how much the number of them is the greater, so much the
more deadly have you helped our pastors considering none of them can be found
in England, as your self seem also somewhat to doubt: for this your write.

If those monsters have not invaded England, I do hartly rejoice in your common
wealths behalf, and confess my self to be in error to think that your
Ila^d was vexed with many such furies. Do ye confess at length wise wisard?
Wherefore then do you so expressly pronounce in those words which I recited
out of your Epistle. That a certain sauadge herd of all Swinish filthynes was
crept into England? So ye first you diffame this noble Island to be a sincke of
horrible abominations even to the Queens Majesty her self: And afterward
stand in a dumpe amazed how you may colorably pray pardon of so great a crime
so maliciously conceived. Does charity teach you this? is this seemly for a
Bishop, and an old man? Is this the wisdom of Osorius that blames lack of
discretion in others? But you seem not to be satisfied, because with one word
I have overthrown all your cursed babbling. Why suffices not to be denied in
one word, that is verified in one word? You have taken upon you to accuse most
spitefully and maliciously, which accusation if you be not able to justify,
you must yield. For it suffices ye accused to deny: who unless he be co^uinced
by good proof ought to be acquired. Cod. de proba. lib. (...).
But I accuse no man (say you) before a Judge, what is it material who sit in
judgment? The court of Christians does stretch far and wide in the whole
world, and extends it self to all nations. Jerome Osorius has by his
infamous Epistle cited England unto this Consistory as guilty: and does
earnestly persuade that it is defiled with all manner of monstrous
abominatio^s, yea in the prefence of ye Queens Majesty. Do ye not accuse,
Osorius? Do ye not here (as much as in you lies) deface, nay rather utterly
subvert the good estimation of this noble Island? Did ye lack no arguments to
furnish this your horrible enterprise? or did ye believe, that your only
affirmative was of sufficient credit in so perilous and pestiferous an
example? But you deny that I do perceive how you have displayed all things most
evidently. In deed so I say, if we will admit your own cavil for a witness of
your own cause (for what should I else call it, but a mere cavil) Peruse your
Epistle who little, and he shall find my saying true. I do write unto you,
that you conceive of the doctrine of the Gospel, which our Pastors on
profess, as a matter detestable, abominable and damnable, and the Authors
thereof haynously wicked, common barretiours, subuertours of commonweals,
enemies of mankind. These speeches you will not acknowledge to be yours, but
mine. Nay in deed these pernicious and pestilent words are your own, the
which though I repeated in mine own words, yet the whole sentence of words
is your own: and though ye speak not the self same, yet ye speak that,
which in effect is all one, like a perverse Sophister. I did also disclose all
your filthy railing, in so much that no kind of ignominy, no crime of heinous
offense, no spot of beastlynesse, no spark of impiety could almost be
reckoned by, but you had therewith defiled the doctrine of the Gospel, and the
professors of the same. The self same slanderous Inuectiue is extant abroad.
Judge of it who will. And yet as though you had played the proper Speareman
therein, and as though it sufficed not that this doggishe eloquence was ones
thoroughly swallowed up by me with toylesome irkesommes, yet are you nothing
ashamed to bark the same again in our ears. Truly it greeueth me to be
encombred with such frivolous brauling. But because this gallant peddler does
make so proud crakes of his brave wares, let us see them (since it must needs
be so) and note diligently what metal they be made of.

Osor. page 8.
I said in that Epistle of mine (quoth he) that Nonnes consecrated unto God were
defiled with incestuous marriage: Osorius co^plaineth of subuertyng Religion in
England.
I said that Saints, Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, and many other godly
monumentes were thrown down from their places, and broken in pieces: I said
that the ancient Majesty of Religion was subverted in your Temples, and other
strange orders supplied in the place. Other things I pass over, and reserve
them for place fit for it. You have said Sir. You have said in deed, or
rather in that uncivil cauilling Epistle, you have spurled out all those, and
six hundred such like slanderous reproaches. But let us see what substance
any of them brings. First in the vauntegarde you have placed the Nonnes:
Nonnes.
and those you say been defiled with incestuous marriage. We reply to the
contrary, and say, yt such virgins being bound apprentices to gluttony,
idleness, and lust, entered afterward into lawful and honorable Matrimony.
Next to the Standerd and main battle, Images of Saints.
you place Banuers, Saints, Images, Crosses, Picture of the Cross.
Crucifixes, and other holy monume^tes, and those you say are thrown down and
broken in pieces. We way not so: but we say, that Ioals, and such tromperies
were by good advise, and for great reason taken from the gaze of Christians
eyes: because they occupied the places of great peril of Idolatry. In the
rereward comes forth old raynebeaten bruysed soldiers, which you name the
old ancient majesty of Religion, Ancient ceremonies of the Roman Church.
and the same you say is supplanted in our Temples, and other strange orders
supplied: we on the other part do boldly pronounce, that the ancient Religion
is restored by us: and your new stinking superstitions worthily abolished. And
for proof hereof as well in these, as in all ye rest, which you seem to keep
in store for an other time, we appeal to the testimony of the most ancient
primitive Church, founded and established in the most blessed age of our
Savior Jesus Christ and his Apostles: which being of all parts absolutely
pure, and undefiled, did never acknowledge the durtie dregs of your filthy
single life, your superstitious Idolatries, nor your cold naked mockeries of
Sacraments and Ceremonies. But here you require of me to every of them
several proofs. I have satisfied already every point, as much as was
needful for so bluntish an adversary: Moreover if the controversy were
debated before indifferent Judges, the only authority of that sacred time, in
the which our Savior Jesus Christ lived upon earth, and the next age, wherein
his Disciples preached, would easily confound and crushe in pieces all those
scattered stinkyng maimed shadows of your Religion. Last of all if alleadgyng
nothing for my self, I should only deny your poisoned accusation: This only
might suffice for all reasonable men, unless you make better demonstration of
your assertion by more probable arguments. And therefore sithence you can not
procure me as guilty to confess (as you see) you must suborne other witnesses
according to your promise.

In the mean space you recite certain words of mine, which are these. The
words of M. Haddon cited by Osorius.
You exclame as much as you may heapyng a mass of foul words together, which
you seem to have hoorded up for the same purpose to deface that your painted
Religion, and cut some throats, whom no man does know but you alone. In this
speech of mine you play the tall man: at these words you hurl out your
cancred stomach, obbraydyng me with dronke^nes forsooth, and hereunto you have
pretyly stolen the words of Cicero against Anthonius, that with you Masters
tools ye might wound me the deeper with a false crime. Cicer. in Anthon
Phil.2.
But I pray you Sir, where is this heinous offense? where is this blockish
error never heard of before? where with this mild and sober father charge
me, wishing in me sobriety some little while. As though I were always drunken:
bearyng me in hand, as though I were furiously mad, that would commit such
monsters to writing: forsooth (if it please your Prelacie) it will so be found
in these two. First, that your self had made ougly your new glased Religion
with all manner of filthy tau^tes: The other that I added thereunto, is, that
some persons throats were cut, who^ no man knew but your self. How say you
Sir? are not both these true? I will allege examples to discover the matter
clearly, you challenge us further that we mainteyne a kind of faith, whereby
every man setting aside all sorrow of mind, not regardyng good works, and
drowning all endeavor of charity, promi^eth to him self hope of everlasting
salvation. Osor. page 9
No manner of person with us does acknowledge this glaueryng faith, no man does
defend it: nay rather all men do abhor it and spitte at it. This therefore is
your own faith, hammered out of your own forge: This is your own lie: This is
your own cavil: the which sithence your self do pursue with such opprobrious
infamy (as you do) your self do disfigure your own whelpe, you dishoneste
your own creature. In the Treatise of Freewill, you bring into your stage a
certain kind of persons decked and apparelled with your own words.

Osor. page 9. b.
What else (say you) is meant hereby? they keep ma^s reason in bondage, they
bereue him of his freedom of aduisement: man's will they entangle fast snarled
in perpetual chains, and the whole man they do unclothe of judgment and
sense: and so turn him over, spoiled of all free choice, that there remains
no more difference betwixt him and a stone: for all manner of things which men
do imagine in their brains, endeavor and practice in their actions, whether
they be good or bad, these men do ascribe to God the Author thereof, and do
link them together with a certain fatal and vnaduoydable necessity enduryng
for ever. By this tedious talk of yours, you have forged unto us certain new
Tyrauntes very fearful in deed, of whom we never have heard any mention
before this time, and which are mere strangers unto us: Broyle them you on
the gredyerne therefore, and burn them with all your fagots and firebrandes of
eloquence: for here you do scourge none but Hobgoblines and Buggebeares,
Osorius makes Bugge bears and fights with shadows.
with whom we were never acquaynted. And therefore we suppose that these be your
own painted Poppettes, devises of your own dreams, upon the which when you
rushe with your doodgeandagger eloquence, what else do you, then murder
shadows of your own forgyng? whom no man knows besides your self. So the
same offense and shame wherewith you do accuse others, must needs rebou^d upon
your own head: when you can not find them, whom you have accused. Take a
familiar example. You call me dronkard, whom all me^ else (I believe) do know to
be sober enough, except you that are scarce well advised. This dronkennes
therefore, if any be, is your own, your own lie, and your own reproach. You
exclame that I am mad: which, for that you do so manifestly lie, will be
adjudged your own error, your own rage, and your own ignorance. You
perceive now at the length, except you be more then frantic, how truly I
wrate, that your self had misshaped your own Religion, and had murdered
those persons whom no man knew besides your self. Awake therefore hereafter, if
you be wise, and deliver your gorge from this surfeit of rancour, and malice,
wherewith you are englutted: and charge me no more with dronkennes and madness,
that am in all respects your equal, your Myter only excepted.

You affirm that you have wounded Luther and his Champions only. Osor. page
9. b. Luther falsely accused.
But herein you have dubbed a double lie: For when you charge Luther with
monstrous opinions, where with that godly man was never acquainted, you do
nothing diffame Luther, but batter down your own credit, by coining a
certain newfangled Divinity, beginning now, and erected first by your own
cauillations. Luther did never allow this your own counterfaite faith (I say
counterfaite faith,) mark what I speak, nor ever affirmed it: nor did at any
time argue so fondly and absurdly of Freewill, as you report of him, how soever
you bark at him in your writings. It is no hard matter to espy, and to bark
at some one sentence of his, uttered perhaps in heat of disputation, which may
happily disagree with the rest of the process. But read Luther over, Luther to
be take whole, and not by pecces.
and mark his whole doctrine, and this will remain certain and undoubted at
the length, yt Luther has in the Church of God, through Gods singular
providence, planted inestimable treasure of Christian discipline: And that
Jerome Osorius is a most perverse ouerthwarte brauler, who besides a
commendable facility in the Latin tou^g, can profit the common wealth nothing
at all.

Thus much briefly once for all do I conceive of M. Luther: whom I did never
undertake to defend, he has other notable Advocates, exquisite me^ in all
kind of learning, who can with no labor avenge him from your cancred tongue. I
stand in defense of my country, and will persist therein so long as breath is
in my body: and although you assail and wish upon the same with most poisoned
darts and venomous battry, yet I trust some part thereof will recoyle back
upon your own breast, and stick so fast in the very entrails of your
carcass, that you shall never be able to rub out the frettyng sistula of
your slanderous Inuectiue against England: And in this your second fault you
were more then poreblind, that, though you would seem to post over your whole
malice against Luther and his associates, you do notwithstanding endite and
accuse England by express words, rail on our Bishops with most filthy and
false accusations outragiously, condemn our subjects in general of
stiffenecked crookednes most injuriously: Our Temples, our ceremonies, our
laws, and our whole Religion with shameless tongue and most insolent Inuectiue
you do deride most scornefully, condemn most arrogantly, and slander most
impudently. These your furious assaults I will for my slender ability
withstand in the behalf of my Native country. I will encounter your outrageous
force as much as I may. Wherein I will not speak so confusedly as not to be
perceived, as you think that I do. But I will so express all and every scabbe
of your wickedness and ignorance in such colors, that all me^ shall perceive
what manner of man Osorius is, if they will not be wilfully blind. At length
you come down by little and little, to that slau^derous crime of poysonyng:
wherewith when I saw you charge our friends, of a very insolency to quarrel
without any proof at all, I returned the same into your own bosom, with
approved circumstaunces of time and persons. But hereunto our new vpstarte
Pythagoras makes none answer, but that my examples are counterfaite and
rejected of approved writers. Of whom I pray you? where? and how? what booteth
it to enquire further? my Lord Bishop does affirm it, and we must needs
believe it. Herein yet your companion of Angrence is somewhat more tractable,
who, rather then he will leave ye matter unconfessed, will set two Monks by
the ears, and confute the one with the testimony of the other. O gay pair of
Bishops, which are so entangled in two examples only, that the one is enforced
utterly to disclayme: the other to take such witnesses, whom no wise man will
admit.

But Osorius forsooth has gotten an other covert to play boe peep in, where
he shrowdeth him self always when he is narrowly chased. Osor. page 10.
I force not (says he) what rules of life our Monks observed, for such
heinous offenses as are committed in commonweals by men not altogether endued
with heavenly wisdom should have been cured or utterly abandoned by the
sincerity of your most holy discipline, and by the wholesome medicine of this
Gospel and by that excellent remedy, which your Doctors have delivered unto
the world. O notable Divine, is this speech meet for a divine and a Bishop? is
it lawful for you to be murderers, ma^quellers and bloudsukers unpunished? Is
there not one baptism only? one profession: one only Lord father of all? one
only redeemer Jesus Christ? what prerogative then ca^ your sect challenge more
unto your wickedness, then ours? We allow no amendment of manners, but such as
yt authority of the Gospel and sacred Scriptures do approve: none other
integrity of life, but that which the Gospel does exact: if you be exempt
from this discipline, the world goes well on your side: long may you enjoy
that your freedom a Gods name. But if there be but one profession, one name,
one bond of peace: why do you so disme^ber this unity? or rather rend it in
pieces? as though it were nothing material in what sort you behave your
selves, because we have an especial profession, and regard of innocence and
vprightnes of life? If this were so, as you do most absurdely confess, what
could this avail to your Monks? how could they be cured of their festered
ulcers being above an hundred years old, by these our newly vpstarte lieches;
as you term them? You see here how you rub your self on the gall where
soever ye touch: so hard it is to find a startyng hoale for such frameshapen
cauils. And yet being altogether unlucky in handlyng your matters, you hawk
after tiltes of words, that so at the least ye may fease upon gnates. I
affirmed that you dwelt nearer the work master of poison then I: You demand
what I mean by that? whether I note your person, your country, or any other
nation. Whereunto I demand again, whether the words be not Latin words,
and plain enough? But they note nothing of certeintie (say you.) This is your
own fault, who use to chop of the head of the sentence, and slyly huddle the
rest. And I otherwise accusing no man willingly, The cauilling of Osorius upon
words and sillables.
am ashamed to deprave any whole Nation. Wherefore though you have endited
England by name it shall be lawful for me to use more modesty: for more
arroga^cie and impudency I can not. You snatch at an other vocable, which is
Perpessa, Perpessa.
Printed for Persparsa. Persparsa.
But yet at the last you release me of this quarrel, and confess that it might
be ye oversight of the Printer as though you or any other having any smatch of
learning, could doubt that I had written, the seeds of wars to be scattered
abroad. But you are an immoderate brabbler, that can scarcely admit that
which your self do see must of necessity seem to be true.

Here you play hickscorner concerning the reformation of our manners after the
rules of the Gospel: Where you sportyngly promise, that you will sail over
unto us, to learn this notable discipline of life. Come not at us I pray you,
except you throw away your hypocritical visour, and call to your memory the
saying of the Prophetical king. Psalm. 119.
Thy word O Lord is a lantern to me feet: which sentence lies drowned
amongst you in so deep a dongeon of bald ceremonies and men's traditions, that
like night owls you are stark blind in the midday: and are not able to endure
the bright beams of the clear shynyng Gospel. Now to the end I might more
sensibly disclose the ouglinesse of your fond superstitions, I noted two
special botches of your loathsome customs. Two soul abuses noted in Osorius
his Religion.
Whereof one consists in that unbridled lice^cious Bulls of Pardons: The
other entreats of prayers ouerunne, and mumbled up without feelyng, sense or
understanding. These two forlorn matters you ouerskip in the plain field
succourles, without touch of breath: wherein surely you deal very discreetly,
for your Schoolemaister Cicero him self, if he were now alive, could not
persuade this black to be white, the matter being so absurd. And yet you have
here illfaudredly provided for your honesty, that so plainly deny, that men
were not accustomed to assign the affiau^ce of their salvation to those two
plasters above mentioned. For as touching those leadden Bulls, what
prerogative they obtained, how wide, and how far they stretched, with how
cruel bondage they had cramped men's consciences, not only the ancient age
and received custom of many years most truly records, but the rotten
carcasses also buried in grave will bear sufficient witness against you. Trust
in Popish pardons vain and wicked.
Amongst a great number of whom, were found caskettes full of pardons safely
folded, and lapt together in the bottom of their graves: Which I suppose would
never have chanced, unless unmeasurable superstitious affiaunce had been
attributed to this peltyng leade^ pilfe. Now if the lively authority of the
holy scriptures have so utterly quasshed and blurred out this bald ceremony,
yt at length you confess now, yt all confidence of salvation ought to be
ascribed to the only bounty and mercy of Jesus Christ, (as your self protest
in the self same words) Uerely I do heartily rejoice in the behalf of Spain.
But as I have no quarrel with that famous Nation at all: so have I very great
against you: whose communicatio^ is so wonderfully variable, that a man may
scarce trust you in this matter. For if it be true, Osorius against him self.
that our righteousness does partly depend upon good works: again if it be
meritorious to pray to the virgin Marie, which both you do verify, and
likewise earnestly auow that she has been oftentimes found merciful to your
petitions: of these then proceeds a good consequente, that all the hope of
our justification ought not to be ascribed to Christ only.

But these things shall be better considered hereafter in place fit for them: in
the mean time call to your remembrance what a thing it is to speak
honorably, and largely of the incompreprehensible mercy of God, when as
otherwise you make but a very slender accoumpt thereof. As to that you seem not
to be resolved, whether any Christian were ever so bussardly blind, as to
believe any other clensing of sin besides that, which consists in the only
free mercy of Jesus Christ: surely (good Sir) you can not be uncertain of
this, unless you doubt whether your self do live, whether you take breath,
or whether you walk a man amongst men. For that pure and undefiled founteine
of ancient Religion was long sithence dried up, when as a certain deformed
counterfaite of outward holiness was privily crept into the Church, and had so
garnished it self, with such a pra^ckyng cloak of Shole commentaries and
scattered br^ggs of foolish superstition, that ye same inestimable treasure of
Christ's bloudsheadyng was almost altogether overwhelmed. This is true Osorius.
Yea, to true. I would it had never been true, yea rather I would to many
remnaunts of this stinking carrion were not now in ure: I would those rotten and
bleare eyed^ Traditions had not over many Advocates, men of great renown.
Lastly I would that our Jerome Osorius were not the very ryngleader amongst
them. Truly if Osorius were not, as he is, he would not be so bitterly
clamorous against me, in that I do so earnestly abhor that lumpishe leaden
Idol: which has been most wickedly esteemed for the only groundworke and
foundation of all other trecheries. For after this gaynefull market of
redeemyng of souls was proclaimed abroad by the trumpet of the Pardoner, and
the price of salvation valued every where at a few pence, there ensued such
outrageous licentiousness of life by the means of this speady forgeuenes of
sin, that we seemed to have no need of Christ sitting above at the right
hand of his Father, having here in earth his Uicar general with us, who for a
small trifle could absolve us daily. But here Osorius blames me further as
well for the thing, as for the name, because I do so often, and so maliciously
(as he says) make mention of lead. Osorius cauilleth about the word, of lead.
Wherein the famous Orator bewrays him self to be not only unskillful but
also a blu^tish leaden scholar. For if we call to remembrance the usage of the
f^repassed aunciencie, no ordinances, no contractes, no obligations, no
Testaments, no Commissions shall be found to have any force, power or
authority, unless the same were sealed with wax, signed with writing, or
ratified with some engraven marks: herein if no man can be ignorant being
never so meanly lettered, or any time acquainted with the common affairs of
the world, with what face do you so storm at me, for that I call lead by the
name of a public Instrument (I use here known words) sealed with lead? do
ye not know the figure Synechdoche? Synechdoche.
or have you not heard of Metonymia? Metonymia.
if happily you remember not these trifles, you may learn of little children by
whom these rules are daily practiced. But if you do know them, as of necessity
you must, why do ye dissembles? And hereof you say some men took great glee,
who do loathe my trade of living, as well as yours. But at the last, you
depart from this lead, and for your better credit vouch your Romish monarche
the first founder thereof: for proof of whose authority you think it not
needful to spend much wind, for that your copemate of Angrence has most
learnedly established the same already. Truly this saying makes me to smile at
the old meery Proverb, one Ass claweth an other by the elbow. In deed your
companion has herein played the tall man before you as well as he might: The
Bishop of Angre^ce.
and therefore you play the good fellow with him again, lendyng him a lie for a
time, and helpyng to uphold his credit already crushed in pieces. But as I said
at the first, you lose your labor, the work is not recouerable. For that
infamous Apology of Angrence, has given his estimation so deadly a wound,
that AEsculapius him self can not cure this poisoned fistula, if he were now
alive. Therefore let us pass over that seely wretched butterflye, and stop
your nose from the air of that carrion, the remembrance of whom is either
utterly extinct, or blemished for ever with everlasting ignominy. We will
harken to you again the most arrogaunt slau^derour, not of private persons and
Divines only, but of Princes and commonweals also.

First let this be granted (you say) that there is but one Church not many
Churches. One Church.
Nay rather you grant the same fondly and falsely. For generally there is but
one only Church of Christ: but out of the same one, many particular Churches
are derived as provinces. Hereof the several Churches to whom S. Paul
entitled his Epistles are sufficient witnesses. Apoc. 1.
The Churches also which S. John does recite in his Revelation do witness
the same. After that you take this for a maxim. That it is not enough for a
Prince to establishe wholesome laws, unless he ordeine Magistrates and
Governors over them. This is true surely: but this hangs nothing together
with your former Maxim: neither can I perceive to what end it is spoken. Of
your third proposition you take handfast upon my words, wherein I consented
with you, touching a Monarchy. One Monarchy.
Truly I did confess, and will not yet deny, that you did dispute of a
Monarchy very aptly. What then? do ye conclude hereof that I do despise or
find fault with other commonweals? does that person disprayse politic
government, which prayseth a Monarchy? does he condemn the estate of Uenice,
that prayseth the government of Florence? he that commends Wittemberghe,
does he therefore reprehende Auguste, or Argentine? Liuius 3. Decad.
As though that ancient Rome, when it was governed by Consuls and Senators,
was not the Empress of the whole world? or as though that politic Regiment
of Athens was not a most flourishing Regiment? And as though in this our age
many famous Provinces are not well ordered, with most sweet laws and
ordinances, which were never subject to one ruler alone? Let this therefore be
the cause that enduced me to esteem of a kyngly pre-eminence: either because I
had learned so, or because I was enured thereunto, or because ye love of my
country did so persuade me. Shall your determination be inviolable therefore
in this sort uttered? For many persons do rend in pieces a common wealth, but
one man does unite fast Citizens hearts together, with great authority. If you
set down this as an infallible truth, you do err monstruously: Polycrates.
Phalereus. Dionysius.
for the contrary has been very often experimented, and sundry notable
Regio^s, which have been miserably overthrown through the barbarous cruelty
of Tyrauntes, and many commonweals being at the very brink of ouerwhelmyng,
have been comfortably recovered, and preserved by the wisdom of many.

Out of these pretty reasons partly false, partly uncertain and chaungeable,
you multiply your conclusion neither true, nor probable. That is to say. That
Christ determinyng to establish his heavenly common weal upon earth, did first
ordeine laws, then assign his Magistrates the Apostles. Lastly, that this
bond of mutual society might not be broken, and so the couenable agreement
of this City disturbed, he did erect a Monarchy, and therein invested Peter
with the highest sovereignty. First of all, what heavenly common wealth do you
dream of upon earth, Apoc. 21. 22.
when as that heavenly Jerusalem is above? wherein dwells God him self, and
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? and whereas the earth can have none other
City then earthly? Neither did Jesus Christ take unto him man's nature to the
end he would coin new laws but to accomplish the old: that the glad
tidings might be preached: That prisoners might be loosed: Luce. 4. ex Esaia.
Ad Heb. 10 Timoth. 1.
that the sick might be healed: lastly that by offering up his most precious
body on the Cross, our sins might be cleansed, As for any superiority in
government the Apostles received none, nor any other authority was committed
unto them, but that they should wander through the whole world empty of all
worldly furniture cariyng nothing with them, Luce. 9. Mar. 6.
and should sow in all places abroad the comfortable doctrine of the Gospel.
Nay rather when arose betwixt them a question, who should be greatest amongst
them: our Lord and Savior Christ did so utterly suppress that ambicious
contention, that he briefly denounced, that he which was left, should be
greatest amongst them. Again when James and John had besought of our Lord and
Savior, that the one of them might sit on his right hand the other on his left
hand, when he were ascended into heaven unto the throne of Majesty, he
reproved them both so sharply blamyng their ignorance, that he told them,
Math. 9.
They knew not what they asked: and immediately calling the rest of the twelve
together, he so tempered unto them lowlynes, humility and obedience by
manifest Arguments, that they might easily perceive how they were forbidden all
manner of superiority. Since these things therefore are true, I wonder what came
into your mind to dream of so dry a Summer, that a Monarchy was erected
amongst the Apostles: and that unto Peter was given the pre-eminence thereof.
Was Peter so appointed the chief over the rest of the Apostles, when as Christ
him self does so embace them and fearfully terrifle them from all manner of
supremacy? was Peter so worthy to be a Monarche, when as Christ him self did
hyde him out of the way because they would have made him a king? must we be so
subject to Peter, and his Successors as unto Princes? when our Savior Jesus
Christ came down from heaven for this intent and purpose, to become a servant
unto others, requiryng of his Apostles the self same duty of abacement?

But there is nothing (you say) more clear, then these words, Thou art Peter:
and upon this Rock I will build my Church: Touching supremacy of Peter and
his successors.
And what soever thou byndest upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven. And I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fainte: And thou at the last being
converted confirm thy brethren. And many other like. Whereby you will
co^streine us to believe. That Peter was preferred before ye rest of the
Apostles. I will treat therefore of every of these severally. That it may be
evidently known, what a deep insight this Reverend Prelate has in Divinity.
For if he have made here a strong and sou^de foundation, his passage will be the
easier to the rest of his Assertions. But if his groundewordes be planted upon
Sand, the rest of his buildyng will quickly shiuer in pieces, and come to
ruin. First of all therefore: Note this to be commonly used throughout the
whole Scripture: That when our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ would demand any
question of all his Apostles, Peter would make answer in the name of the
whole generally, and not in his own name particularely. So to that question:
Marg. 9.
But whom do you say I am? Peter makes answer for them all. Johan 6.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Again, when the Lord demanded,
Whether they his Disciples would depart away from him with the rest of the
Jews? Peter not only for him self, but for his whole company, denied,
saying, Lord whether shall we go. Thou have the words of eternal life. The
life hereof is in Peter's Sermon, when he exhorted the Jews to repose their
whole affiaunce of salvation in Jesus Christ, whom they Crucified, and was risen
again from death to life. For in the same place it is said, that Peter alone
did not preach to the Jews, but with the other eleven. The words were
pronounced by Peter's mouth only, but the mind, sentence, and intent was
agreed upon by all ye Apostles. Now therefore, if those Scriptures do admit
these phrases of speech, as appears plainly by the words of the holy Ghost.
Then this is a necessary consequent. That our Lord Jesus Christ did in like
manner apply his wonted communication used with the Apostles, to Peter's common
answer. Aug. Retra. Cap. 11.
In the like phrase of speech were those words: Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church. For as Peter in the behalf of all his fellows
affirmed, that he was Christ the son of the living God, Chrisost. in Hom.
Penthec. To. 3.
so Christ likewise though he named Peter only, yet acknowledges the
universal consent and confession of all the rest, Hillar. de Trim. lib 6.
Cipr. Epist. 3.
and in the same does promise to establish his Church: which interpretation if
you will not allow without witnesses, behold (O^otius) I have alleged ancient
Fathers, Orig. in Math. Cap. 16.
mainteinyng mine allegation against you, and have noted their places, not
obseruyng your disorder herein, Gregor. 1. Distinct. 10. Considera^dum.
which use to pack together a Rabble of names of Fathers omittyng the matter:
as though to the resolution of doubtful matters, needed nothing but names.

Next hereunto you place in order the promise of Christ in these words. What
soever thou shall bind upon earth, shall also be bound in heaven: what then?
ought this promise to be restrained to Peter only? or was this promise
equally communicated to the other Apostles? whose speech is this then? Receive
ye the holy Ghost, whose soever sins ye do forgive, shall be forgiven them, and
whose sins soever you do retain, the same are retained. Is not this the
gift of Christ? is not this Christ's promise made unto his twelve Disciples,
standing in the midst of them, and preaching unto them all, endyng them all
with his heavenly blessing, somewhat before his Ascension? Is not this sentence
manifest enough the witness approved? the authority not comptrollable?
unless paraduenture you will contend like a child, and stand upon the nycenes
of these sillables byndyng and loosing, whereof you made mention before. And yet
if ye will obstinately persiste herein, you shall be urged with sillables, and
titles of like words. Math. 18.
Verily verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind on the earth, the
same shall be bound in heaven also: and whatsoever you loose upon the earth
shall be loosed also in heaven. Here you this? Do you also perceive it? and are
ye not ashamed? will you attribute that unto Peter particularly, yea and in
earnest? will you urge and defend stoutly the very same sentence wherein
Matthew and John by manifest proof do convince you? who expressly do protest
that the very same power of byndyng and loosing, was given by our Savior
Christ to ye other Apostles in general? what will you not dare to do in the
darcke (good Sir) that practice to defraude us of the clear shynyng sun, how
will you pervert and wrest the fathers, that will so craftily iuggle with the
express words of the Scriptures? truly you must either bewray your pestilent
^eger de main in this place, or confess your gross error. Your third place
is this. I have prayed for thee that thy faith saint not, and thou being at
last converted, confirm thy brethren. And what hereof? Can any man be so
witless to say, that those words of our Savior Christ were not as well spoken
to the rest of the Apostles, as to Peter by name? I will therefore first scanne
the words of the Evangelist in order, that they may be more apparaunt: Luc. 22.
But you are they, which have perseuered with me in all my temptations. And I
do provide for you, even as my Father has provided for me a kingdom that you
may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and may sit on seats judging
the xij. Tribes of Israel. And the Lord said. Simon, Simon behold, Satan has
desired to sist you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith faint
not, and thou at length being converted confirm thy brethren. In this parcel
of Scripture is nothing particular to Peter, but the same is common to all the
Apostles. That they perseuered with Christ was common to them all. Amongst the
Apostles no singular power given to any one more then all the rest. Johan. 17.
Johan. 17.
The reward likewise is common to them all, videl. to sit at the heavenly
table. Again the third parcel had relation to them all. Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired to sift you as wheat. Sithence the whole process of the Text
therefore was referred to them all, by what Argument, may it be applied unto
Peter only? Namely sithence our Lord Jesus going a whiles after suffer death,
and making preparation for his Ascension into heaven, poured out most earnest
prayers unto his Father, with a long and vehement repetition of words, not for
Peter particularly, but for all the rest of the Apostles in general, which
last and general prayer of Christ to the Father, who so advisedly considers,
shall easily conceive, that our Lord Jesus Christ made not intercession for
Peter's faith alone, but for all the rest of the Apostles: And hereof will also
marvel much, how great learned Clerks daily exercised in the Scriptures, can
Judge thereof otherwise. Truly the most notable of the ancient Fathers do
constantly affirm, Orig. in Math. Cap. 16.
that the very same sentences wherewith Supremacy is challenged unto Peter,
are common to all the other Apostles together with Peter. And this have I most
manifestly proved by the self same places, which your self vouched. And
albeit we pass over all these, and give ear to the holy Ghost, speaking unto
us by the mouth of the sacred Scriptures, yet all this Monarchy of Peter which
you do so exquisitely advance above the Moon, Augustine. de Agone Christi.
and the seven Stars, shall be found to have been usurped by the inordinate
ambition of Bishops of Rome, and not by any authority grosided upon the
doctrine of the ancient Apostolic Church.

I will begin with our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who having spoken these
words Thou art Peter etc, Math. 16.
immediately after calls Peter Satan, and commanded him to depart from
him: because he knew not the things that apparteined unto God. How did Christ
then (I beseech you) erect the supremacy of his Church in the person of Peter,
whom immediately, and almost with one breath, he rebuked bytterly, by that most
execrable name of Satan? and that not without cause: for he dissuaded him
from going to Jerusalem. Moreover if Christ made intercession to the Father for
Peter only, that his faith should not faint: how came it to pass, that within
a few days after, Peter only with open mouth denied, and forsware Christ his
Lord and Master? But I do much miscontentedly make mention of the fall of so
notable an Apostle, who^ I do acknowledge the most excellent amongst the
famous Apostles. Only this I would to be known, that he was ordained to no
several supremacy in the Church of Christ, by any authority of the
Scriptures. We have heard Christ: let us come now a little lower to his
Apostles, and namely unto Paul, who labored in the Church of God (as he
reports of him self) more then they all: he therefore does plainly and
constantly affirm, that he had received as great authority from Christ, to be
an Apostle over the Gentiles, as Peter had over the Jews: Gal. 2.
and adds further, that he had conference with James, Cephas, and John, whom
he names Pillars of the Church, as the chief of all the rest. Yet in the mean
whiles he acknowledges no singular prerogative of prheminence in Peter. Nay
rather he uses great liberty of speech against Peter him self without all
respect of Principality, or mention of dignity. But why seek we other
testimonies? Peter is a good witness concerning him self. Petri Epist. 1.
Cap. vlt.
I beseech the Elders, which are amongst you (says he) that am also an
Elder, and a witness of the Passion of Christ, and partaker of the same
glory, which shall be revealed etc. Behold here the dignity, behold the
Supremacy, and Monarchy of this reverend father. He is an Elder amongst
Elders: A witness amongst other witnesses of the Passion of Christ: partaker
with the rest of the same glory to be revealed. Here is a Triple Crown truly,
yea a most precious Crown, not made of gold^, nor beset with precious stones.
A most honorable Ambassador of the heavenly glory to be revealed, not of any
Temporal or earthly dominion. Lastly a most Reverend Father not in any
singular Lordlynes, but by especial ordinary power of his fellow brethren. Who
so will thoroughly sift the doctrine, the ordinances, the life, and
conversation of the Apostles, Act. Cap. 1. 2.5.
shall find a most perfect pattern of unchangeable consent, but shall not
smell any taste, no not one spark so much of this Lordly Monarchy, whereof this
ghostly Prelate does so subtlely, and largely dispute. Unless perhaps he will
drive us to frivolous gesses, as to pick up children kyckesses together. As
that Peter went before: That he spoke oftentimes first: that he looked into
Christ's Sepulcher before John. But if we shall hunte after such gnattes. Act.
Cap. 15.
The honor given to James is of more substance. Namely when in their public
assembly, the rest of the Apostles did subscribe to the ordinance that he
made: And that other also: to wit when Peter was desirous to know who should
betray our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to the Jews, him self did not enquire
thereof, but beckened to John, which did lean upon the breast of our Lord,
that he might demand the question.

But howsoever these things are construed. The calling of the Apostles was
equal: one manner of function amongst them all, the authority indifferent:
one self same holy Ghost poured upon each of them at one time, the promises
general, and the reward proportional. The which though I do knit up briefly,
making have foreward: yet if any man will behold every several parcel, and
withal enter into a deep consideration of the most pure, and undefiled Church
of Christ, and his Apostles, as he shall perceive an enterchau^geable communion
in that strickte society of Apostleshyp, so shall he soundly judge of that
Monarchy and superiority in possessions, in gifts, and other functions, and
all other privileges of dignity especially: That they were utterly renounced
of Peter, and of all that sacred Brotherhood. These former positions therefore
being now thus well fenced, your cutted Apishe Sophisme is cut of by the rumpe,
wherewith you conclude so ridiculously: If it be evident (say you) yea more
apparau^t then the sun in midday, that Peter was above all the other Apostles
in superiority of degree, then is it most manifest, that the same honor and
pre-eminence in dignity is due to all them that suceede him in place. O
leaddagger Argument, in which what shall I blame first? If Peter (you say) were
a Prince. It is all one forsooth, as if this our holy father had wings,
perhaps he would fly like a Wildgoose. But admit that Peter were placed in
Pontisicalibus, as you would have it, though it be quyte contrary, as I have
already proved. But we will grant it unto you for a time. What will you gain
hereby? That the same dignity is due to the Successors? wherefore I pray you?
The privilege of the person is not extended beyond the person: The privilege
of the person reaches no further the^ the party him self, unless it be
limited by name.
And therefore if the Majesty of Peter were peculiar to Peter, even so it
ended in him self. But if you had no leisure to learn the Civil Law, can not
common reason teach you, that whatsoever privilege is given to one person
alone, may not be translated to his successors, unless it be limited by
name? But if these two crooches deceive you, come of, and learn of our Savior
Jesus Christ him self, what kind of superiority that was, whereof Christ made
mention to Peter. Math. 16.
Blessed art thou Simon Bariona, for flesh and blood have not revealed this
unto thee: but my father which is in heaven. Thou art Peter etc. Which words
do plainly convince, that flesh and blood were not partakers of this promise,
nor yt any especial choice was made of the person of Peter, but of his faith
and confession only: Galat. 2.
For God does not accept the person of any man. In like manner neither flesh nor
blood may challenge any succession in this promise, whether it be July,
Boniface, or any other: But the faith and confession of Peter is the true
succession of Peter. For if his succession were due unto personages, then
should this dignity be oftentimes committed to Sorcerors, and heretics, but
this is altogether repugnaunt to the sacred institution of our Savior Christ,
to build his Church upon so stinkyng a puddle.

Therefore cast away this your patched conclusion, lame, and haltyng of every
leg. For without all question Peter obtained no such interest in
Principality: or if he did, it was but in his confession of faith only: And
therefore can no man claim any other succession, as lineally from him, unless
perhaps you may command God to love an Italian Prelate, because he is borne
in Italic, better then an English or Spanish Bishop: or that ye will lock fast
the holy Ghost to the City of Rome. Johan. 3.
But the Spirit will blow where him lists, and the time comes and is even
now already come, that neither in this Mount, nor in Jerusalem, nor in any
appointed place God shall be worshipped. Johan. 4.
God is a spirit, and his true worshippers, shall worship him in spirit and
truth. But will ye come nearer home? harken to your own Doctor Jerome, whose
judgment I have here noted, worthy surely to he engraven in letters of gold.
If authority be enquired for, Iero. and Euagr.
the world is greater then a City whersoeuer a Bishop be, either at Rome, or
at Eugubium, or at Rhegium, or at Constantinople, or at Alexandria, all be
together equal of like merit and of like Priesthood. The power of riches or
baseness of poverty makes not a Bishop higher or lower. They all are the
successors of the Apostles, wheresoever they sit, and of what estate so ever
they be etc. To the same effect writes Cyprian, Cypri. ad Simplic.
in these words. The same thing verily were the Apostles that Peter was,
endued with like partakyng of honor and power:But the beginning, first entered
by unity, to the intent that the unity of the Church might be showed to be
one. Is it even so Cypria^? is this thy verdite? that all the Apostles were
endued with like partakyng of honor and power? But you my Lord affirm clean
contrary. Osorius page 17.
That Peter was appointed chief of all the Apostles, and that this is more
manifest then the Sun in midday, and that hereunto agree the Scriptures,
ancient fathers, and that general consent of antiquity. Truly you speak
many words, but no man besides your fraternity will believe you, not of any
pleasure of gaynesaying: but because you allege nothing that may enduce to
yield.

And because you seem somewhat tymorous of ye success of your Divinity, in
this deep and principal cause of Monarchy, you catch hold fast of a
Sophistical target. Osorius ibidem.
That in the church wiche is but one, ought to be one chief Ruler upon whom all
men may depend, by whose authority troubles may be appeased, and outrageous
opinions may be suppressed. etc. There is in deed but one Church generally, as
there is but one confession of Christian faith, yet this generality of the
Church is distributed into many particular congregatio^s: as all Nations have
their several administrations of Justice. Now therefore as every dominion is
divided into several distinctions of government, so to every particular
Church are ordained several Pastors: and yet in the mean whiles find no
lack at all of your new vpstart Monarchy, whereof was never question moved in
ye golden age of the primitive church. But you Reply with pretty poppet
reasons. That contentious can not be calmed, nor outrages suppressed, except
some one be ordained chief and head of the Church. Ibidem.
This fond distinction the common course of human actions does utterly
extinguish. For every several Prince does govern his common weal with
wholesome distinct ordinances, and yet make not so great advancement of this
stately Monarchy, as you do phantastically dream. But perhaps this is
needful in matters of Religion: why I pray you more then in temporal
regiments? The government of Rome it self (for the singularity whereof you
play the champion) will minister examples unto us of either part. Augustus was
an honorable Emperor. Vespasian indifferent, but Caius Caligula, Sueto. in the
life of xi^. Emperors.
and Nero were horrible monsters, who did not only weaken the Majesty of the
Roman Empire, but ransacked and rent in pieces the whole world almost. Even so
the Romish Bishops in the first swathling cloutes of the first primitive time
of the church, were very godly and sound, and to use the words of the
scripture, did many times withstand the enemies of the Gospel even with loss
of life. Platina de vitis Pontificum.
But after they had erected this Lordly superiority of the Papane Monarchy,
there was of godlynes, and integrity of life no dram at all: but of
intolerable ambition, and unbridled licentiousnes, whole swarms did appear.
And yet I speak but a little. It is not therefore requisite to hang all the
keys under one maus gyrdle always, nor yet scarce good policy. For if it
were so, there might be some danger therein, lest the frowardness of one
person might overthrow the whole estate of Christianity. There is far less
ieoperdy, where several Provinces are ruled by their several Pastors: for
proof whereof if it be not sufficient to have alleged reason and experience, I
will recite unto you out of the Register of Romish Bishops for witness, Gregory
the first: Who in this matter utters the same reason, in the same words. And
for playnesse of the matter, I will set them down as he has spoken them
which are these. Grego. in Epist. ad Mauri. lib. 4 Epist. 32.
If we have but one only head, the fall of that head, is the fall of the whole
Church: it any man presume to take upon him this name of universal Bishop,
the whole Church falls down from her estate, when he falls which is called
universal. But far may this name of blasphemy be from all Christian minds,
whereby the honor of all Priests is diminished in part, whiles this arrogaunt
singularity is presumed upon, etc. May any thing be said more plainly or
plentyfully? can any thing be pronounced more vehemently, or effectually
against this extraordinary and presumptuous Lordlynes of Papacy? Neither did
Gregory otherwise, then he spoke: For when this Satanicall name of universal
Bishop was offered unto him by the Counsel of Calcedon, Grego. in Epist. 30.50
36.
he refused it with great detestation, and would by no means be acquainted
therewith: although you deny the same most shamelesly, as shall be declared
afterward.

Cant. 2. Osor. page 17.
But here you obtrude against us the mystical Sonet of Solomon. Wherein he
commands his spouse to catch the Foxes destroying the vynes: which be (as
you interpret it) heretics peruertyng the Church: And this you affirm ca^
by none other mean be brought to pass, except some one be set in authority,
that may root up the mores of heretical contagion before they be ripe. First
of all (Osorius) it is hard to establish a firm doctrine by an Allegory:
Moreover the denomination of Foxes does no more resemble heretics, then any
other wicked persons. But to grant this unto you in some respect, by what
argument do ye prove that heretics can by no means else be apprehended,
unless your singular Monarchy be admitted? The Emperor Phocas did first of
all erect this Papal Empire in Boniface the iij. What then? Had not Peter long
before Foxes in chase? and the other Apostles likewise? Act. of the Apost. the
5.15. Chap.
Call to your remembrance Ananias, Saphira and Elymas the sorcerour: forget
not other pestilent examples like unto the same, and you will be better
advised. Proceed a degree lower to those grave Fathers, the first Bishops of
the Romish Church, Cleme^s, Anacletus, Marcellus, and many others. Could the
holy Martyrs have sealed our Religion with their blood, unless they had first
daunted the pride of Tyrauntes, and heretics with the sword of the
Scriptures? But here paraduenture you will Triumph, because? I make so
honorable mention of the Romish See. I wis it is needelesse: For I do here
commend Bishops, not Popes: Martyrs, not Monarchs. And yet in truth I have no
quarrel with the Romish See, or the Bishop thereof, nor ever had: It is that
usurped authority that exalts it self above all earthly power, which I do
challenge and will proclaim open war against, whiles breath is in my body,
except I find a stronger Goliath then you are hitherto.

But we will return to your Foxes, whereof I have noted the overthrow of
sundry most subtle and crafty before the Papacy. This our later age (praised
be God) does punish and utterly suppress whole sects of heresies, although the
same does not acknowledge your Papane principality I dare be bold to vouch
England, and I conceive no less friendly of other commonweals, against the
which you can not forge any probable reason to the contrary, or why it should
not be so. For if there were no universal Monarche of the Church, sittyng in
that stately chair at Rome, ought that be any estoppell to the Bishops of
England, Scotland, Poland, or Germany, yea of Spain or Portingall, or any
other dominion or common weal, but that they may apprehend hereticques, yea
and punish them? Have they no Magistrates, do they lack laws? are they void
of sense and understanding? Put on your spectacles Osorius, and behold all
Christian Nations, and mark well the manners of the people. Are they not
sufficiently provided for their common safety, and tranquillity by their own
peculiar laws? do not Princes govern their several territories in orderly
policy? may they administer all other matters well, and can not confute the
absurdities of heresies, without this Tyrannous Ierarchy of Rome? Can not we
touch an heretic? or can not other Regions do the like, which are in the
furthermost part of the world, severed from the costs of Italy, except they
gad to Rome for a Pelting Oracle? do you justify this, Osorius? is this the
wisdom of an old man? are you so altogether void of learning, experience,
and discretion also? Yea rather, before any Pope was at all, heretics were
laid hands upon. Even now also rigor of law is executed against them: Neither
can any Fox be foside so crafty, as your reasons alluded unto the^, are
utterly frivolous and unskillful. But ye skippe from Solomon to Paul, and of
him you write in this manner.

Osorius page 18. b.
Therefore Paul in his second Epistle to the Thessalonia^s denies that it may
come to pass that Antichrist shall come, before there be a departing from the
faith. First of all, this is somewhat strange in you, that you note the place.
And surely in very good time have ye done it: for even here your unshamefast
imprudencie is taken tardy. Paul pronounces in that place, that our Lord Jesus
Christ shall not come before a departing be of the faith first: but you for our
Lord and Savior Christ, have placed Antichrist. Paul's words are these. Ad
Thessa. 2. Cap. 2.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for the Lord shall not come, except
there come a departing first, and that son of perdition be revealed. You are
caught Osorius and so entangled in this snatch, that ye can not escape. Are you
not ashamed to deprave Paul's sentence so blasphemously? can you with so
execrable impiety, and horrible ignorance, place Antichrist in steed of
Christ? and the son of perdition, in the place of our Lord Jesus? And as
though Paul had spoken so in deed, can you so beastly proceed to the
confirmation of that your Babylonicall Empire, with a sentence of Paul
pestilently perverted? Is this the profession of a Bishop? is this the
Divinity of Osorius? Down with that Pecockes tail, away with this
arrogancy: be no more so collhardy, and write hereafter more advisedly, and
take better regard to your pen, lest you bring your name into odious contempt
with all Christendom. Take your pleasure in my words, wrest them as ye list:
but handle Paul more discreetly. But you are learnedly plentyfull in examples,
heaping together John Husse, Jerome of Prage, Martin Luther, and many others.
Who, as you do affirm, Osorius page 18. b.
have revolted from this your Romish Monarche of set purpose,because being
exempt from his Jurisdiction, they might be more freely licentious in writing
and speaking. Why do ye conjecture so (vain Southsayer)? They were men of
laudable conversation, void of all manner ryotte, not culpable in any notorious
or heinous crime: Therefore how may they be duly charged of any suspicion of
dissolute behavior, that lived always discreetly and soberly?

But this is but a trifle with you, to defame a few persons by name: you rushe
upon all England with open mouth, page 19.
As though after the abolishyng your Romish Monarche, it were forthwith carried
violently into all unbridled lust. This is a false suggestion by your leave
Sir, for as soon as we had shaken of the foreine yoke from our shoulders, and
yielded our selves to the lawful authority of our sovereign Prince, all
things went better, and more peacibly with us: especially in this later age of
the Gospel renewed, which being compared to those elder years, wherein your
Romish Prelate did insolently tread upon and triumph over us, may well be
adjudged to have enjoyed most blessed prosperity. Then which heavenly benefit
our victorious Ila^d does most tha^kefully confess never to have received
greater at the hands of God. God for his inestimable mercy, grant that it may
be permanent unto the worlds end: and that we most humbly submittyng our
selves to our natural and liege sovereign, united together in this most
duetyfull amity, may most be estraunged from your extraordinary Babilonicall
Idol: turnyng the same over to you and your fraternity for ever. And now ye
run foreward with more lies. Rehearsing a rabble of sects, and these you do
imagine to have entered sithence the Banishment of the Pope. page 19.
As though in the old time were not great swarms of sects? whereof Paul does
so often premonish us? or as though they raged not wonderfully, in the time of
that godly Father Augustine? whose heart did so boil against them, that he
wrate great volumes against their pestiferous errors? Or as though that sacred
father, Peter's successor, Pope Liberius were not a mainteyner of that poisoned
canker of Arrius? Or as though Celestine and Anastase the second were not
stout champions of that horrible Scorpion Nestorius? Can you object sects,
when as no age ever wanted some? Dare you so boldly name sects when as three
of your Romish graundsiers were mighty patrones them selves of two most
pernicious errors? But you affirm that these godly Fathers are maliciously
belyed. Call forth your own Alphonse, Alphonsus de Castro. contra haeret. lib.
4. Cap. 4.
who being a Moncke, and a Spanyard borne, ought to be of some credit with
you being a Prelate of Portingall. O worthy successors of Peter. O excellent
pillars of Christ's Church. This it is forsooth to commit sheep unto Wolves:
This is it to deliver the people of God to bloody Butchers. Yet you blush
nothing at this to blame factions of sects in us, which you report to
exercise perpetual war one against an other in diversity of contrary
opinions, and the same to proceed hereof pardy, because they are not in
servitude to Libertines and Celestines, that is to say, to Arrians and
Nestorians. But be it so, as you would have, that some contrariety were
amongst the later sort of our writers. Is there, or can there be any more
monstrous dissension, then has burst out amongst your Friars and Monckes?
has ever sharper storms been raised, then betwixt your Schoolmen, brawlyng
oftentimes about moates in the sun? page 19.
You rush upon Lutherans and Zuinglians by name. First you do this besides the
matter, because I do not defend them: I stand for my country, I do defend
England, I undertake the cause of little Britain against you, wherein I will
abide whiles breath is in my body. If you provoke enemies else where, I doubt
not but that you shall easily find them. Yet in the mean space I will recite
your words, whereby men may know the manifest injuries, that you vomit
against the souls of these sweet personages, and how usually you blunder out
at all adventure whatsoever your frantic brains do imagine. For this you
proceed in accusation.

The Zuinglians do inueighe against the Lutherans, and the Anabaptists keep
continual wars with the Zuinglia^s. Osori. page 19. b.
Why do not I here thrust in also Coelestianes and Interemistes, and other
names of Scismes? First of all there is no contradiction betwixt Luther and
Zuinglius in the principal points of Christian Religion. They do differ in
the Sacrament of the Eucharistie, not in the substance thereof, but in the
manner of the presence of Christ. And yet perhaps this quarrel is more about
words, then matter. But you have not only wickedly transubsta^tiated (to
speak like a Schooleman) our Savior Jesus Christ into bread, with most
monstrous devises, but also thrust upon us vj. hundred lies, every one
contrary to other: whiles you amaze the ears and minds of Christians, with
this absurd and newfangled doctrine. And therefore your graund captain of
Schoolmen, Peter Lo^bard, Peter Lombarde.
in this doubtful conflict, broyling and turmoyling him self, and thoroughly
wearied with your mockeries, does conclude at the last, That Transubstantiation
ought to be inviolable, for the autenticke authority of the Church of Rome:
but that it ca^ not be found in the Scriptures. As for the Anabaptists you
did name them without all reasons. For you are not ignorant, that the
universal consent of all Churches have condemned them: unto whom Luther and
Zuinglius were as earnest enemies as your Maistershyp, or any of all your
brotherhoode. Surely in our common wealth, they can retain no footyng, nor in
any other country that I know or, ca^ hear of. What manner of men those
Celestianes be, I would feign learn of you, and of your durtie companion of
Angrence, because you have given that name first: as far as I can perceive.
The other sorts are Interemistes, by this name (as I guess) notyng those men,
which to make a certain qualification in Religion, have patched up a certain
book of peeuishe Romish dregs, and have entitled it by the name of Interim.
If this be true: what came into your brains to reckon two of your soldiers
or graund-captaines under our Banner? That Commentary of Interim is yours (I
say) your own. These were your own Doctors and their whole doctrine is
yours. They were tractable for a time in the marriage of Priests, in the
receauyng of the Sacrament, using the necessity of the present time, but in
all the rest, (as much as in them was) they did gorgiously garnishe their
Romish kingdom. And therefore in this last place you were fondly foolish, to
affirm that your own chieftaines displayed banner under your enemies
enseignes. Truly either your memory is very slipperie, or your wits went a
wollgatheryng, when you were over earnest in your slanderous imagination. Yet
are you much miscontented with these men likewise, because they seem to vary
amongst them selves.

For they correct (I will use your intricate words by your leave) they alter,
they turn in and out, they blotte out the old and make new places etc. When
you name places, I suppose you mean common places of Scriptures, or little
books of common places. If it be so, you ought to have remembered the Grecian
Proverb. The second determinations are accounted wiser then the first. Neither
can any thing resemble the Christian modesty more nearely, then if we amend our
selves as need requires. We have a notable example hereof, Aurel. Augustine
who made a book of his errors entitled a Retractation. The Retractation of
August.
But you are in an other predicament: That is to say, you are apprentices and
so addicted bondslaues to these drowsy dreams (the daily practice whereof
has so betwitched your senses) that no strength of the truth ca^ mollify your
hearts, cloyed altogether in that fantastical puddle of schoolemyre. But
howsoever you shall remain stiffenecked your selves, you ought not yet reprove
the modesty of others, which fashion them selves nearest to Christian
simplicity. Neither was any example at any time more commendable in the Church
of Christ, then this of Augustine was. You see now what a stinckyng reward you
have gotten for this pursuyte of Sectaries: and yet as if you had besturred
your stumpes ha^dsomely, you triumph in these words.

What can you Reply to this? was there a general consent betwixt them that
sprang out of Luther? no disagreement? no contradiction in opinions? But how
much better had it been for you, to have reverenced that lead whereat you
scorn so much? then to have opened such a gappe to so mo^struous pestiferours
errors? I answer that these your metie questions concern me nothing at all.
For I am an English man, not a Lutherane. I stand for England and not for
Luther against you. Yet do I pronounce this also, that there was a general
consent amongst the Lutherans: There was no disagreement amongst the
Lutherans.
no disagreement, no contradiction in opinions. For they all stick fast to
Augustines confession, nor will suffer them selves to be drawn from it. But
that confession (say you) I do not allow. Neither is this matter now in
question, what manner of confession that was: for howsoever that be, it is most
certain that the Lutherans did persevere steadfastly therein. Coelest. Anabap.
Interem.
As for the rest which you heap together, are either feigned, or coined by
you, or banished from all men, as well from us as from you. Or else they be your
own sweet sworn brethren, saving that they have somewhat more modesty and
discretion then you. Therefore this is but a slender Argument to enduce me to
reverence your lead, except I were too too leaddish by nature. But sithence you
have shronke from your tackle, and forsaken the leaden Bulls of your Monarche
in so succourlesse a shipwreck, without helm or cable in such dispayred
perplexity, you are to be esteemed not only a leadden and wooden, but a
durtie advocate also of your Romish Monarchy: if at the least any thing may be
more filthy then durte. Yet that ye may the better proceed, you spitte on your
hands, and take hold of my words, which are these. But there came a
thundercracke into our ears out of the heavenly authority of the sacred
Scriptures, that made our consciences afraid: and compelled us to abandonne
and forsake all men's Traditions, and too put our whole confidence in the
only freemercy of God. Well: I acknowledge this speech to be mine own, yea
and gladly also: And I find nothing therein blameworthy.

But what says Osorius to this grace? Do ye not say gramercy to Luther (says
he) that linked you so fast with such a singular benefit to abandonne all
fearefulnes from you? What is the matter my Lord? what Planet has distempered
you? I have nothing here to do with Luther nor with his doctrine of faith. I
showed that our consciences were terrified with the authority of sacred
Scriptures, and constrained to flee to the free mercy of God: you say, Luther
has written erroniously touching faith: forsooth these two hang together like
a sick man's dream. As if a man would argue in this wise. Osorius is a most
impudent rayler, Ergo, his companion of Angrence is a perfect Logician. Are you
not ashamed to cite whole sentences from an other writer, being unable to frame
any probable objections against any one of them? For as concerning Luther
albeit, I have not undertaken to defend him (as I have oftentimes protected)
yet this do I suppose, that neither he, nor any other interpretour of yt
Scriptures ought to be admitted upon every particular Assertion, but to have
relation to the whole discourse and meaning of the Author. If this especial
regard be had unto Luther (as in deed it ought) he shall be found a profounde
scholemaster both of faith, and a good works: and so far to excel you in
learning, that ye shall not be worthy to bear his books after him, howsoever
you delight your self to gnaw upon a few words of his, unadvisedly thrown
out in some heat of disputation. But by the way you stu^ble also at an other
straw of mine, because I wrate that we have forsaken and rejected the
traditions of men: And with many i^gglyng words challenge us, that we are
beholding herein to Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, and Peter
Martyr. O my over tedious and toylesome luck, that hoped to dispute with a
learned and discrete Divine, who would without good ground have blamed
nothing, nor used any cauillatio^s: but now find all contrary. For I am
pestered with a fond brabblyng clatterer, which delightyng altogether in
vncessaunt chatteryng snatcheth and snarleth at things ratified and approved
by all men. I am therefore constrained now to play the child again, in the
principles of Divinity as he does, and those questions must be debated, whereof
no man having any skill, can be ignorant. In the same manner therefore, we have
cast away traditions of men, as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has
pronounced in the Gospel, under the person of Esaias the Propet, But in vain
they worship me teaching the doctrine and traditions of men: And as our Lord
Jesus a little before rebuked the Phariseis. Math. 25.
You have made frustrate (says he) the commandment of God, through your own
traditions. We give ear unto men as they be men: but if they ones teach
contrary to God, we despise and set them at naught. And enen so we do allow of
Luther, Bucer, and of the rest, so long as they explane the mysteries of the
sacred Scriptures unto us: wherein those famous men have oftentimes travailed
very co^mendably, though you iangle never so much against them. As for those
beggarly fragmentes of man's invention, being without all cover of Scriptures,
yea rather contrary to the same, though they, and you also do warraunt them
unto us, we will not receive them. Now you are taught sufficiently enough (I
think) how we have forsaken those peltyng fantasies of men: likewise how we
conceive of those notable learned fathers, whose works will be tha^kefully
embraced, whiles the world does endure, though you slau^derously barcke at them
never so much. And yet I deny not, but they were subject to sin and errors,
which happened also to the ancient fathers Augustine, Tertullian, Origin, and
Cyprian. Who sometimes wandered out of the way, and were estranged from the
truth. Yet do I not now compare, nor at any time heretofore did compare our
^ate writers with those ancient fathers, as you cavil against me: but I judge
of them as beseems me, and I profess that they were the servants of God.

Whereas you vpbrayde us with our manner of life by the reports of our cursed
enemies, such as you are: you follow herein your own gyddy brain. For true
innocence will never desire better witnesses, then such filthy and slanderous
backbyters: wherein your request to be pardoned is so much the more
unreasonable, by how much you do boldly defend, without all regard of the
gravity of a Bishop, or the natural duty of an honest man, such scattered
rumors rashly conceived of headles report, in steed of well known and
approved offenses. This also you seem to mislike in me, as a matter
intolerable, that I commend the prosperous reign of our Queens Majesty,
and herein your counsel is to for see the time to come, and the troublesome
estate of other Princes. The Queens highness belike without the advice of
Osorius can not conceive those matters, whereof no man can be ignorant that is
but meanly practiced in the daily actions of ma^s life. Have an eye to your
own charge of Siluan, and be ye careful for them. Her Majesty surmountyng in
knowledge and wisdom, regards not your peeuishe and dotyng counsel,
especially being conceived rather of malice to true Religion, then of any love
to her safety. Ye keep a great stir about the Tumultes in France, and
complain much of treason conspired against the king, and safety of his
person, and with all, that his adversaries required not his blood only, but
that the whole blood Royal should be rooted out of France. O licencious
venomous tou^g, worthy to be plucked out by the roots, from out that execrable
mouth, except it recant in time. Dare you presume so impudently to make guilty
of so cruel and horrible treason, so many worthy personages of ye florishyng
Realm? Namely when as the king him self by his open Proclamation,
acknowledged some of them, (against whom you rail so pestiferously) to be his
dear kinsmen, the other his beloved subjects: and that their being in arms
concerned the general safety of France? Many variable, uncivil, and
malicious rumors have been blown abroad in many places, touching those civil
wars: but never was any man heard to have spoken so blockishly, so
barbarously, so void of reason, and so monstruously as this Gentleman speaks
being a Bishop and an old man. And therefore we shall the less wonder at your
rashness and impudency in controversy of Religion hereafter, seeing your
sauadge boldness in this detestable and bloody accusation of the greater part
of France, without cause, without reason, and without proof.

When matter and reason do openly fail you, then you wrangle about words:
Because I named Luthers doctrine yours: against the which you stand stoutely,
and do most deadly hate it. What shall I say to so captious and bussardly a
Sophister? I term it not yours, as though you defend it, but because you
deprave it, because you pervert and iumble it with lyeng, that it can not be
discerned as you have misshapen it: whereas otherwise of it self, it is a most
comfortable treasure of the Gospel somewhat infected with poisoned contagio^
of childish errors: but in these latter days through the inestimable benefit
of God discovered, and cleansed by the commendable industry of those singular
learned Divines Luther, Bucer, Calvin, Melanchton, and others: whom though you
despise at your pleasure, yet when Osorius shall be dead and rotten, and the name
of this reverend Prelate of Portingall out of all remembrance, Osorius his
ignorance in judgment and triflyng about words.
their names will be commended to eternity to their immortal praise. For what
man will esteem of you, who (besides your foolish and unskillful handlyng the
matter whereof you entreat) are altogether ignorant in the propriety of
words, wherein you may seem to make a pretty show. You think this spoken
improperly by me: videl. that your sluggishnes should be awakened and your
dulnes pricked forward, what say you drousie Prelate? Truly you sleep so
sou^dly, yt you snorte again that ca^ deny this kind of speech: A man may be
awakened out of sleep, and be pricked forward being dull. Learn out of the
Gospel: The blind do see, the lame do walk, leapers are cleansed, the deaf
do hear, the dead do rise again. Luce. 7.
Which words of our Savior do not argue that the blind do see, or that the
lame do walk: but that those which were blind and lame, were restored to
sight and walkyng. Learn again of Cicero, Cicero pro Mar. Coelio.
who speaks on this wise. Let young men observe the bounds of their own
chastity, lest they defile the chastity of others, lest they consume their
patrimony, and be devoured with debt: Let them not offer force to virgins, nor
dishonestie to the chaste, nor infamy to ye virtuous, etc. what? Can virgins
be defloured? no surely: not so long as they are virgins, but by allurements
they may be carried from their shamefastnes. Ca^ the chaste be defiled? no
truly, but yet this chastity may be seduced in process of time to
looseness. Learn at the last what the old Proverb emplyeth, whereby is
forbidden to prick foreward the willing: which Proverb if we do admit, this
also is spoken properly enough: The dull are to be pricked foreward, and the
sluggish to be awakened. Neither would you have ever gaynsayd the same, unless
the malice you owe unto me, had drowned your senses. In good sooth I am ashamed
of you Osorius: and so have been long ago: neither would I contend any further
with so bluntish and blockish a person, if I were not determined to open
evidently, what a senseless adversary of this holy father England has, and
how unmeasurable a bragger he is: in whom besides a vain sound of frivolous
words, no metal can be found at all. Hereafter therefore I will spend as
little labor as I may, nor will willing touch ought of all that huge lump of
idle words, scattered abroad by you every where, without reason, or measure,
more then the necessity of the cause will require.

After that you have waded in your accustomed gross railing against the life
of our preache^s, imputyng unto them all manner of wickedness (where with your
Sinagogue swarmeth most evidently) you recite at the last certain of my
words, vouched out of Augustine which be as follows. Augustine does
grievously compain that in his time such a rabble of beggarly ceremonies did
ouerwhelme the Church of Christians, that the estate of Jews was much more
tolerable. Osori. fol. 24.
Osorius affirms that I did never read this sentence in Augustine. This is
well. I will cite Augustine his own words, which are these. August. Epist.19.
For although it can not be found, how they are against the faith: yet do
they ouerwhelme Religion it self (which the mercy of God willed to be freely
exercised under a very few most evident Sacraments) with servile burdens.
That the estate of the Jews is much more tolerable: who though knew not the
time of liberty, were subject only to the ordinances of the law, and not to
men's constitutions. What say you? have I not cited Augustine truly? does he not
speak the same, and in the self same words plainly that I speak? does he
not render a reason also, why the state of the Jews was more tolerable in
ceremonies then ours? which being confessed, Osorius his vanity take tardy.
is not your ignorance linked with singular unshamefastness manifestly convinced?
deny it if you can may rather because you can not, yield to the truth in the
open light. For manifest liars are not to be winked at, though they be
Bishops. In like manner you be ouerseene in that godly Father Jerome, who
requiryng all persons to search the Scriptures, and to learn them, you would
notwithstanding coin us out of the same Jerome, Iero. ad Marcel. in Epist.
cuius initium est. Mensur. charit. non habet.
a contrary doctrine. Bycuase he wrate unto Paulinus that certain persons
having no vnderstandying, nor being commendable in conversation of life, did
handle the Scriptures to licenciously. In which speech of yours what would you
have understood else, but that certain wicked persons do abuse the benefit
of the Scriptures? whereof no wise man does doubt. You are ouerseene therefore
Jerome, that will so foolishly and so wide from the matter, object Jerome
against him self. If you seek to be further satisfied herein, peruse
Chrysostom, Chrisost. in 1. and in. 3. Concione de Lazaro.
who has written of the same matter so much and so plentyfully, as nothing can
be more copious, and more manifest.

I praised Basile, and besides him also those later Monckes which observed
Basiles rules, as men that suffered lest loss. Osorius denies it, and
affirms that we do not contend with men, but with chastity it self. What
say you dotterell? how happens that you rehearse the name of chastity,
whereof I made no mention at all? And with what face do you make our Nation
guilty of monstrous and barbarous cruelty, as though it employed her whole
endeavor to the rootyng out of chastity from out our coasts, whereas that
kind of sauagenes can not be seen amongst the Turks? You prove it by the
example of certain Charterhouse Monckes forsooth, which were worthily
executed for high treason about xxx. years past, If those men (say you) would
have yielded to the wicked decrees of marriage, then should they have been
acquitted of all other punishment. As though the estate of Wedlock were in any
Realm accoumpted a punishment? or as though we did constrayne Monckes to marry
Wives against their wills? or as though this most impudent father and
shameless Bishop ca^vtter any thing in word, or deed sensibly? When as he
bealcheth out such foolish and filthy speeches against our common weal, being
so void of all credit and truth, as having no drop of any probability at
all. But let us hear what a worthy conclusion this deep wise man has brought
for his Lurdeines those mockemonckes. Of the suppression of Monks.
But admit (says he) that the greater part of them were full of all
filthynes, was it therefore forth with necessary to suppress the whole order?
First of all you do notably defend your order, which you confess was full of
all vice. Then, we deny that we subverted any order; but that those disorderous
runneagates were reduced to the common society of subjects, and their own
commodity, by means of our wholesome Statutes and Laws. In deed traitors
were executed according to their desert, as belonged to equity. The rest we
removed from their stinckyng Smynestyes, defiled with all lazynes and fithynes:
and delivered whole and Iustie to public labor and exercise, to provide so
for their living, according to brotherly charity. But in the mean space (say
you) they forsook their orders of Dominicke, and Benedicte, Barnarde and
Frauncisce, of whom Portingall has many perfect professors. Let Portingall
retain such Ioselles a Gods name. We hold our selves contented with that
heavenly Oracle, which was heard from heaven. Luce.3.
Thou art my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: Him do we attend
upon: we harken unto his Prophets and Apostles, and withal do perform our
profession in Baptism, as far forth as the frayltie of man's nature will
permit: other teachers, other rules, other orders we neither esteem nor admit.
So do we also feel, and thoroughly know your superstitious vanity herein.

You do inueigh bytterly against me, because I do compare our later Deuines in
all manner of comme^dation to the ancient fathers, and herein you turmoyle your
self wonderfully. You shoot at randone my Lord. I do not make comparison
betwixt them, nor ever thought to compare them together: and therefore you
strive here in vain, and your whole Turkish eloquence is not worth a straw.
My meaning was to declare, that the ancient Fathers did agree with out
Deuines: And for examples sake, I noted specially some common places, reseruyng
the rest, for more convenient place, because all can not be expounded at once.
Overthrow this my course if you can: but abuse not your time, nor mine, nor the
Readers with such frivolous lies, nor seem to be over eloquent, where you have
no adversary. You are highly offended because I praise Luther. Let not this
cou^ber you, I will praise him for a very praise worthy man: so will all the
posterity also: and his studious travail in the enlargyng of the Gospel will
remain to yt worlds end to his everlasting renown, though you and such as
you are chaufe and fume never so much against him. And yet I think there be
few like unto you, besides that durty pigge of Angrence your sweet cabbemnate,
resemblyng you as it seems in nature and manners nearest. Luther untruly
charged with vprores in Germany.
But as to that you accuse Luther, as author of the vprores in Germany: herein
you report a manifest untruth: for no man did more earnestly defend all
obedience due to the Magistrates, and higher powers then Luther. Whereas you
add hereunto the tumultes in Sueuya. You do err therein more then childishly,
where as the Switzers are far unlike unto him in nature, in situatio^, in
manners and in discipline. You accuse him also as a rayler against Princes,
amongst whom you name the Emperor, our famous Henry, of worthy memory, and
George Duke of Saxone. You do helye him in Caesar impude^tly, for Luther did
reverence him most humbly. In deed he did maintain the cause of the Gospel
against our king, and somewhat sharply confuted his Epistle written against
him at the first, whom afterward (being amended and reformed in doctrine) he
embraced most louyngly, and advanced with all kind of honorable title. Long
time he instructed George Duke of Saxone, George Duke of Saxone.
and with most sweet aduertisementes persuaded him, called upon him with
incessaunt prayers and Supplications. But after the Duke had hard hearted him
self, and waxed insolently obstinate in all things, nor would make any end
of spoiling, and turmoyling Gods people: Lurther beholding the lamentable ruin
of his Christian brethren round about him, did bitterly inueighe against that
traiterous outrage of Duke George, induced thereunto by the example of the holy
Prophets against the Princes of Iuda^ and of Jesus Christ our Savior against
Herod the Tetrarche. 1. Kings. 18 Luke.18.


At the last you conclude That all Luthers preachyngs did tend to provoke the
people to sedition. O shameless tou^g. How would you delude us, if no man had
read Luthers books but your self? how would you abuse our age in heapyng lies
upon lies, if we had no witness against you? when as Luther left behind him
as many pledges of Christian humility, as he wrote books. No man more
constantly maintained the authority of Magistrates, no man did more often
inculcate, more plentyfully preach, more vehemently Imprinte, more earnestly
exact Christian obedience, then he did. His writyngs are extaunt, lively, and
florishyng, and will with a whole searyng iron of detractio^, mark you for a
backbiter to your everlasting reproach. That was a great and manifest error
that I made: but here ensues a greater, far more horrible against renowned
Princes, notable commonweals, yea in matters of high treason: by the which as
by degrees this reverend Prelase aduaunceth his shameless and execrable
vanity so much, that all men may judge him not only to have forgotten all
truth, and modesty, but also utterly abandoned the same.

This matter he affirms to be most apparaunt, that Jews king of Hungary,
and a great multitude of Christians were slain in battle through the folly
and wickedness of Luther, Luther charged with the overthrow of the Hungarians
most untruly.
and that hereof ensued the Conquest of Buda, by the Turkishe Emperor. O
venomous tongue to be detested of all men, that have any love of the truth, or
regard of humanity. Can you doubt or be ignorant of this (most perverse
dissembler) that this lamentable death of the king, and the loss of Buda, came
by the only outrageous unmeasurable rashness of that cowled prelate Tomorraeus
Archb. of Tholosse: Tomorraeus Archb. of Tholosse.
Which had so bewitched ye people with hautie and arrogaunt preaching, that
they rushed out headlong, with a small and weak handful against an huge
host, and invincible power of Solomon: in so much that after ye Conquest,
Solomon him self could not keep countaunce, but smilingly scorned the
insolency of the Hungarians, which had so unadvisedly yielded into his hands
their king to be slain, and their kingdom to be spoiled? Is not this true? do
ye not know it perfectly? Paulus Iouius in his 23.book of Histories.
Does not Paulus Iouius your chief a counsel report this story parcel meal?
yea every title thereof? was ever any man besides you so frantic, as to charge
Luther therewith? The place it self does convince you, wherein at that time
scarce any Lutheran had set any footyng: The time does confute you, for Luthers
name was as yet scarsely known. The circumstaunces of the History do condemn
you, which do cry out against that Monkishe Archbishop of Tholosse, for that
pityfull loss, and lamentable effusion of Christian blood, as I have declared
before out of Paulus Iouius.

But it is no marvel, if he can so franckely coin a lie against a Region so
far distant from us, when as he spares not to press upon us Englishmen
here in English, with a most exectable lie. Osorius slander touching the death
of king Edward the sixth.
For he affirms that Edward the sixth our Royal king of famous memory was
haynously poisoned in his Childhode. O monstrous beast, can you being a
Portingall borne so impudently diffame our Region with ye horrible crime,
without all likely or probable proof now that swe^tie years he spent and
gone? when as no sober or discreet English man did ever conceive any such
thought in his mind? The Physicians reported that he dyed of a consumption.
The same was affirmed by the Grooms of his privy Chamber, which did keep
continual watch with the sick king. All his subjects did believe it for a
confessed truth. Neither could your slanderous Fable have been blown abroad,
but amongst tattlyng women, foolish children, and such malicious English
loselles like unto you: nor yet could this rotten vnfauorie cavil have had any
discreet Author, had it not been whispered into that Ass head of Osorius.

He coupleth hereunto Caesar, who he says was betrayed and destroyed by
treason. Of the overthrow of the Emperor.
Truly Caesar did not only pursue, but also vanquishe the Germans, chasing
them in Germany with a great army of Spanish and Italian soldiers. The which
overthrow the Germans shook of as well as they might. But the last wars
raised by Maurice, what they purported, and what success they took I will
pass over, nor will blame in the dead, whom I confess a victorious Emperor
when he lived. Osor. slau^derous lie touching the poysonyng of Queen Mary.
He joins Queen Mary a Princess that reigned very lately, and her also
auoweth to have been destroyed with poison. Who ever believed or reported this
but you (railyng Scorpion) All the English Nation, and all other Strangers, yt
were then in England, will manifestly reprove and condemn this your malicious
and shameless impudency.

There raunged at that time a certain outrageous burning fever, which
infected all the estates in ye Realm, and amongst the rest, The death of
Queen Mary.
shortened the lives of the richest and most honorable personages: at what time
Queen Mary in many things most commendable, after a few months dyed of the
same disease. In like manner Cardinal Poole, The death of Cardinal Poole.
an excellent learned man, being sick of a quartan, departed this world the
same time. You demand of me^ery mala^ertly, as if the matter were manifest
and confessed, whether I understood any thing of that conspiracy, wherewith
most wicked men practiced the destruction of Queen Mary, and Cardinal Poole.
Ueryly I do simply confess, that there was never any such matter spoken,
written, feigned, or surmised, unless by some such mad dogs, as your self:
which having else nothing to snarle at, do barcke and houle at ye clouds,
moon, and stars, and many times at their own shadows. You tell us a tale
of some flying vapors and drousie dreams (Osorius) imagined in that rotten
mazer of yours, when you clatter out such matters, whereof neither I, or any
man else ever heard, or could hear one word, except he might chaunceably light
upon some Synon of Osorius trayning, that could with most crafty conueyaunce
make a mowlehill seem a mountain.

The foreine marriage of Queen Mary.
The foreine Marriage of the Queen was somewhat displeasaunt at the first, and
the same was gaynsayd by some men in arms: yet was there nothing attempted
against her highness person, neither did any man dream of the return of
Cardinal Poole into England at that time: and the solemnization of the Marriage
proceeded in most peacyble order: and every limme of your monstrous lie is
trusht in pieces. Osorius does accuse France of high treason.
Hereunto Osorius annexoth, as a place fit for it, the vprores, treasons,
outrages, and the overthrows of Religion in France: For with such heinous
offenses our holy prelate boldly charge ye greater number of the nobility of
France. Amongst these are enterlaced some of the royal blood: and many other
virtuous and honorable personages: whose godlynes and integrity of life, did
as much deteste such outrageous insolency, as the tongue of this Thraso is
void of all truth and modesty. Thraso.
There are many probable presumptions conceived of some persons, who were
suspected to sow the first seeds of this Tragical tumulte in France: but I
will not imitate your Iunaticke waywardness in accusing the Nobility. Neither
will I pursue any man besides you, and your dotyng dearlyng Dalmada of
Angrence, yet much miscontentedly do I this also, and clean contrary to the
mild inclination of my nature: but your hautynes has altered my modesty, and
your excessive pride has distempered and broken the gall of my patience: yours
especially, whose arrogancy passes all measure: for I account it sufficient
to pinche that saely abject grasshopper Dalmada now and then in the chase.

Now let us return to Henry the Scottish king, Who^ you affirm was cruelly
murdered through high treason. The most miserable murdering of Henry the
Scottish king.
Truly you say well herein: For in our age was never seen a more horrible act
committed, then in this lamentable slaughter of the king: But why do ye not
disclose the traitors? why name you not the persons? why do ye conceal any
parcel of the fact, in so notorious a murder? The matter, say you, is
manifest: they were Lutheranes, that executed this bloody practice: They were
Lutheranes, that enterprised all the former abominations: They were Lutheranes
all, that at any time in our age, have raised all troubles, and tumultes
against Princes, and against commonweals. Cursed be that frantic scalpe:
Blystered be that blasphemous tongue: Cursed be those Swynishe senses, which
can wroote together all roots of wickedness, to oppress the poor innocent
Lutheranes withal. But it is all false that you have suggested, and this your
surmise never entered the thought of any discreet person so much as in his
dream, as I have showed by particularities before. And the king of Scotland
(whom you have reserved to the last) makes most against you: whom your sect
(mark what I say) your own sect, most traitorously entrapped, and smoulthered
to death with gunnepower. I could declare the very order thereof, but that I am
determined to dwell in my former purpose unto the end, not to detect any
person besides you, against whom neighter I, nor any other person can exclame
sufficiently.

This was also a great block in your eye, that I said Luther was a man of God.
I gave unto him his right: and even as truly do I call you an uncharitable
person, void of all Christian love, a slaunderour of Princes, a backbiter of
commonweals, a very forge of lying: I add also hereunto most truly, ye very
bondslaue of Lucifer. You run over certain common places of Luther, and
those you rende in pieces, but after your wonted guise, of a very shameless
impudency, without proof, without reason, without example, without wit,
like a Lordly comptroller, or like an Emperor rather, whose authority may not
be gaynesayd: whereof I have resolved some part in my first answer: and the
rest I will confute in their places, when I shall come nearer to the Divinity
of this glorious Prelate. Afterward this grave father inueigheth against the
life of Luther: which Erasmus reports to have been commended of all persons,
Erasmus his commendable report of Luther.
and which no man has reproved hitherto, besides this Doctor Dottipoll, who
yet can pike no just quarrel against his manners, more then that he was
somewhat sharp in his writings. At the last to show him self in his own
colors. This foul mouthed Gentleman depraueth and defiles the death of that
godly man vpbraydyng him with surfetyng, and dronkennes. Whereas it is well
known that Luthers yeldyng to nature was so calm, The death of Luther, which
was most holy, sinisterly depraved by the malicious slau^derers.
and so quiet, in the very last gaspes whereof he expressed so contant
profession of Christian faith, that all men that were present wondered thereat.
Which I pray God we may accomplish when our end approaches. But we have spoken
of Luther sufficiently: whose life and doctrine I did not undertake to defend,
nor of any other person else. My only purpose was to acquit this famous Island,
my dear native country from your unmeasurable and shameful railing. Luther
and that golden couple of Fathers Martyr, and Bucer are well enough shielded
with their own armor of virtue and piety, whose estimation because you could
by no means empaire, you affirm briefly, that this was a sufficient reproach
unto them, that I did commend them so plentifully.

Therefore sithence this troubles you, I will exasperate your malice against
them, and will boldly proteste, that herein I received a singular and
enestimable benefit of God, that I did once hear, see, and know these notable
Fathers, esteemyng more of one days conference with them, then of all the
vain glorious Pomp of your hawty Lordlynes: and that those two worthy
personages did as far surmou^t you in wisdom and learning, as that caluish
dole Dalmada is inferior to you in eloquence, and cleanesse of style. And so
we will passover the persons, whom the godly disposed will regard according
to their deseruings. Neither will I hereafter trace out the tracke of your
durtie cauillations, nor firrett out all your follies and errors, for I should
find no end of that endless maze. I will now prye into your cunnyng
Divinity, and herein will I wrestle a pluck with you, because you brag so
lustely of your skill, as though no man were able to win the Collar from you.

In this point you charge me with inconstancy, because I said that our
Preachers do allege Scriptures only: and yet within a whiles after I added,
that they did vouche the authority of the Fathers also. Are you not ashamed
(holy father) being an old man and a Bishop, to lie so manifestly? In the
Epistle to the Queen. page 11.
and to poast over your feigned imagination unto me. This is your own lie,
yours I say, a whelpe of your own lytter, very often snarlyng against me with
your currishe speeches, but beaten back again, and thrown into your own
bosom by mine answer. In mine answer. page 8.
Confer the places (gentle Reader) I pray thee, and thou shall see how
Osorius bewrays his obliuious dotage. I do deny that our writers do urge
Scriptures only, as you did cavil, and said, that they did allege the
Doctors for their defense also: as appears plainly by their books, but I
enterlaced this withal, that if our writers had used scriptures only, they
had followed herein, the example of Jesus Christ and his Apostles. What says
our grave father to this? Forsooth he Preaches much of the Divine power of
Christ our Savior, how that he was the mind and wisdom of the father, and
the accomplisher of the Law, and did make new ordinances of our Religion,
which were not expressed in the whole course of the old Law. First of all this
unwieldy old man perceives not how he has overthrown him self in his own
turn: for if Christ be the mind, and wisdom of the father as he has most
truly said: hereupon consequently follows, that all the particular
testimonies of Christ, are special Oracles of the truth: and that all his
particular sayings ought to be engraven in our hearts, as heavenly Oracles.
This did our heavenly Father pronounce unto Moses, and Moses declared the
same unto the people in these words. Deuteronomy. 18.
The Lord thy God will raise up a Prophet like unto me from among you over thy
brethren, him shall ye barken unto: Wherefore if we must harken unto Christ as
unto Moses, then are we bound as necessarely to his precepts, as to the
ordinances of Moses. Behold the same more plainly yet in the Gospel, Math. 3.
Jesus being baptized, came forth of the water, and behold the heavens were
opened, and he saw the spirit of God, descendyng as a Dove, and standing over
him, and lo there came a voice from heaven. This is my well-beloved son in
whom I am well pleased: Therefore since the authority of Jesus Christ is sealed
unto us by the mouth of almighty God, what greater Majesty of Scriptures, may
be pronounced in ye Scriptures, taught or imagined more excellent then this
doctrine? Iam. 4.
James does record That our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is the only
Lawmaker, which can save, and destroy. Wherefore in his only right and
interest, he did partly establishe new laws, partly amend the old, partly
expou^de the obscure, partly restore them that were worn out of mind, and
partly abolishe them that were received. But what makes this to your purpose?
when our Lord Jesus does use Scriptures, does he allege any other then the
sacred testimonies of the old Testament? it could not otherwise be, say you:
does he vouche any other interpreters then the holy Ghost sent down from
heaven? he needed not, John. 3.
say you: For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: for God does
not give him the Spirit by measure. The Father loves the Son, and has
yielded all things unto his hand. This is a true saying of John concerning
Christ, which being so in deed, that must be also true which I enterlaced.
That Jesus Christ being contented with the testimony of the holy Scriptures
alleged none other interpretour, besides him self. This is also undoubted
true at the last. That you are a very unskillful and blockishe Divine, which
professing the knowledge of God, do wauder so erroniously in the nature and
power of God.

If I should sift out the examples particularly, that you have taked together
for this purpose, I should find them altogether void of all manner
probability, stuffed full with gross errors. Two only will I shake out
amongst all the rest, which shall condemn you of your disguised maskyng. You
deny that this sentence can be found in the Law, in the Prophets, or in the
Psalms: that the way is narrow that leads to salvation, or that we must
turn the left check to him that has stricken on the right. If you exact
words, you play by yt Sophister: If you require substance or sentence, I do
affirm it to be found every where both in the Law, in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms. The old law has an express commandment. That we shall not bow
to the right hand nor the left hand, Deuteronomy. 4.
nor add to the Law, nor diminishe there from. Is it not apparaunt therefore,
that we are placed in straightes? Truly David perceived it well, Psalm. 27
who being a king and a Prophet chosen by yt singular providence of God to
govern the people of Israel, yet does grievously complain, that he was
partly placed in narrow straightes: partly forsaken in the dark: Psalm. 25.
and sometimes makes most humble supplication to God to direct his feet in
the right way: Psalm. 119
but very often confesses that the word of the Lord is a Lantern to his
feet, and a light to his paths. But what needs a Lantern, but in
combersome and narrow straightes, where a man may easily go amasked? if you be
ignorant in all those places, what do ye understand that is requisite in a
Divine and Bishop? or if ye know them, and dissemble them, what can be more
wayward then you?

Likewise you object that saying, of geuyng a blow on the cheeks, which words
do employ nothing else, but that we are commanded to be patient. But patience
is most learnedly contained in that first and special commandment of God.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. There is no man that will offer
injury to him self in any matter, wherefore he ought not to wrong his
neighbor at all: ca^ you have any thing more plainly spoken? The ungrateful
people of Israel did exclame and rage against their good, mild, and paynfull
guide Moses, sometime with secret conspiracies, sometimes with open
exclamations, many times with threatenings, and very often with wicked
cursinges. What might this gentle Captain do in the mean space? Being
stricken, yea and buffeted also upon the cheek, does he not turn over his
other cheek? What else, I pray you, is meant hereby, that he does often pray
unto God for such cursed caytiues his enemies? when he does so earnestly and
vehemently cry out to God, either to forgive them, Exodus 3.
or to blotte his name out of the book of life? if you require yet a more
notable example of patience: Behold our Lord Jesus Christ is prefigured unto us
in Esaias the Prophet, drawn unto death as a Lamb to be slain, who being
rayled upon on every side, Esai. 53.
vexed by the Jews, and buffeted with fistes on the face, held his peace: and
as a sheep before the Shearer never opened his mouth: what may be thought of
the whole history of Job, but a conquest of patience, and in most miserable
calamity a most joyful Triumph thereof? And yet this veepe Divine is so
void of common sense, that he utterly deuyeth any sentence to be found in the
Scriptures touching patient sufferaunce of our enemies wrongs: You say that
you have passed over many things. It had been better for you truly, that you
had passed over all things, then in all things, with malice and foul
speaking, so to turn the catte in the pan, that your words can neither
find head, nor foot to stand upon: can explane nothing soundly, conclude
nothing duly, prove nothing effectually, but rau^ge in railing, brawle with
bare affirmatiues, and with pratlyng past measure, pester and pervert the
minds, and ears of all men. You quarrel with Paul, and demand where he
learned, that those persons should be restrained from the communion and
society of Christians, which retained Circumcision? He did learn it of
Christ our new lawgeuer as I recited before: Iaco. 1.
he did learn it of the holy Ghost, whom by the singular benefit of God,
Act. 20.
he knew to be yt reuealer of the truth, he did learn it of God, by whom he
was by especial calling chosen to preach the Gospel. Ad Galat. 1
He did not (say you) allege therefore the old Law to this effect. As though
any man is so mad besides your self, that will maintain sundry sentences to
be alleged out of the old Testament, which are not contained there? This do I
say. This is my meaning: This do I verify, that our Lord Jesus Christ did
observe this order continually in enlargyng the Gospel, to wit, to vouche
testimonies out of the law and the Prophets: and the same order was also
continued by the Apostles. This to be undoubted true not only all Deuines, and
Bishops, but all mowers also, carters, children, and women do know and
confess, if they have either them selves handled, or heard the Gospel
preached by others. And yet this our grave grayheaded Prelate, in this so
manifest light cauillously quarelleth as though the matter were doubtful, and
stuffeth whole leaves with toys gayly knittyng up the knot at the length, on
this wise.

What is it (says he) which the Apostles speak in their assembly: It seems
good to the holy Ghost and unto us. They do not say, It is written in the
Scriptures. O rotten and gyd dye brain. How could the Apostles vouch the old
Testament, in a new matter, when they made a new ordinance? But in all things
that were contained in the law and the Prophets, these words were always
uttered in the speeches of our Savior Jesus Christ and his Apostles. These
self same words (I say) we shall find many times repeated, and every where
redoubled, which you do reject maliciously, and impudently, It is written.
And this also: That the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Shall I annexe hereunto
examples? It needs not (say you) The matter is evident. So is this also
manifest, that you do wickedly abuse the holy Scriptures, to pervert ye truth
of the Gospel. For where as you do demand of me a little after: How I dare be
so bold to say, that the ancient Fathers did add nothing to the government
of the Church, but that they found in the Scriptures. I will likewise demand
of you what came into your brains, being an old man, a Bishop, and so reverend
a father, to burden me with words which I never spoke, never wrate, never once
thought upon? If it shame you nothing to make so open a lie, to the manifest
view of all the world, how will you behave your self in matters of Divinity,
wherein the vnleattered people have no judgment? I affirmed that the ancient
Fathers of the primitive Church did vouch the Scriptures and the holy Ghost. I
do acknowledge these words to be mine own: Toss them, and tumble them, as ye
list, and the more ye gnawe upon them, the more will your teeth be on edge. For
as then your Councels, whereunto you lean so much, were not hatched, neither
any interpretours as yet fully plumed. These two, whereof I made mention, were
the only sou^de fou^dations and pillars, namely the holy Ghost, and the
Scriptures: after them whole flocks of interpretours flusht in: all which I do
not generally condemn. Neither had any just cause of conte^tion been betwixt
us in this matter, if you were not vnmeasurably quarellsome. For whereas I had
set down in plain words that our late Deuines do produce the Assertions of
the Fathers in their books (as evidently appears by their monumentes) what
need you to provoke me to a tedious and unnecessary an answer? and to plunge
your self into questions, partly false, partly impertinent? as I have
heretofore declared. But our gentle Bishop is so vnmeasurably given to
chatteryng (wherein he delights beyond reason) that he will willyngly permit
nothing to proceed in order, though it be altogether contrary to the purporce
of the disputation.

Out of this corruption of your mind comes to pass, That you deny, that
lust, Rebellion and outrage are reckoned sins, with us: What say you reverend
father? do not we accou^pt lust, rebellion, and outrage to be sins? For this
do you affirm in these words. Here I ask an other question of you if you had
but one cru^me of shamefastnes, humanity, wit, or modesty, would you with
such foul slanders dissame any kind of people living in the world? and yet
not so foul as foolish? for nothing ca^ be imagined more foolish, then to
rail so absurdely as well without all show as likelyhode of truth. Pause here a
whiles Osorius and ponder well this your indiscreet accusation, and henceforth
write more advisedly, except you mean to bewray your amazed madness to all
the world. But how can you handle any matter discreetly, that to pike a
quarrel to brawle upon, will wrangle about plain words, nay rather gnaw in
gobettes, seely sillables and titles of words? For where as I wrate on this
wise. You do accuse us, Aristarchus was a great quareller.
as though we had turned out our Nuns and droues of Monckes to lust, and
lowsnes of life, and had sold their houses for money. This sentence our proper
witted Aristarchus does not conceive: and does believe, that these words: Their
houses sold for money: should be construed, as though I did mean that the
Selles of Nuns and Monckes were sold for their own behoof. When as I
affirmed plainly, that their houses were sold to the use of the weal public:
which words no man could have wrested so monstruously but this brablyng
rascal. Paraduenture this will seem a great fault to call a Bishop rascal.
And I confess no less in deed. But I do not argue with a Bishop, but with a
very Beast crowned with a Myter: who oftentimes calls me frantic, sometimes
dronken, every where wicked and liar. Wherefore sithence he has forgotten and
utterly laid away the personage of a Bishop, he may not gape for any softer
speech from me. But if he chance to call him self home hereafter, and gather
again some gravity and modesty agreeable to his profession, it shall be very
easle for me to return to mildness and fair speech, which I do commonly use
with mine acquaintance, and with strangers also, unless they brag in
brawlyng, prau^ce proudly as Princes in ostentation of learning, and piety,
disdaynefully despising all other men's judgments in respect of them selves.
It displeases this our Gentleman also, that my style is so inflamed against
those stinckyng sinckeholes of that cowled generation. I spoke of ours which I
might more easily accuse, then you can defend: for I knew them better you did,
my Lord. So had they been less known unto me, if by the especial providence
of God I had not happily escaped out of these filthy mischievous dens betymes.

You reserve a place for the defense of your Monckes by it self and in drawyng
their petigree, you play the Philosopher at large. Wherein you are not only to
childishe and tedious, but so far estraunged from the purpose, that ye seem
rather to dream of S. Patrickes Purgatory, the^ to note our Religion. Osorius
a Proctour for monks.
Let us mark the beginning which is this: There be ij. sorts of men (say you)
that are empaled within the bounds of the Church. The one, whose function
consists in general practice of manners, in a mean course of virtue and
godlynes: The other that desire to advance the^ selves in a more exquisite
endeavor of heavenly discipline. Behold here a new Divinity. Two sorts of
Christians are sprung up, if we believe my Lord Bishop, where as the Scriptures
have authorized but one only state of Christians hitherto. 1. Cor. 12.
There are diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit, and there are
differences of administrations, yet but one Lord: there are diverse manners of
operations, and yet but one God, which works all in all. For as the body is
one, and has many members, and where as also many members be of one body: Eue^
so is Christ. For we are all Baptized into one body by one spirit, whether we
be Jews, or Gentiles, bondmen, or free, and we have all drunk of one spirit.
These are ye words of S. Paul. Wherefore there can not be two sorts of
Christians, if there be but one body of Christians: nor a distinct profession,
because the spirit is one, and the self same: Will you have this made more
manifest by sillables and titles? Ephesians. 4.
One body, and one spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your calling.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, which is above
all, and through all, and in you all. All are one, and in us all as Paul does
affirm. Where is your distinction therefore? There is no respect of persons
with God: but in every nation he that does fear him, and works
righteousness is accepted of him. So does Peter preach, who^ if we admit for
our Scholemaister, all your distinction (wherein you have travailed so much)
will lie in the durte. Act, 10. and 11.
And therefore since our profession is but one, and the same common also to all
Christians, out of Antioche were all called once first by this common name,
Christians. But if you will not be satisfied with the testimonies of the
Apostles: Let us hear our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, sendyng his eleven
Disciples abroad into the whole world speaking unto them in this wise. Math.
vlti.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye forth therefore, and
teach all nations, Baptizyng them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all those things, which I
have commanded you. This is the pure, and only profession of Christian
Religion, grounded upon the authority of Christ his own words: repeated by
the preachyngs of the Apostles, confirmed with the general consent of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, and ensealed with the blood of the Martyrs
in all ages. Leave this Religion to us, and retain to you and your fraternity
that newfounde two horned sect, Cicero in his book of duties. Aristotle in
his Ethickes.
whereof you can vouch no Author besides Cicero or Aristotle. But let us pause
yet a whiles upon my Lords division, and consider the special points of his
discreet destruction, distinction I would say. For after he has enstalled two
sorts of Christians, he does give them cognizaunces whereby they may be
discerned. There is one sort of them (says he) whose function consists in
common practice of manners, and in a mean course of virtue and piety. The
other desire to advance them selves to a more exquisite endeavor of heavenly
discipline. Now I beseech you my Lord, what mediocritie of virtue and piety
do ye speak of? Sithence, our profession does exact of us a perfect, and most
absolute keepyng of the commandments, by express testimony of both old and
new Testament how often is this sentence repeated in the old Testament Be ye
holy: Leuit. 21.
for I am holy: Wherefore we ought not to stand still in a mean, but must
endeavor courageously to yt perfect holiness of God. This is an express
commandment. I am the Lord, your God, Leuit. 19. 20.26.
you shall observe all my ordinances and all my Statutes etc: He commands
all, makes no exception. And therefore this your newfangled mean betwixt both,
must be thrown away, nay rather this mean is execrable and damnable, our
Lord and God the Father thu^dryng the same from heaven. If you will not harken
unto me (says he) and will not observe all that I command you, Deuteronomy. 27.
I will visit you with fear, with tremblyng, and burning feauers. etc. The
very same words are so often and so manifestly repeated in Deutero. That who so
will diligently behold them, can not but wonder at your dullness, and
ignorance in Scriptures: God does accurse the person, that will not observe
all the precepts of the law perfectly, to do them and all the people shall
say. Amen. What will you aunswers to this conclusion of Moses? he commands
a perfection, the Lord does accurse him that does not fulfill it, yea even by
his own mouth, and all the people say Amen. And you contrary to this doctrine
do divide the Christians congregation, or rather disseuer it into parts, and
practice to plant in place thereof a frame shapen mean of piety, which
neither old, nor new Testament does acknowledge. You have heard out of the old
law, we will now come to the new. There is also an express commandment of
our Lord Jesus Christ to his Apostles in these words. Preach ye the Gospel to
all creatures, Math. 28.
who soever believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that does not believe
shall be damned: Go ye forth therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them
to keep all things, that I have commanded you. Behold here one manner of
profession, dispersed abroad over all Nations, behold, all things must be
observed that are commanded. Wherefore there is but one sort of Christians,
not two: and the same one also endeavors to perfection, stands not still in
amediocritie. Our Lord Jesus standing upon the mount, compassed about with the
people of the Jews, preached in most godly manner the chief principles of
Christian Religion unto them, and amongst the rest gave this commandment
severally. Math. 5.
Wherefore be ye perfect as your heavenly Father which is in heaven is perfect.
What impudency is this Osorius to thrust a mediocritie into our Religion, when
our Lord Jesus Christ by express commandment requires perfection? But I tarry
to long upon matters clearer then the Sun: And yet this our deep Divine does
underprop his lazy Monckerie upon these pillars, which being wormeaten and
rotten (as I have showed already) will at length bring all his other buildyng
to ruin, and cause it to shieuer in pieces to the ground.

Osorius does prefer unmarried life before wedlock alleadgyng hereunto Paul
to the Corinthes. 1. Cor. 7.
We also confess even as much as Paul says, yea very gladly, so that ye
allege Paul whole, and vnmangled. It is good (says Paul) for a man not to
touch a wife, but he adds a correction, yet for avoiding fornication, let
every man have his own wife. I would (says Paul) every man were as I am,
hereunto he knitteth fast a correction likewise. But every man has his proper
gift of God, one after this manner, an other after that. I might rehearse more
to the same effect out of the same Chapter. But Paul's meaning is conceived
sufficiently in these few sentences. And yet to confess the truth, this your
disputation of single life avails not properly to maintain your Monckerie,
for unmarried life extends it self to all estates of Christians generally,
and is not restrained to Monckes only. But you oppress us with examples
partly ancient, as of Basile, Paul, Jerome Nazianzene. Partly of these later
years, as Dominicke, Bruno, Frau^cisce. Here I might take lawful exception to
your testimonies if I would: for Frauncisce was no Moncke, besides that also
unlearned altogether, a forger of frivolous superstitions, as appears by
those durtie dregs, which you call Golden Legendes. Legenda Aurea.
And who that Bruno was must be enquired amongst the Friars, for else where is
no mention made of him, neither yet of Dominicke. The residue of the Fathers
except Gregory, professed a solitary life: but enduced hereunto, partly
through desire of learning, partly for uprightness of life, yielded more
commodity to the Christian profession, then may easily be expressed: whose
daily conuersatiou and rules of manners did as far differ from the rules of
our Mo^ckes, as the heavens are distant from the earth, and good from evil.
But let us grant all that you will, and admit those Monckes (whom you speak
of) to be godly and commendable persons (for in deed some were such) may they
therefore be compared in equabilitie of estimation to those men, who were
conuersaunt amongst the fellowshyp and common societte of men? will you know
whom I will name? I will first of all name Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior:
then some that were before him: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Patriarchs, Esaias,
Jeremy, notable Prophets: next after the coming of Christ, the glorious
company of ye Apostles: All these almost (except Christ alone) were married, and
every of them adjoined them selves to the common society of men, that they
might profit the general fellowship of mankind. What say you M. Jerome? May
your Monckes, though never so commendable, be compared to this fellowship of so
excellent and famous personages? May any equabilitie seem to be betwixt them?
either in the excellency of the holy Ghost? or in sincerity of life? or in
antiquity of time? There can be no comparison betwixt them my Lord, neither
was any need at all to rehearse these examples, if you had well ordered your
talk herein: for this general company being the flower of the ancient
primitive Church, standing in the face of your drowsy lozelles, will so dazell
their sight, that they shall not be able to lift up their eyelyddes for the
inaccessible brightness of them.

And yet do not I condemn unmarried life, or that kind of sole life. I
condemn your false and wicked argument, whereby you would persuade the
unmarried Christian to be better and more holy then the married, and the
solitary, better then the Citizen. S. Paul is of a contrary judgment. Romans 3.
But the righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus Christ, is with all men
and upon all men that believe, for there is no difference. We have all sinned,
and have need of the glory of God, but we are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. Paul does speak here plainly:
There is no difference: Osorius does make a difference: whom shall we believe?
Again: The same Paul. Glory honor and peace to every person that works
good, to the Jew first, then to the Gentile, Rom 2.
for there is no respect of persons before God. If God do not respect the
person, where is then the singularity of your Mo^ckes? if he regard not the
place, as appears by the words of Christ to the woman of Samarie: The time
shall come, and now is. etc. John. 4.
whereunto tends your solitarines, whereof you dispute so idly? All persons
(says Paul) which are Baptized, have put on Christ: Galat. 2.3.
here is another Jew, nor Gentile, bond, nor free, man, nor woman, for we are
all one in Christ Jesus. If Christians be all one in Christ Jesus, as S. Paul
witnesses, what shall become of your differences of times, and professions?
But we will leave the scriptures, which every where do confute your vain
superstitions, and false forged distinction. How shall we satisfy the ancient
fathers, who do praise Monckery wonderfully? They do commend men excellent in
learning and virtue, which do employ their quiet leysures to the commodity of
the Church. Such men will I aboundau^tly praise as well as they. For John
Baptist lived in the deserte, then whom arose not a greater amongst the
children of women. But what will ye conclude hereof? Was John Baptist a more
perfect Christian living in the wilderness, then our Lord Jesus Christ that was
co^uersaunt amongst men? Truly your wicked distinction does emplye this
doctrine in effect: but ye ancient Fathers say not so, of who^ you rehearse
nothing besides bare names: and although they would justify your words, I
would not believe them against the Scriptures: neither do they desire to be
credited otherwise. And to this point forsooth, your gay defense of Monckerie
so stoutly travailed, garnished with such a trim Coape of painted words,
wherewt whole leaves are beblotted, is come at the last: as to be adjudged
either altogether superstitious, or wicked, or nothing necessary. At the last
you depart from men and come to women: and with a flat denial affirm that
virgins were not forced into Nunneries. I need not to make any great proof
hereof, for all me^ that do know any thing at all, are well acquainted
herewith: I will therefore for this time content me with your own words: For
you say that it was forbidden by the Tridentine Council, that from thence
forth they should do so any more. How say you fine man? He that forebyddeth a
thing to be done in after time, does he not covertly emplye that the same was
done before? Write more circumspectly (my Lord) if you can, and if you can not,
you were better speak nothing at all.

But our reverend father is now at very good leisure, for he now begynnes to
Fable with us. Osor. Fable of an hypocritical Monckes.
He says that he had much conference with an idiot or simple Moncke, who was
often as any mention is made of the love of God, so often he falls grouelyng
on the ground, as if his senses were ravished, and yet the man is pretty
witted enough, and is busied about heavenly things and godly co^templation.
Truly this your speech does not describe unto us any godly Moncke, but either
some notorius hypocrite, or happily some drunkard, or some one distraught of
his wits. For why should his senses be overwhelmed at the namyng of God? They
should rather be lively and joyful. Wherefore should he fall to the ground (on
the devils name) if he were a true Christian? he should rather raise him self
up, and rejoice in him, from whom only comes all salvation. How chances
this holy father, that you an old man, a Bishop, a Divine of so great
estimation are so fallen to Fables? Certes a meet advocate for so monishe a
matter. You demand of me, why we suffered our Mo^ckeries to escape unpunished
if there were such licentiousnes of life amongst them? How did they escape
unpunished good Sir? we overthrew their durtie dens: The Brothelles them
selves being bondslaues to all vnthriftynes, we haled out of their swynestyes,
and set a liberty: we did abolish the occasions of their treachery, as much as
we might, not hatyng yt persons but their vices: when their vice was rooted
out, what else might have been exacted, not of you only (who blinded with
malice know nothing) but of any other reasonable person? To this dau^ce, you
hauge the Uestale virgins, whom the ancient Romans reuere^ced greatly: and
so in like manner require our Nuns to be honored of us. Surely you handle this
matter very kindly: Salij Priests of Mars did dau^ce naked in their open
filthy Pageantes, for this was a special Article of their Religion, why then
do not you likewise being an old priest, think it as seemly for you to dance
for Religion sake? Herein I may seem to scoff over bytterly: No truly. For
what can be less tolerable then an old grayheaded Bishop and a Divine (as he
persuadeth him self) to march with the mad superstitions of the Romans,
against the verity of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

Of the vows of widows.
You turmoyle your self much about ye vows of widows, which does not concern
our disputation, and argue as though virgins vowyng chastity could not be
joined in lawful marriage without great haynousnesse. How can men or maidens
promise single life? or if they promise rashly, how can they perform truly?
when as chastity is the peculiar gift of God, and is not in our own power? Get
you to S. Paul, whom you produce in your behalf touching the same matter.
These be his words. 1. Cor. 7.
But every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and an other
after that: What can be alleged more manifest then this? If you be not yet
satisfied, annexe hereunto our Savior Christ, and withal his own words
touching Eunuchs, wherein you triumph so Iollylye, because that our Lord,
Jesus reported, that some did geld them selves for the kingdom of heaven. Is
not this also added a little before? He that can take it, let him take it, all
men can not conceive this saying, but those to whom it is given. Luke. 19.
Wherefore if chastity be the proper gift of God: we may not assure to our
selves the thing that is the proper gift of God. And if none can be chaste, but
to whom it is given, how can we promise to our selves, that which we know not
whether we shall ever attain or no? Great is the force of the truth, and
greater then this our great Master of Israel can comprehend. And howsoever he
list to iangle here, he confesses the same a little before in express words,
Osorius fol. 37. Hoc tantum munus. etc.
that chastity is the gift of God, as in deed it is. And for proof thereof
urges the same words of Christ mentioned before: namely: All men can not
comprehe^d this saying, but unto whom it is given. I marvel much Osorius, that
you have so quickly forgotten your self. But I ought not marvel thereat,
because of a very greedy affection to cavil an ^rabble, you rush headlong many
times into most pestilent errors.

You accuse Luther, Bucer, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, and Martyr of
lust. As though men lived not chastely which hold them selves within the
limittes of lawful Matrimony? or as though all the Cowled droues of
Sophisters as well of your Nation, as of any part of the world else, were
comparable with these godly fathers in commendable conversation of life, or
excellency of learning? or as though the namyng of those persons made your
cause any myte yt better? or as though Paul (whom you do wrest and pervert for
the mainteynaunce of your single life) did not sufficiently interpret him
self? or as though there were any thing in you besides arrogancy, cauillyng,
and choler? You move a very saucie question of Christian liberty: Whether the
same appear greater in your Cowled generations, then in married folks? I
answer: that the pure Eunuchs whom God has endued with the gift of
chastity, do enjoy most excellent freedom of mind: but the question
concerns not those persons in this place. But the rest of your mock
Eunuchs, have no freedom, of mind: except you lift to term it a wicked
freedom, and an horrible liberty to whoredom. Neither am I alone of this
judgment, for that were of no credit. Paul is of the same mind. Who having
said, It is good for a man not to touch a wife, immediately adds: 1. Cor. 7.
But for avoiding fornication, let every man have his own wife: and thereof
presently renders this reason: For better it is to marry then to burn. The
first part of this sentence you urge very stoutly, Osorius, but the later you
do wickedly wincke at. But we may not halt so because (as Paul says) we go
the right way to the Gospel, not haltyng as you do: But halt you as ye lift,
Gal. 2.
dissemble still, and wincke still at ye horrible actions of your cowled
Lurdeines, yet is this true, yea to true (alas) that these hypocritical
professors of chastity, do not burn only, but swell also, and are enflamed
with insaciable firebrandes of Lechery. And it is not a whiueryng voice of a
vow, blowe^ out in respect of gain or idleness, that can very easily quench
and suppress in ye minds of young persons, those intolerable flames of
natural corruption. There be great droues, nay rather unmeasurable herdes of
your drousie Uotaries (to be so bold as to coin a new name for a new thing)
whose poisoned filthynesse has so defiled the earth, that they may with
horrible fear, look for Gods just terrible vengeance to be poured upon
them, with Gomorrhean and Sodomiticall brimstone, and fire heaven, unless they
repent be times.

Luthers Marriage reproved.
You do reproach Luther with his Marriage: and slanderously rail that at the
celebratyng thereof, Venus was President, not Venus of Paphia nor Erycina, but
Venus the fury of hell. O unclean mouth. Dare you so blasphemously rail
against the estate of Matrimony commended with so glorious titles, as which
the holy Ghost commanded to be honorable amongst all persons? which our Lord
Jesus Christ did honor with his presence? which was ordained of God the father
in Paradise? confirmed by the Patriarchs and Prophets? established by the
Apostles and Martyrs? Gene. 1.
and continued most honorable in the best and purest ages of the world, and by
most notable personages? Dare you with so blasphemous a mouth defile the
dignity of this Matrimony, beautified with so many ornaments? Dare you name
that execrable fury of hell to be President at this honorable Marriage?
Beseems an old man, a Bishop, a Minister of the Sacraments so to dally and
scoff in matters of so great importance? Forsooth I do reprehend (say you) the
Marriages which the Votaries do contract together. Uery well remembered Sir, what
monument then can you give us of those gay professors of chastity, in that
golden age of the primitive Church, when our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles
did dwell upon the earth? If you can show us no one example of those chaste
souls in that most blessed time: Nay rather if that pestilent co^tagion of
Uotaries did long after begin to infect the Church: Pack ye hence with that
deuilishe Priest of hell from us, and acknowledge your own Priest that
Satanish hellhounde Hildebrand, Pope Gregory the 7. Hildebrand by name, was the
first that did establishe single life by Decree.
who first of all enacted by public authority that infamous Canon of
constrained unmarried life. Curse ye that your own hellhounde Priest, and batter
him with your thunderboltes of words and Sentences. For Beelzebub him self,
withal ye furies of hell, could never have practiced a more pestilent
infection of life.

You proceed to defend Images, wherein you fight so stoutly against your
self, that you need none other adversary. But first ye furnish your self
with a startyng hole, wherein you may shroude your self from a shower. For you
deny that Images are worshypped, Of Images.
that pictures are honored, but you confess that in them is a certain
natural power, which may bring some help to unlettered persons. If it were so
(Osorius) we could be somewhat tractable herein: and would somewhat friendly
tolerate the rude weakness, and gross ignorance of the people. But how say
you? Is not worship given to Images? Truly people fall prostrate before the^,
they stretch out their hands unto them: they perfume them with frankencense:
they set ca^dles before them: they call upon them by name: they deck them
gorgeously: they carry them sole^nely abroad, and make a show of them openly:
they wax hoarse with scrichyng and cryeng out unto them in their sickness and
diseases: They gadde many a weerysome journey on pilgrimage unto them: they
power out prayers unto them with great reverence: they enlarge unto then
magnificently: yea they do believe that they do work miracles. If all these
do not plainly denounce worshyppyng: by what other Argument may a man discern
the nature of worshyppyng? But if ye yield not that these blasphemies are
committed in your Romish Church, yea in your own Temples of Siluania, it is
very well, and I would to God it were true for your credites sake. But if you
grant it (as ye can not deny it) why do you so impudently deny in words, the
thing which you know to be haynously handled in daily practice? How much
better had it been for you (Osorius) to have defended worshyppyng of Images as
well as ye could (though without all color of truth) the^ so stoutly to deny
that, which your women and children do see to be daily, and hourly frequented
in your Churches? yea your selves the very Authors thereof, ministryng example
to others? But you have lost both your wit and modesty, that in so daily and
manifest abuses will seem to be ignorant, and withal maintain your untruth
with pretty popet demaundes, so blockish and so far from the purpose, that a
man may judge you to be fast a sleep with your eyes open. The Images of
Cherubins.
You demand earnestly of me whether the Images of the Cherubines were placed
before the Arcke of Covenant in the old time? and whether the Brazen Serpent
were erected, that such as were wounded with Serpents might behold it, The
brazen Serpent.
and be made hole? what then wise man? as though any man could or would deny
that Images and pictures were made in all ages? or that it came ever into my
thought to condemn the commendable Art of Engrauyng and Paintyng: I grant
that there may be some use of Images, but I deny worshyppyng of them: I do
allow that there may be pictures, but I do abhor all honor in them. And the
same has our Lord and heavenly father prohibited by express commandment.
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
You tell us that the Ancient Israelites had diverse Images of Cherubines. I
confess it, but you can not show, that they were worshypped at any time. The
Image of the Brazen Serpent^ as a remedy for them that were bytten with
Serpents: I grant it. But when in process of time, the people came at length
to worship it, the godly king Ezechias detestyng their Idolatry, Ezechias.
commanded the Image to be taken down, and broken in pieces: and herein your
self do wonderfully commend him. You mar therefore all your own matter
(Osorius) by this your own example. For ye grant that the worshyppyng of
Images is damnable, and defiled with poisoned Idolatry.

Ye deny that men are now at this present or ever heretofore were at any time
so blockish and senseless as to believe that godliness was included in Images:
and withal yield your selves to be accou^pted for mad and buzzardly blind, if
this can be justified against you. What else do ye then? whenas you throw your
selves prostrate before pictures, and never make any end almost of embracyng
them? lickyng them? kissyng them? deckyng them? presentyng them with gifts?
going on pilgrimage unto them? when you call upon and invoke the Images of
dead persons, by the proper names of your Saints pictured there? when you
keep such a stir before stocks and stones, and confess nevertheless that
in the^ is neither virtue nor sense? your selves surely be worse the^ rotten
blocks, that will give such reverence to dead stocks. But I will stick
somewhat near to your skin in this matter.

The people of Israel (as ye know) were a chosen Nation, an holy kindred, a
peculiar and elect people: and yet in the absence of Moses they forged a
golden Calfe, and believed that there was in this Image, not only life and
sense, but with open mouth did profess also, that it was God, yea the very
same God that brought them out of the land of Egypt. For when they had
commanded that this Image should be borne before them, as the conduct of their
journey, they added hereunto these blasphemous words also. Exodus 32.
These be thy Gods O Israel, which brought to pass that thou were delivered
out of the land of Egypt. There follows yet more. And Aaron seeing this,
erected an Altar before it. What say you Osorius? Truly though you conceive
never so well of your self, and love your country (as meet is you should)
never so much: yet you do not believe (I suppose) that those your country men
what soever they be, are more dear now unto God, then the children of Israel
were at that time: no nor deem your self more holy the^ Aaron. Therefore where
you see so manifest Idolatry in them, why make you so proud bragges of the
innocence of your Nation? But you will happily say, that those days are out
of memory, and no such matter sticks now in your fingers: will ye therefore
that I bring you home? and evidently disprove the ignorance and unadvised
folly of you, and your people, by the testimonies of your own fraternity?
Truly I am contented so to do and I will paint out your Idolatry so plainly in
the sight of all men that can see, and be willing to see, that no well disposed
persons may doubt thereof hereafter. Peraduduenture your eyes will dazell
through corruption of daily custom: as it happened to Cerberus, Sense. in
Hercul. fur.
the dog of hell suddenly drawn out of his darcke doungeon into the bright
sun shine.

First, The Papists are taken tardy in committyng manifest Idolatry.
you will grant me this, as I suppose, which all your Papisticall Godmakers
will yield unto: that in that your transubstantiated white Wafers is enclosed a
certain Divine essence, and the only substance of bread flowen quyte away (I
know not whither) but that the accidents of bread remain as at the first: to
wit, the roundnes, white color and such like. Hereof then follows of
necessity even by your own Argument, that who soever does worship ye white
color, or any external thing thereof subject to the senses and spectible view,
is a manifest Idolatour. Answer me to this place my Lord I beseech you, if
there be any sparckle oftene faith in you: Tell me when your simple unlettered
people, cluster in heaps together to your Altares, heave up their hands,
knock their breasts, reverently behold and humbly worship that your white
round singyng Cake holden betwixt your fingers and lifted over your heads, as
if it were our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus him self: when (I say) this seely
rude multitude does so humble them selves, and are moved in affection, can they
discern betwixt the accidents of the bread and the substance? if they can,
surely your nation is deeply seen in Logic. But if they cannot. Then we may
rightly conclude upon the suppositions of your own Deuines, that they commit
open. Idolatry: because they do worship not only the essence of God far
hidden within, and wholly removed from their senses, but also the outward signs
which they behold and see with their eyes. You are taken here (Osorius) neither
can you escape me, for either you must serape out your Decrees and Canons,
which will procure you mortal hatred, or else you must needs confess the
daily Idolatry of your people, except ye deny that the outward form of bread
is worshypped by them: wherein they will witness against you if need shall
require. And therefore if your feigned God may evidently be found culpable of
evident Idolatry. Your error is much more apparent in worshyppyng of Images. I
did set down before the words of our Savior Jesus Christ used to the woman of
Samaria touching the true worshyppyng of God: Above alleged also the ancient
custom of the Primitive Church, when as no graven or painted Images were
permitted to be worshipped.

In this most assured testimonies and ordinances of our Religion, this our
great Divine and Master is altogether mumme, but that he cauilleth a little (I
know not what) about the Images of the Cross, Of the Images of the Cross.
to wit: That the fame was deeply emprinted in the hearts of me^ in that
ancient and flourishing age of the primitive Church, but that pictures were
needelesse since that time. The same do we also confess franckly. For there be
two notable rules very true, and prescribed by God as Principles whereby the
ancient use and rule of Christian Religion and duties of Christian life may
be daily enured and preserved. The one is, that we apply our minds to read the
holy Scriptures. The other is that we yield atte^tiue ear unto them. For all
Scripture (says Paul) is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to admonish, to improve, 2. Tim. 3.
to amend and to instruct in righteousness. that the man of God may be perfect
and prepared unto all good works. If we be made absolute and perfect by the
holy Scriptures, what need we any help of your pictures? In those holy
Scriptures is the lively Image of God the Father, the lively picture of Jesus
Christ our Savior, the true Cross, true worshippyng, true Religion to be
found. But you are foully fallen away from this ancient verity, you have
wickedly buried in darkness the Testament of Jesus Christ, you have
treacherously discredited the authority of holy Scriptures: and in place of
these pure and known founteines of our true Religion, ye have in your Churches
planted a wonderful rabble of wo^meeaten pictures, and portraictes of dead
bodies to be worshipped: you have instructed the rude and unlettered people
with men's traditious, and have utterly drowned the holy Scriptures being the
most pleasant and plentyfull food of the soul with ouerflowyng puddles of
stinckyng Ceremonies. This is very true Osorius, yea it is to true: And you
being a Bishop and a distributer of the holy mysteries of God shall to your
intolerable anguish of mind, feel this to be true, which you shall be sommoned
before the dreadful: Judgment seat of the Lord: From whence you shall be
thrown into everlasting torments, if ye amend not in time. But there is no
drop of sound or sober wit in you: for amyddes your disputation touching
the worshyppyng of God, you suddenly skippe from the matter, and return to your
wonted shifts and demand of us. If we have found our selves more
inclinable to pray since the abolishyng of Images then before? First of all.
This concerns not the controversy anythyng at all. Then who has authorized
you being a Portingall, to be Judge and Inquisitour over us Englishmen? Enquire
ye for the demeanours of your own people of Siluain, and let us alone with our
own Bishops. It greeueth you much that the Relics of Thomas of Canterbury
are defaced: Thomas of Canterbury.
whom it pleases you to call a most holy man being in very deed an exectable
Traitor. O goodly Doctor of the Church, that require us to worship the rotten
stinckyng carkase of a pielde traiterous Priest. Persuade that else where, for
in England women, children, and natural fools do detest the stinking Rames,
crauyne, and Idolatrous Shryne of that Rebellious traitor.

Neither are you pleased because I rub your Schoolmen on the gall, a very
sacred society (if we credit you) most pure pillars of Christian Religion,
agreeyng and consentyng with the ancient Apostles: but if they be tried by
their own trinckettes, Of School Divinity.
they will be founded a pestilent generation of Uipers, full of unsavory
brabbles, corrupt doctrine, altogether boyde of wit, and addicted to all
superstition. And there is no discreet person amongst our adversaries that
has any smatche of found learning (except a very few) but do utterly detest
and reject this filthy puddle of Schooleme^. And yet you sir Jerome, suppose to
bolster out and uphold this sowsie ragged rabble with stout countenance. But it
will not be, you come all to late. And your labor is all lost. It was not
without reason, that I noted haw this huge heaps of Pictures were the offcombe
of that unsavory schoolekitchen. Neither did I err in notyng the certain
limitation of their whelpyng: no more can you cease from your old cankred
custom of cauilling scarce one minute of an hour. You flee over to your
Council of Nice as to an invincible bulwark: The second Counsel of Nice.
as though what soever a Council does thrust upon us ought to be holden of us
for inviolable. In deed your filthy unmarried life crawled first into the
Church after this manner. So also your frivolous and Sophistical
Transubstantiation was commanded in the beginning. But let us scanne this
Divine Decree of the Council touching Images which was uttered in that second
Nicene Counsel under these words. Images ought to be worshipped as reuere^tly
as God is worshipped. But you will not admit this to be true I trow, Osori.
fol. 47.
when as else where you are of opinion that Images and Pictures remain to be
viewed only, all worship set apart: wherein nevertheless you disagree in your
self also. For in the same place, you tell us a tale of Robinhoode alledgyng
miracles withal, to wit, that blood has been seen to gush out of Images
perdy, and certain virtue of healyng has issued from the^. And that for this
cause they ought to be worshypped. Hereby meaning to prove both: of the which
a little erst you admitted neither. What grossness is this Osorius? what
oversight? what forgetfulness of your self and your own words? you report
that Eusychius did behold the Images of the Apostles exquisitely painted. What
hereof? This was but a commendation of Paynters my good Osorius, and not a
praise of Pictures. Yet you notwithstanding as though you had made a fair
speak, do affirm that it is without all controversy, that Images were in the
Apostles time. How? or from whence do you persuade this Osorius? is this a
good Argument to prove that Images were uisited in the Apostles time, because
without comptrollement you tell us a smoath tale of Thomas of Inde? of Eusebius
and of Pope Siluester? Do ye so conclude my Lord being an old man, a Priest and
a Bishop?

Semblable and like drowsiness is in you, where you charge me that I did
accuse your Scholemen to be the first founders of Images? This is false: I do
not charge them withal: but I will abide by this, that this uenemous doctrine
was wonderful increased with the corruption of this poisoned School. ^y
words are as follows. In mine answer to Osor. Epist.
When true Religion began to decay: Images crept into the Church by title and
little, and that former earnest desire of pure doctrine waxed cold in men's
hearts: and that bastard and deformed superstitious School Divinity vaunted
it self at the length, and immediately all places were patched up with
Images. etc. Now speak Parrotte of Portingall, I pray you. Did I not orderly
enough distinguish the seasons of times? By little and little crept Images in,
yea long before the peepyng of Schoolmen abroad: but being settled in their
stalles, all places were stuffed with Pictures. You see their Original before
Schoolmen, but the increasinges thereof, in the chief reign and sway of that
brotherhoode: And yet ye dare impudently affirm that I named Schoolmen to be
the very wellsprynges of Pictures. And at length ye cry out. What dullness?
what negligence? when as I might more justly have exclaimed, O forgetful
dottard, O railing scolde. After that you have long turmoyled your self in
this gulf, sometimes treatyng of Pictures, sometimes inducyng them as
representations of holy personages: you pack up your trunckes, and return to
your former course of exhortation, wherein you persuade that because Images be
sauory Instruments to inform the unlettered people, therefore they ought be
reserved to that use. But learned and godly men will rather say, that Images
are dangerous Rocks of manifest Idolatry. And as I will not much gaynesay,
that discreet men and well exercized in the Scriptures may have in their
Closettes without any peril, the Image of the Crucifixe, so do I boldly
pronounce that without great danger of Idolatry, Images can not be placed in
Churches, to the uiewe of the rude people being naturally incliuable to all
superstition. And therefore it is most necessary to abandone Images out of
Churches, and to instruct the people in the holy Scriptures, the often hearing
and readyng whereof, will make the diligent and uertuous followers, to find no
want of any such painted bables: Satan carrying our Lord and Savior Jesus into
the wilderness willed him to fall down and worship him. Our Lord Jesus
despising and rebukyng him said. Luke. 4.
It is written. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. Ueryly when I ponder the Majesty of these words thoroughly in my mind,
and the daily practizes of your Churches, wherein so perilous and evident
tokens of Image worship and kneelyng to Pictures is frequented, my very heart
pants and trembles within me, to think, how this express commandment of
God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ seems utterly buried in oblivion
with you.

But run on, since it so pleases you, and scorche your souls in the flames
of Idolatry: we being terrified with the Divine Oracles of the sacred
Scriptures, have utterly subverted Images and Pictures, and exiled them from
our Churches. In like manner we pass over the Saints in our prayers, and make
intercession only unto God the Father and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
and upon them do we call only for succor. Unto whom with the holy Ghost we do
confess and profess all glory, all honor, all power, and everlasting
eternity to be due. And to confirm this our confession to be most pure and
true, the testimonies of each Testament are plentyfull: wherein we do also
follow the manifold examples of the Patriarchs, Apostles and Martyrs. As for
you, there is nothing uttered of your part sauoryng of the ancient, pure
founteine of the primitive Church, either in conversation of life or profession
in Religion. We have heard the voice of our Lord Jesus: Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Certes if ye only Majesty of God
must be worshipped alone, the worshipping of saints ought in no case to be
admitted the^. The Evangelist John began to worship ye Angel: The last chap.
of the Apocal.
but the Angel withstood him and yielded the reason. I am (quoth he) thy fellow
servant. If we have Angels our fellow servant Osor. surely we have no Saints
to be our Advocates. 1. Timo.
There is but one Advocate betwixt God and man: The God and man Christ Jesus. If
Saints make no intercession for us, then to worship them is but vain.
Semblably take worship away, to what purpose serve Images? For to gaze upon
them avails little. Let the people hear the Scriptures. Let them be busied
therein: There is Christ painted unto us: there may the eyes of the soul
behold him: in them does he breath, in them does he live, in them does he
reign and triumph.

My Dylemma, or double Argument does not content you, wherein I did conclude
against Images, to wit, that having life there was no want of them, and
wantyng breath there was no use nor profit in them. How you say the^ hereunto?
may not (...) parcel be justified by the Scriptures? Exodus 1^.
Why do thou cry unto me (says God the father unto Moses) And yet Moses
in his prayer opened not his mouth. Therefore the spirit being present, does
present the prayers unto God though all the senses else be silent. On the other
side. If the heart be otherwise occupied. God will not accept the prayers though
never so many and never so laboursome. For after this manner the Lord Jesus does
recite out of Esaias the Prophet. This people does honor me with their lips,
but their heart is far away from me but they worship me in vain. etc. Behold
here worshyppyng is to no purpose, the spirit being absent: Why do ye
therefore spurn against matters so manifest?

^ay but you presume to contend agaysnt the holy Ghost in these words, saying.
The spirit being present, Images do no hurt: and being absent, they do very
much avail. Amiddes our prayers things may not be enterlaced, yt do not hurt
(good Sir) but matter wherewith our prayers may have access unto God. But
whereas you would have Images to be auaylable being without spirit. This is
very strange and monstrous in a Divine to affirm that our prayers can be
commended unto God by Images or by any other way else without the spirit. God is
a spirit (says our Lord Jesus Christ) and it behooves his worshippers to
worship in spirit and truth. John. 4.
The Lord Jesus does pronounce that the true worshippers ought to worship in
spirit. Our Prelate does contend that pictures may avail to prayer without
spirit: Away Osorius Away. For even on this wise and in the same cause the
Lord Jesus did put Satan to flight. We assuryng our selves upon the authority
of God the father and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, will together with
the Prophets and Apostles, honor the Lord God the father, and him only will
we worship, the Lord Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost making intercession unto
him for us. As for you (if you be so altogether persuaded) raunge on in this
your crooked procession together with these gorgeous titles of Councels and
Fathers, and with that filthy raggema^oll of your schoolmen. There will come a
day, when this matter will be more deeply sifted before the Judgment seat of
our Savior Jesus Christ. Then shall we know whether part have more safely and
more duetyfully profited in the worshyppyng of Gods Majesty. And so now at the
last your first goodly Inuectiue is come to an end: from out the which if a
man will pluck away your outrage in cauillyng, your venomous scoldyng and
your superfluous sentences: surely very little will remain wherein the learned
Reader may be desirous to spend any time.

The second Book.
I Am ashamed (you say) to use so many words in the confutatio^ of your Book.
It is modestly done of you to confess your fault. But your unmeasurable
braulyng has altogether weryed me: of the same opinion are all others also
that have seen your writing, who with one consent do wonderfully condemn this
your idle superfluity of tongue in an old man. Yet can we see no amendment in
you: for the further ye proceed, so many the more Fables you do utter, whereby
all men may perceive, that you are not induced to writing of any judgment or
discretion: but enflamed with excessive malice and violent outrage: with
neither of yt which your person and grayheaded years ought in any wise be
acquainted. But whereas you report that I seem to have taken wonderful
pleasure in that my little book. Herein you follow the example of wayward men,
which esteemyng other men's affections by their own be of opinion that scarce
any ma^els can be well disposed because they be indiscreet them selves. You
begin to quarrel at the overthrow of the Sacraments, wherewith, you say also,
that I do seem somewhat displeasaunt: and therefore you commend me with a
scoff, no less unpleasant then unsavory. But mock on and spare not. You do
travail with your contumelious words to bring this noble Island my dear
beloved country into obloquie with all men, and with an abominable lie do
exclame, that our Deui^es have utterly subverted all Sanctuaries, Ceremonies,
and Sacraments. This your infamous, shameless, Hyperbole is called an
excessive vehemence of speech.
and reproachful Hiperbolycall speech I have scattered abroad, crushed in
pieces, and brought, to naught, and have so deeply emprinted your flesh with
an. S. for a slaunderour to your perpetual shame, that neither you nor any of
all your feet shall be ever able to wipe it out again. You do accuse Luther,
Carolostadius, Oecola^padius, Zuinglius, and my Peter Martyr as men that do
irreverently rende asunder the Lords Supper.

First of all. I have sundry times heretofore protested, that your controuersse
concerned us, and not them. For your quarrel was against our English Deuines,
Whereunto the Apology of Haddon had especial regard.
whom I undertook to defend: you slaundered our England, I stood to the
defense of ye same. And therefore I might well have referred all this contention
touching their doctrine to them selves: and so I do: yet I will presume to say
this much by the way, that you deal very ungently herein, to scold so
importunately against the good name of them, which can not now plead their own
cause: I do add hereunto, that the rest (except Carolostadius only, of whom I
can say nothing, because I do not know him) all the rest I mean, were men of
such excellency, not only in ye knowledge of toungues, and other liberal
sciences, but also such singular Deuines, as that Jerome Osorius might have
been scholar to the meanest of them. I say this withal, that you utter your
unskillfulness herein, to couple Luther and Zuinglius together in matter of the
Sacrament, whose opinions were somewhat discrepa^t in the same. Lastly touching
the matter it self, I answer briefly: That those famous and worthy patrones
of the Gospel and true Religion (whose names you rehearse in reproach) did
reverently and religiously treat of the Sacrament of the body, and blood of
our Lord if they may be tried by ye true touchstone of the scriptures: in who^
likewise you can find no just cause of reprehe^sion concerning the other
Sacraments, unless you suppose, that with your naked clamorous affirmatiues ye
may expel them out of the Church, as me^ are wont to drive common players from
the Stage with hissing and clappyng of hands. But they can not be so quayled
Osorius. They have obtained better footyng and deeper root in the hearts of me^
by their learning and virtue, the^ you can be able to remove with your pen
though it be never so cruel: whom the bootcherly cruelty of your side be it
never so sauadge, can with fire and Faggot consume out of the minds of the
godly. But this our new master dispatcheth all things in scoffs and a petie
questions. He demands of us, what is to be understood of those Sacraments
which we do retain? First of all, if we do use any Sacraments at all, you
are taken tardy for a common liar against us especially: for you rayled a little
erst, that all Sacraments were utterly abolished by our preachers, and that
you have as many witnesses of this solemn lie, as England has inhabitauntes.

But you proceed, and would know. What Sacraments be. If you do know already
and will dissemble, why do you play the fool in so earnest a matter? but if
you be ignorant hereof, what manner of Divine will you be accoumpted? that
know not the first principles of Religion? Nay (say you) I am not doubtful of
the Sacraments of Scholemen: but I know not your bare and naked Images, by the
which you deny the grace of God to be obtained. How many faults Osorius, in
so few words? For first of all, who ever called Sacraments, by this name
Images, but you alone? in deed they are named signs, and marks of holy
things, many times seals of our salvation, many me^ call them tables: and so
diverse men give diverse names. But your self are the very first, that ever gave
this term of Images to Sacraments. But as touching words, though you be
ofte^tymes over captious, we will be more tractable with you therein, and will
prosecute the matter. You say that our Deuines do place naked Images in stead
of Sacraments. How naked, my Lord I pray you? we do agree with S. Augustine,
that Sacraments are signs of holy things: or thus: that Sacraments are
visible signs of invisible grace. I trust you will permit me the same liberty
of words, which you use to take to your self. We do grant, that we are by
Baptism regenerate to eternal life: we do also yield, that in the holy
Communion our Lord Jesus is truly received of the faithful in spirit by
faith. Whereby it appears, that our Deuines do not accoumpt the Sacraments
as bare naked signs, but for things most effectual, most holy, and things
most necessaryly apperteyning to our comfort: they be sacred mysteries of our
Religion, they be assured pledges of heavenly grace: Exodus 32.
And yet God ye father which made us of clay is not tied to his workema^shyp,
nor bound to his creatures, Romans 9.
But takes mercy of whom he will have mercy, and forgeueth our sins for his
own sake, not for the Sacraments sake. Lastly, Romans 6.
Life everlasting is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, not through
operation of the Sacraments. And therefore we do refuse and detest such naked
and falsely forged Images, as dreams of your own drousie brains, How we
ought to esteem of the Sacraments.
and use the true Sacraments as most sacred things, as pledges of our faith,
and seals of our salvation: and yet we do not attribute so much unto them, as
though by the means of them, the grace of God must of necessity be poured our
upon us, Ex opere operat. Romans 4.
by the Works wrought, as through conduct pipes. This impiety we turn over
to your Schoolmen, the very first sprynges of this poison, For inheritance is
given of faith, according to grace. The Sacraments are reverend signs of Gods
grace unto us, are excellent monume^tes of our Religion, are most perfect
witnesses of our salvation. If you can not be satisfied with these
commendations of the Sacraments, heap you up more unto them at your choice, we
shall be well pleased withal, so that you bind not the grace of God to these
signs of very necessity. For we are not saved by the receiving of these
Sacraments, Romans 10.
But if we confess with our mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and with our hearts
believe, that God raised him again from death, this confession only will save
us. Julian the Emperor was Baptized in the name of Jesus, yet dyed in manifest
blasphemy: Judas Iscariote did feed upon the Sacrament of Euchariste, yet
immediately after Supper, he departed to the enemies of our Lord Jesus, and
betrayed innocent blood: what needs many words? Sacraments are most
precious tokens of Gods favor, Sacraments are tokens of salvation, but do not
work salvation. 1. Cor. 1.
but they do not obtain Gods favor: Sacraments are excellent monumentes of
godlynes, but they do not make godlynes: He that will glory, let him glory in
the Lord, not in the Sacraments. For by God, we are engraffed into Christ Jesus,
which was made unto us by God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption.

And this much to your general objections framed against our order of
administryng the Sacraments. Now I will come to those two principal points,
which you seem specially to have culled out, that in them you might brave out
ye nimblenes of your wit, and eloquence of tongue: Confession, Confession.
Sacrament of the Altar.
you name and the Sacrament of the altar, as you term it: Of Confession you
draw forth a tedious talk, and in the same endeavor to include the Sacrament
of Repentance. First of all, you cast your acco^ptes amiss in your numbryng,
Osorius, for if you receive Repentance in the name of a Sacrament, either you
must admit eight Sacraments contrary to the old custom of your Church, or else
you must turn one of your other seven Sacraments out of the doors: wherein
unless you deal more circu^spectly, you will have more fistes about your
ears then your own, even amongst your own fraternity. But please them as
well as you may, and us you shall easily win to wincke at you, which do
content our selves with two Sacraments only, to wit, Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord: Two Sacraments.
yet do we also exercize the rest withal as matters singularly profitable, and
so fast knitte to the rule of true godliness, that Christian profession can
not want them. When I name the rest, I do not comprehend all, but Confession,
and yet not your hypocritical and school confession (whereof we will treat
hereafter) but the pure, and ancient confession, authorized by the Scriptures,
and practiced by the Prophets, and Apostles: I add hereunto amendment of
life, ordination of Ministers, celebration of Matrimony, and prayer: although
you pass by this last as a foreine stranger. All these (I say) are in daily
use with us, and had in great estimation, though they retain neither name nor
nature of Sacraments properly: There be some other also, whereof it is
needelesse to make any mention at this present: for these are the chiefest:
which though we do not usurp for Sacraments, as you do: yet we do allow of
them reverently, and religiously according to the ordinance of the Gospel of
God. Which I thought meet to touch briefly by the way, left any person
unacquainted with our orders, and geuyng to much credit to Osorius, may
esteem so much the less of our Religion. Now I return to your Confession
whispered into ye ears of your Priests: Au^icular Confession.
who^ though you embrace as your sweet babe, and enriche with a great dower of
words, and deck with gay copes of sentences: yet ye lose herein both your
travail and cost. For you garnishe but a schooleharlotte, a nurse of
superstition, a drudge of covetousness, and the common shop of all
abomination. And therefore you do well, that in the enshryning of so filthy an
inue^tion of man, you fly from all aid of Scriptures: And yet because ye
produce some, somewhat sty^ye, and according to your discretion apply them as
wisely, though ye promise quyte contrary, we will sift them a little by your
leave, and see how they will help you in your journey.

I speak nothing here (you say) how in the old law^ in their sacrifices offered
for cleansing of sins, a certain confession of vnpure living was brought to
the Priests. But speak aloude rather, what confession was that you speak of?
by what custom received? in what place, when, and with what circumstaunces was
it frequented? either you ought have uttered one of these, or else we must
plainly judge, that this confession was a certain somewhat, we know not what.
Whereof is no such thing in all Scriptures, as you make it: or if any such were
amongst the ordinances of the Priests, Heb. 9.10.
the same is worn out of ^re even as the old sacrifices are, and quyte
forgotten: and this you can not deny: unless you be altogether ignorant in
Divinity, No nor that you think worthy to be noted (you say) that those
which came to the Baptism of John Baptiste did of an earnest zeal confess
their sins. You do well (Osorius) yt you do not, note it, but you had done
better, if you had never touched yt place. For at that time were no
Massemo^gers nor Cowled lozelles, into whose ears the wretched rude people
might particularly whisper their offenses, without whom this your goodly
confession is of no value. No, nor it pleases you (you say) to rehearse the
confession that Christian men made to the Apostles of Christ, mentioned in the
Acts of the Apostles. If it pleased you not to rehearse it, why do you
rehearse it the^? nay rather why do ye make a special note out of ye Acts,
Acts. 2.
of that which is not there? The hearts of the Jews were pricked at the
preaching of Peter, whom also Peter does exhort to amendeme^t of life. Here is
no word of Confession: and yet I doubt not, but they did confess their sins
unto God. But I would not have you (Osorius) being a Divine, and a Bishop so
unadvisedly to vouche any thing out of scriptures whereof is no mention made
there. You say also that you will pass over in silence the Commandment which
James gave concerning Confession. Truly you ought to have made no mention
thereof, because that commandment ca^ not be restrained to Priests only, but
exte^deth it self to all persons indifferently, and belongs no less to
common prayer, then to mutual confession: James the last chap.
as is evident by James his own words.

Lastly (you say) that you will not use these words where with Christ did
manifestly commit unto Priests the jurisdiction of the soul. Osorius.
Ye do very well truly that you will not use those places, I would to God you
would not abuse them. But you do corrupt them foully (Osorius) and that laudable
and wholesome order of the Apostles in remittyng offenses, which they used
with prayers openly spoken, in the name of our Lord Jesus, you do deprave with a
certain authority of your own, in blind corners, either for lucre of some
powlyng pence, or for someother worse matters. In a strange tongue ye send away
ye people that come unto you, nothing amended, nay rather ofte^tymes, more apt
to devise mischief: surely for the more part, much more corrupted rather then
amended. I do not lie, Osorius, though you stomach my words. Daily practice,
and common experience, and the perpetual history of all ages, will witness the
same to be true. And being here destitute of Divinity, you hawk for other
helps abroad, and you raunge to two virtues very godly ones I promise you, yet
such as they be, as far wide from your forged Confession, as heaven is
distant from the earth. You suppose it a goodly matter, that we do know our
selves. And so it is in deed. You commend humility much, and I agree with
you therein: But from whence come these unto us? out of Friars Cowles or
Priests wide sleeves, or from the bosom of God the father? James. 1.
from whom every good and perfect gift is delivered unto us? Peruse you yt
Psalms of David, what shall you find in them but submission, Psalm. 22.30.
humility, knowledge, and embacyng of a man's self? and yet that Prophet of
God did not learn them of your Priests, but of the creator of all things God
our most loving, and bountefull father, of that same great and mighty God (I
say) who pronounces of him self, saying: Deuteronomy. 32.
Behold therefore that I, even I, I say, am the same Lord, and that there is no
God besides me. I do kill, and I make alive again, I do make the wound, but
I will heal again. etc. Wherefore we must obey James, who pronounces in this
manner. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he will exalte you: But
wherefore bring you these things severally? The whole discourse and tenor of
the Scriptures does teach humility, and submissio^ of minds, it breaks
obstinacy, it abateth pride, and ^ameth arrogancy. And yet Osorius a Divine,
and a Bishop does lead us away from the Scriptures, and will thrust us unto
market Confession, to gather precepts of good life from Massemongers, and
Cowled Friars: O blind guide of the blind. It is no marvel truly, though you
and your sheep of Siluain fall both together into the ditche. But at the
length he brings forth an invincible Argument and does testify of him self
in earnest and as it were with Protestation.

Mercena^ie Confession.
That the holy Ghost has wrought all that goodness that is in him by the
mean of Confession. He does plainly Confess, that confession has been his
Schoolemystres, and nurse of all his godlynes, in so much that he has not one
sparkle of the love of God (for so he speaks) besides that, which has been
revealed unto him by illumination of this ear. Confession. First of all
(Master Doctor) I am easily persuaded this to be true that you speak of
your self: and next I am ashamed, and weary of you, that have altogether so
hanged upon Confession, that neither prayers, nor study, nor precepts of holy
Scriptures, have prevailed in any respect to enduce your mind to godliness,
being a grayheaded Divine, a man of three score years almost: Then also I can
not but believe, that either you have been a very blockheaded Scholar, or that
your masters of Confession, were very unlucky, which in so many years, after
so much buzzing in their ears, after so many co^ferences of godly matters,
could work nothing else in you, the^ to shape a mad Bishop, of a senseless
Priest. Epicure (as you know) was accustomed to glory, that he had never
instructour in Philosophy: I believe it (quoth Cicero) for if you had been
taught any thing at all, you would never have written so absurdely. Even in
like manner may I believe no man better the^ Osorius him self, that he never had
any other Schoolemisters besides Confession. For of a wicked and corrupt
Schoolemysters, is hatched a proud and hautie sholer, standing in his own
light, a despiser of all others, an importunate brauler, a prattlyng Sophister,
a shameless rayler, an unmeasurable slander and a peruertour of holy
Scriptures, and true godlynes. How much better had it been for you, if you had
had less conference with Massemongers, and been more acquainted with S. Paul?
He would have instructed you in all sobriety, modesty, justice, piety,
faith, charity, patience and meckenesse: Whereof you seem to have le^rned no
title in all your sweet confessions, nor so much as heard, whether any such
matter be, or ever have been: So far and wide does both your speech and your
reason dissent, and disagree, as altogether estrau^ged from them. Yet ye
proceed notwithstanding in this desperate travail of Confession, which being
staggeryng and ready to fall, you do underprop with works, least it fall to
the ground, For thus ye write.

Yet notwithstanding we do not so content our selves with this Confession of
sins, but that we exact fruits of Repentance, which we use to name
Satisfactions, a word that you scorn at most insole^tly. Behold this fine
scholar of Confession, so well poolished in ye school of his Massemongers,
that he has learned, that Christians are required to bring forth fruits
worthy of Repentance. O deep and profounde doctrine: as though any Cobbler or
Carter did ever deny, or were ignorant in this point? but you have coupled
hereunto an other new companion a meare stranger to Christian ears. For you
say that the fruits of Repentance are named of you by this name
Satisfactio^s. I do know very well that your Massemo^gers, Friars and
schoolmen have thrust into the church this new wicked name of Satisfaction:
but I know this also, that you have done this, to your great shame, and
reproach. For it is a manifest untruth contrary to all holy Scriptures, contrary
to the doctrine of the sacred and Apostolicque Church, and contrary to the
judgments of the approved ancient fathers. But we do hear John (say you)
exhorting them, which had confessed their faults, to bring forth fruits
worthy of Repentance: and you add, that the same words were repeated by that
great master of righteousness the Redemer of mankind. I do confess this
Osorius, what conclude you hereof? we must bring forth fruits worthy of
Repentance, Ergo, fruits worthy of Repentance must be named Satisfactio^s.
Cursed be your Confessors Osorius, that could instruct you no better in
Logic. Osorius has sucked out of Confession the rules of good life, Ergo, he
must do nothing else. A very like conclusion, a fit whelpe of that school where
you were trained up. But let us see, if your Satisfactions be not utterly
overthrown with the same Scriptures, wherewith you think to establish them.
John pointyng unto Christ with his finger, Behold (quoth he) the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world: John. 1.
If Christ take away the sins of the world, how ca^ works satisfy? but
harken unto Christ him self whom you do worthily name the great Schoolmaster
of righteousness. When you have done all (says he) that are commanded you,
say yet, we are unprofitable servants, we did no more then we ought to do:
Luke. 17.
Behold we are unprofitable servants in the chiefest perfection of our
works, Ergo, your Satisfactions are cold and nothing worth.

That pure and chosen vessel of God Paul, does teach in this manner. 1. Cor.
4.
I am not guilty of any thing, yet am I not justified hereby. If Paul's
undefiled conscience, clear of all crimes, were not auaylable to
justification: then of very necessity all your own, and the Satisfactio^s of
all your sect, are lame and cripled. But let us learn of the same Paul from
whence true Christians ought to fetch full Satisfaction and absolute
perfection. Christ (says he) has by one only oblation made perfect for ever;
them which are sanctified. This one only Sacrifice of Christ, offered up in
the Altar of the Cross, is our Satisfaction, our perfection, and our
witnessing, and shall be for ever, not ours only, but of all those also, which
shall be made perfect in time to come. We do believe Paul, we do believe John,
and we do believe Christ. If you do not believe those, there be other companions
fit for you to company withal, namely, the Pharisees which scorned Christ's
preaching, unto whom he said. Luce. 16.
You be they, which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts: for that which is glorious in the sight of men, is abomination before
God. Take heed Osorius, take heed (I say) yt you be not of the number of
those Pharisees, lest God abhor you, and turn his face from your glorious
Satisfactio^s, shine they never so gorgiously in the sight of me^. You cavil
after your old manner, I can not tell what, against the vanity of me, and our
Deuines: wherein I will not braule with you, lest I fill whole Uolumes with
superfluous matters, as you do, but I will meet with you in those things
only, wherein seems some matter of controversy. You bring a very sit and
elegant cause surely, whereby you would show, why we should not confess to
God alone, but rather flee out to your Confessors.

For that God (you say) can not be so easily perceived of us, he has
appointed his Vicares on the earth, which should exercise his authority so
that who would refuse them, would refuse God him self. etc. First of all, ye
deny that God ca^ be clearly perceived: as though the sight of God were
necessary to ye damnation of sinners. This is to to lumpish Osorius more fit
for that Cowled Ass your companion then for you. 1. Tim. vlt Ad Heb^. vlt.
No man ever has seen God, nor ca^ see him, and yet through Christ, we do
offer unto God the father, the sacrifice of thankesgeuyng, and magnify his
holy name. This matter apperteineth not to the sight of the eyes, it
apperteineth to the mind, and inward seelyng of the soul which clyming unto
God in hearty sorrow, and sighyng is never thrown down from the beholding of
his infinite goodness. Ezech. 33.
I live, says the Lord, and take no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but
rather that the wicked convert from his wicked way, and live: be ye converted
therefore, be ye converted, from your wicked ways, wherefore will ye dye, O ye
house of Israel? With like ge^tlenes does our Savior Jesus Christ call us unto
him. Come unto me, all ye that are laden, and I will refresh you, I will give
to them that are thirsty of the well of life, freely. And yet Osorius
believes, that because of ye absence of Christ, Uicares must be substituted:
Paul taught us far otherwise, saying. Apoc. 21.
The Lord is near unto all them, that call upon his name: Christ teaches
far otherwise, of him self. Apoc. 3.
Behold I stand at the door, and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open
unto me the gate, I will enter unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with
me. O sweet and most comfortable voice of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ,
which if once may be thoroughly rooted in the inward parts of our soul, will
easily raze out, and abolish that privy blind buzzyng in the ears of those
Massemongers and Friars. But Osorius sticks fast to his substitution and
mainteineth earnestly, that the Apostles were assigned to be Christ's Uicares
on earth, which should supply his jurisdiction, and should enterlace their
own definitive sentences with his. These are both false. God is a ielous God,
and will not give his honor to any other. He has appointed no Uicare, and
the holy Scripture does acknowledge no such word, neither was it his will, that
the Apostles should entermedle in his Jurisdiction. Your surmise is false,
quite contrary to his heavenly prerogative.

Apoc. 1.
For Christ only has the keys of hell, and death. Christ only, is the
slain Lamb, and the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of David, which
opens the book, and louseth the seven seals thereof, neither was there any
besides him in heaven, in earth, or under the earth, that could open the book,
and look into it. Apoc. 5.
Our Lord Jesus being raised from death, and appearyng unto his Apostles spoke
unto them in this manner: Math. 28.
All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth. Of this power was never
jot empaired in any respect, and never shall be. What was the Commission of the
Apostles then? Christ him self does open it in the self same place. Go ye
therefore, and teach all nations, Baptising them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all those
sayings, which I have commanded you. This was the Embassy of the Apostles,
this was their Commission, and Jurisdiction, or to speak more plainly and
bluntly, this was their function, this was their office. To this authority the
keys of heaven, and remission of sins and whatsoever else of the same kind
must be applied. S. Paul does comprehend all these briefly in these words. Ad
Cor. 4.
Let men so esteem us, as Ministers of Christ, and Stewardes of the mysteries
of God. You be not Uicares the^ Osori you be Ministers: ye be not judges to
constitute Laws (as you do wickedly take upon you) but ye be Stewardes to
dispose ye mysteries of God: or at the lest you ought to be. But how belongs
this doctrine of Christ and his Apostles to your Massemongers and Confessors?
They have an other Romish doctrine, whereby they do receive the seely rude
people, runnyng in heaps, unto them, rehearsing their sins privily, and in
some close corner, superstitiously: and when they have uttered what them
lists, they pronounce over them, of their own power, an absolution in a
strange language: and in stead of Satisfaction, they do enjoin them some
fasting days or some long pilgrimages: and to make an end of the play, they
pike from them a few pe^ce for their labor. This is your usurped power of
Co^fessio^s (Osorius) which you affirm was given first to the Apostles,
afterward to you, by a cert^ine title of Succession. Tell me now, did you
ever read, that any thing was whispered into the Apostles ears privily? or
that sins were severally repeated? or the people absolved by their own
absolute power? or any thing done in a language not understood? or any
penance (as you term it) enjoined? or at the last any reward taken?

What unshamefastness is this? what impiety is it to defend this close
superstitious, and mercenarie ear confession under pretense of the authority
of our Savior Christ? and example of his Apostles? especially when as none of
these was ever instituted by Christ, or frequented of his Apostles. But your
brains are so be witched and intoxicated with ear confessions, that ye shame
not to allege other stuff yet which is most absurd of all the rest, You say
that it is dangerous for men to be left in their own liberty, when they
should confess them selves to God. For if it were so, we would not willingly
yield to that embacing and throwyng down of our selves, which David named to be
the most acceptable sacrifice to God. You do hear and acknowledge your own
words, my Lord, then the which I never heard any thing uttered more blockish:
The matter shall be made manifest by the same example of David, which your self
do allege. David being a Patriarche, a King and a Prophet, and a man according
to Gods heart (to use the words of the Scripture) was notwithstanding
continunually exercized in this kind of Confession, which is betwixt God
only and us: in whom there is such store of sorowyng, sighyng, lamentyng,
weepyng, afflictyng, and bewayling: as the like has never been in all your
se^^et whisperyngs, no not since the first whelpyng of the same. For (...) else
is there in all that heavenly and golden Psalms of David's p^ayer? then a
mournful, and lamentable confession of sin? joined with hearty repentance,
and sure hope of pardon? Psalm. 51.
Be merciful to me. O Lord (says he) according to thy manifold mercies, wash
me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins: for I do
acknowledg^ my faults, and my sin is ^^er before me. Against thee only have
I s^^ed, and done wickedly in thy sight. Lo here a true and sou^de form of
Confession fully described in David, A true form of Confession out of David.
who^ you have alleged. In this confession we do exercize our selves: In this
we remain, and in this we do dwell. We do also pour out public Confessions
of sins in our Churhes, Public Confession.
where the godly Minister is harkened unto, which may minister an wholesome
plaster to our wounded consciences, some sentence (...) of the authority of
the Scriptures. These be the keys, wherewith he does open the kingdom of God,
to the^ which do unfeignedly repent, and pronounces us that are bound with the
chains of our sins, freely loosed, and delivered from them in the name of
our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. These Confessions as well private as
public, these keys, this power of byndyng and loosing we do acknowledge
appointed by the Scriptures, and practiced in the time of the Apostles. Neither
was any thing done with John in a corner, touching Confession, nor yet with the
Disciples of Christ. This matter was referred and ended also to and before God:
whereof we have a most manifest example in the Gospel, which ought not only
enter the ears, but also pearce the very hearts of all well disposed persons.

Luce. 15.
When the lost and prodigal son, had riotously consumed and wasted all his
substance in so much that he was driven to eat Peascoddes with hogs, he
begins at the last, to call him self home, and earnestly to devise how he
might be reconciled to his father: herein he prays no aid of any Leuite, nor
sittyng in a corner unfolds unto him by peecemeale how wickedly, and
filthyly, he had behaved him self, in all his misdoynges, in hope to receive
pardon of him, who could not relieve him: but with an assured confidence,
comes to his heavenly father, and makes his humble Confession into his
ears, in this wise. An example of private Confession in the prodicall Son.
Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants. Truly this is both
an humble, and lowly Confession, the sentence wonderfully effectual, nor any
whit tedious in words: And yet it came to pass hereupo^, that this most myld
father was very joyous, and clothed his son gorgiously, rendryng thereof this
reason: My son was dead, and it alive: was lost, and is found again. Behold
here a pure and Gospel like Confession, by the which we pass from death unto
life, from destruction, to salvation. And therefore we that are instructed with
these godly precepts, ought to obey the holy Ghost, which teaches us by the
mouth of S. Paul, That, Heb. 4.
because we have an high Priest, that has pierced the heavens, even Jesus the
son of God, we should boldly approach to the Throne of his grace, with
affiaunce, that from thence we may obtain mercy and grace and find necessary
relief. Yet for all this, our great Proctour of Confession speaks on, and
faceth out the matter endeuouryng to fetch the petigree thereof out of the
Prophecies of Esaias and demands of me How I think that place of Esaias must be
understood: Esaias. 11.
that it Should come to pass, that after the birth of Christ, the suckling
Babe should thrust his hand into the den of the Cockatrice and draw him out
from thence? First let us hear the famous interpretation of this reverend
father.

If you will interpret this place (says he) as becomes a Christian, by
children, you must understand those persons to whom Christ has given power to
tread down Serpents, and Scorpions, that is to say all sauadgenes of
wickedness, the deceites of Devils, and all cruelty lurkyng in the very
Dens of the souls. For although those persons be of a childishe simplicity,
yet are they endued with such force and strength, that they may easily kill
Vipers, being baled out of the most inward entrails of the souls. Mark here
Reader this deep interpretation of this grave father, Bishop and Divine. But
what shall I reprehend in this old Dotterell first? He resembles Confessors
to sucklyng babes. By what reason? by what resemblaunce? by what likelyhoode?
Paul does inform the Ministers far otherwise, whom he requires amongst
other things, 1. Tim. 3
To hold fast the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, then, that a trial
be had of them first, and after admitted to the Ministry. Both which are
far beyond the age of Childish simplicity: but the power to tread upon
Serpents, The place of Esaias wrongfully wrested by Osorius.
and Scorpions, was granted to the Disciples of Christ, as apperteinyng to
their bodies, not to their souls: That they should be daily conuersau^t
amongst poison, without any empairyng of their health: for even so does our
Lord Jesus promise the^. Behold I give you power to tread upon Serpe^ts, and
Scorpions, and upon all the force of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you.
Luke. 10.
So did Paul shake from his hand into the fire the Uiper, which by chance
stacke fast upon him, being him self safe and whole, when all men did look
that he should have swollen and burst in pieces. Wherefore this promise of
Christ, whereby the health of the Apostles was preserved, that nothing might
hurt them, can not be so mistourned, and wrested to the edifieng of souls
through Confession, unless it be, by you and your schoolmen: which in mydday
ouerspread all things with clouds, disguise all things licentiously at your
own will, which change white black, and black white, that by such means
yt peeuishe and cold inventions of your Comme^taries may be imputed unto our
charge. In like manner, because God did place in the firmamentone great light,
and an other less, in the first creation of the world: ye will have this also
to be almost an Article of our faith, that hereof it came to pass, that the
Pope is in degree above the Emperor. O passing wit, that can make of the
Sun a Pope, and of the Moon an Emperor. But ye route so soundly in these
drousie dreams, that you can not be awakened out of them: and therefore I will
leave you snortyng in them, and will answer you of the true meaning of the
Prophecy whereof you moved your question. Esaias the Prophet does in that place
treat of the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, and does foreshew, that in
that time, shall peace and full tranquillity of all things be: which peace
after a Prophetical manner he does beautify and make apparau^t, under
allusions and variable figures, that by them we might be enduced to have a
better taste and feelyng thereof.

And to express the same more plainly. I will recite that part of Esaias from
the beginning which you have slightly run over. Esaias. 11.
The Prophecy is knit together in this phrase of words. And there shall spring
a branch out of the root of less, and ae blossom shall grow out of his
root. etc. Upon whom the spirit of the Lord shall rest. etc. then a little
after. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leoparde shall lie down
by the Kidde. And again. The Bullockes, Lions, and Cattaile, shall keep
company together, so that a little Child shall lead them. The Cow, and Bear,
shall feed together, and their young ones shall lie together. The Lyo^ shall
eat straw like the Ox or the Cow, the suckling babe shall have delight to the
Serpents neast, and when he is weaned, he shall put his hand into the
Cockatrice `Denne. This much Esaias: who did most eloquently describe unto us the
coming of Christ into the earth, florishyng to the great benefit of
universal peace and public prosperity, by way of allusion of the co^corde
and agreement of sauadge beasts accompanyeng together peacybly. And because he
would Emprinte the same more deeply into our inward senses, he is ple^tyfull
in comparisons, and figures: The place of Esaias explaned
amongst the which, he brings in, this comfortable similitude of the
sucklyng babes, desirous to play with the Serpents: whereby, he does most
manifestly express unto us, the happy estate of those days, and the
wonderful clemency, and innocence of Christ. All men may well know, that
this was the true, and unfeigned meaning of the Prophecy, which will consider
the purpose of the Prophet: and withal will know this also, that your Fable
thereof is very triflyng, a meet lesson for your peltyng school of Co^fessours
and schoolmen. Now here is your goodly Confession so gorgiously painted by
you, which you affirm to be the Queen of all Christian discipline, being in
very deed (as you have set her out in stage) a most filthy handmayde of your
Schoolmen, and most pestilent bondslaue of the Romish See.

Now come we to deal with you of ye Supper of the Lord: Of the Sacrament of
Euchariste.
which being of it self a most precious and sacred monument of our
redemption, you have so defiled and corrupted with your traditions, that the
true use thereof is almost utterly extinct. Yet in the mean space You accuse us
as violatours of the Majesty of this sacred Sacrament, and that we have in the
same, I know not, how haynously offended. Which horrible accusation being
enflamed with outrageous burning firebrandes of Sentences, if it be vnfolden
and thoroughly perused, will seem to savor of nothing at all, but of malicious
smoke of your shameless railing. You make a preface hereu^to in some leaves,
with a great rabble of words, but altogether contrary to the matter, As that we
do not conceive all the creatures of God by reason: and a little after, you roll
in your Rhetoric coming down to the fashionyng of man's body, and the whole
creation of the world and herein because you will be accoumpted no small
Ciceronian, Osori. Tullyes cou^tersaite.
you besturre your self: and pack and stuff together a whole sarpler full of
Tullies own sentences, and at length with a long and laboursome talk, ye
conclude that, whereof no sensible man of our Deuines ever doubted: That is to
say: Cicero. de natura Deo^um.
That ma^s reason only must not be used to the conceauyng of all the creatures
of God, but that faith must be many times enterlaced withal: And last of all
you name our Lord Jesus Christ coming down unto us from heaven, and of his
infinite mercy taking upon him our frail nature, the which you preach to
exceed reason above measure. What say you Osorius? what do you mean hereby?
who has distempered you? you do suppose (I think) that ye write to stones,
and blocks, not to men. Who did ever doubt that there are as many things to be
wou^dred at, as be creatures in nature? Let us behold all the works of God. Or
what Christian person has ever been found amongst us so blockish, and so
void of perseueraunce, which does not confess the coming down of Christ
from heaven? and all the Articles of our belief, to be unto us, as secret and
heavenly mysteries of our faith? wherefore do you so wastfully lose your own and
other men's time in so evident, approved, and confessed matters? why are you so
mad in the introduction only of so great a matter, to make so long a
discourse, of Maxims already manifest, and whereof our children can not be
ignorant.

Forsooth to this end I do it (you say) thereby to display your error. Who do
not comprehend the Sacrament of Euchariste by the mystery of faith, but
esteem the same by reason only. That is false (my Lord) it is untrue: we do
earnestly urge faith: Acts. 1.
we adioyne the Spirit, we do grant, and defend it to be both a Sacrament,
and a mystery also. You on the other side, do pluck God out of heaven,
contrary to the express Article of our faith: and being pluckte from thence
(the holy Ghost crying out against you in ye Scriptures) you shut him up into
bread, and being shut up therein ye do transubstantiate him, and disguise him
with your Arguments, and illusions of schooleianglers chopped together, framed
upon accidents, substaunces, quantities, and qualities, and to help your
iugglyng, you borow a point of Paul, clean contrary the cause: videl. He that
has not spared his own Son, but has delivered him up for us all, how has
he not given us all things together with him? I would to God Osorius you did
as firmly and sincerely believe this sentence of Paul, as we do. There would
not then be such a swarm of ceremonies, and superstitions in your Church,
there would not be such gaddyng on pilgrimages, and lyeng grouelyng before
Images, neither should we see the Uicare of God enstalled a Lord over men's
consciences, vtteryng his pardons of sins for a few pence, tossing and
turmoyling the poor and wretched souls in ye flames of Purgatory, not
enhaunsing market of the holy Scriptures, after hiw own pleasure. Lastly your
Confessors and cowled generation of Uipers would not esteem the worthynes of
works as a portion of our Justification. Yea if you had believed Paul, you
would never have admitted those poisoned monsters of Religion, but would have
confessed with us: That all things are given unto us together with our Lord
Jesus. But I pray you what does that sentence of Paul avail to the Exposition
of the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord? Truly nothing at all: yet this our
goodly grave father turmoyleth all things, confounds all things, not
regardyng what may be agreeable to the cause, but pours out all things at
hap hassard as they come into his vagaraunt quill.

Now follows a decree of your own sta^pe in these words. I am of this
opinion that those persons which do profess the true faith, should consider
nothing else herein, but how that thing, that is decreed upon to be believed,
may be agreeable to the goodness of God. That no man might doubt by any means
the mystery of our Redemption. What speak you (Osorius) shall we judge how
agreeable any thing may be to the goodness of God? Who has made us judges of the
goodness of God, that we should determine what may be agreeable, and not
agreeable to the same? but your tongue does folter: for you would have said, the
will of God, or ye should have so said: as far forth as we can understand, it
as far forth as the Patriarchs, Hebr. 1.
Prophets our Lord Jesus also and his Apostles has revealed unto us by the
sacred Scriptures. And if your decree tend to this effect, we will accept
thereof. For we make no doubt of the power of God (although you falsely
reproach us herein) but do grope after his divine will in his word, and do
humbly apply all our actions thereunto, as far forth as the imbecillitie of
our frail and weak nature will permit. And therefore teach you I pray you,
what thing God would have to be made in that Sacrament, we will never enquire
whether God be able to perform it: sor when we are made assured of Gods good
will, we will acknowledge with all reverence and humbleness his power, as
meet is: Next after your foolish and childish Preface ensues a very graeuous
accusation against Peter Martyr, a meet hotchepot for your Confessors,
Schooleme^ and Friars. For if they had couchte all their noddles together, they
could have vomited out scarsely half so much poison in so short a time. To
make this matter somewhat plain of all parts what manner a thing it is, we
will rippe abroad his Budget of tales even as Osorius has patchte it together.
These therefore are the words, wherewith Osorius does challenge the combat
against the soul of Peter Martyr.

Osori. Prolopopo^ia against Peter Martyr.
O thou most wicked man, how came it into thy mind to handle that most sacred
mystery? I would to God my sweet Peter were alive again, and did hear this
frantic slander against him. Forsooth he would easily suppres this brawlyng
tongue, with the chains of holy Scriptres, and tame your waywardnes. Now
therefore, albeit God has called him hence unto him self: let us imagine that
he were alive, and in few words confutyng your cursed declamation after this
manner. First of all, The answer of Peter Martyr against the Prolopopo^ia of
Osorius.
how may I take this (reverend Prelate) that you being an old man, a Divine,
and a Bishop, at the first choppe should call me most wicked man? whereas I am
not known unto you, nor have ever been seen o^ you, nor have deserved any
evil of you? Is this the brotherly love, which Christ requires of his
Disciples? Is this the mildness and modesty of a Bishop, whereof Paul makes
mention? I have written (I confess it) and have spoken in the common Argument
of Religion, as seemed good unto me: I have not offended you, in any thing,
neither have I had any disputation with you touching matters of Religion,
neither was any contention betwixt us at any time. Wherefore then do you storm
against me so vnciuilie? why do ye call me most wicked, which can not duly
charge me with any wickedness at all? But be it, that your manners are so
naturally of an evil disposed inclination, that ye can not choose but oppress
your brother with infamous reproaches, whom of duty you ought gently have
admonished, being in error: why do ye haynously offend in the cause, which
you have vndertake^, that you must needs stamp out so manifest a lie in the
very beginning: for ye write that the Sacrament of Euchariste, is defaced,
defiled and perverted by me. This is false, and you herein are injurious and
slanderous: I call to witness mine own books, let them be brought forth and
perused, and it shall evidently appear, that I have beautified this excellent
Sacrament with most honorable titles, and have spoken thereof always with
greatest reverence: But whereas you demand of me, and my masters, with what
face we durst attempt so execrable a fact, contrary to so many former ages: and
where you also demand if so many Martyrs, and so many Religious men have
strayed from the truth, and we only have seen the truth: Truly I ca^ not
conjecture what Masters, what Martyrs and what Religious men you do mean.
Neither do I presume any thing upon my self, nor do derogate from any other
man, neither ca^ I judge you to be sober enough, which in matter of nothing ca^
gush out such a Sea of idle words. But you are come somewhat nearer the matter,
and would be certified of me, What great matter our Lord Jesus Christ did, if
in his last Supper he did leave nothing else unto us but a naked remembrance of
his death? In this question I turn you over to the Anabaptists, whose
speeches are these: A bare sign, bare bread, and bare remembrance: which
their nakedness of speech I do abhor and condemn as well as you. I do speak
honorably, and judge most reverently of the excellency of this godly
Sacrament. The Sacrament is the most excellent, and effectual visible sign of
invisible grace, ye heavenly bread, mystical bread, the pledge, and vessel of
our redemption: finally, it is the true body of our Lord Jesus Christ, even in
the same manner, as the true body of our Savior may be present in a Sacrament
spiritually, by faith, and in a mystery. Therefore away with those your bare
signs, your bare remembrance: I call them yours because they are your
slau^ders, your manifest quarrels against me: for I do not acknowledge, nor
defend any such matter for mine. As often therefore as you do repeat the same
(which you do very often) so often you do repeat not mine error, but your
own lie. You imagined in my writing very monstrous interpretations, and
absurd disputations. Whereof I never thought of once so much as in my dream:
All which come to this only effect, as if I had taught, that nothing had
been in the Sacrament, but a bare sign of Christ Crucified for us. Wherein you
are very far wide, not only from the duty of a Bishop and person of a
Divine, but also from the profession of a true Christian man, for you thrust
unto me a Bastard whelpe as it were mine own, and the same also you toss
topsie tyruie, from post to pillar after your own (...), as if it were mine.
But this whelpe is not mine, it is a Bastard, I hate it and abhor it, and
will forswear it also, if you will have me so do.

At the length you are come to the very bowels of the controversy, and do
stoutly affirm, that the matter is most manifest, and prove the same with the
words of Paul. But let a man first prove him self, and so eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup, alledgyng also these words of our Lord Jesus.
This (says he) is my body, do ye this in remembrance of me, You will
therefore that we should stand fast to these words being so notable and
evident, and accuse my wicked interpretation of Christ's words, and affirm
that I do make none accou^pt of the meaning of Paul. Do I apply a wicked
interpretation of Christ's most sacred words (Sir Jerome) Do I esteem the
sense and mind of S. Paul of no value? show the place, recite the words,
bring forth in the face of the world this heinous crime, that all men may
abhor mine impudency, detest mine impiety, and spitte at mine ignorance.
If you can discover nothing in so notorious an escape, if you exclame against
me without cause, if you be clamorous without reason, if none of all these be
in me, but if it be your foul and unshamefast slander: what manner of
Christian, what Divine, and what kind of Bishop shall me^ surmise you to be?
Now I will return to your allegations, whereby (to deal in plain and open
terms with you) if upon those words you will have it concluded, that Christ
is truly delivered in the Sacrament, to the true beleuers, in faith, and
spirit: I will not gaynsay you. But if you mean to ground the foundation of
your gross, and Idolatrous Transubstantiation upon the same (whereof you make
mention a little after) I must needs tell you, that I do utterly dissente from
you, and your Masters the Schoolmen herein: and do so nothing refuse to
debate this controversy by the very self same testimonies, which you have
alleged, that I do rather desire, and most earnestly require the same. This
is therefore the sentence of Paul. Let a man examine him self, and so eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup: 1. Cor. 11.
Which word, Bread, Paul through the whole discourse of that Chapter, once,
twice, yea many times does inculcate. Whereby it appears plainly, that when a
man has tried him self to the uttermost, when he has done all that
apperteineth to the due receiving of the Sacrament, he must yet at the last
eat Bread. So that after your consecrations, Bread, remains: and nevertheless
the Sacrament, yea Bread remains even to the last. Wherefore the substance of
the material Bread can not pass into an heavenly substance (as you do
imagine) for Bread can not remain material Bread without the substance of
Bread, no nor be surmised by thought to be Bread.

Paul does sundry times call the Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.
Bread.

But natural Bread is not the body of Christ.

Ergo. The Sacrament can not be the natural body of Christ.

I do speak here even of the consecrated Bread, as you call it, or as Paul
calls it, the Bread which is blessed. Whereof Paul has an infallible
sentence in his Epistle to the Corinthians. The bread which we break, is it
not the partaking of the body of Christ? 1. Cor. 10.
This Sacramental Bread therefore after blessing, when it is taken to be eaten,
is even then Bread, and broken as natural Bread. Ergo, it loses not his
natural substance, nor is tra^substanciated into the natural body of Christ,
as you use to speak monstruously in a monstrous matter.

How then (say you) does Paul call Bread the participation of the body of
Christ? For sooth in the same manner: in the which a little before, he does call
Christ a spiritual Rock. They did all drink (says Paul) of one spiritual
Rock which followed them, and the same Rock, was Christ, and by and by after,
is set down in the same Chapter, We many are one bread, and one body. In both
which we do acknowledge the most wholesome, and familiar speech of the holy
Ghost, but can not acknowledge your monstrous and newfangled
Tra^substantiation. To this purpose are the words of our Savior Christ to be
applied. This is my body which is delivered for you, do ye this in
remembrance of me. For the latter part does explane the first part of the
sencence most expressly. For if the transubstantiated bread should contain in
it self the very natural body of Christ, hanged upon the Cross and thrust
into the side for us (as you do dream) what needed then so often a rehearsal
to be made unto us of the Remembrance of his body, especially the body it
self being present, and subject to our senses, and daily handled in our
hands? But for as much as our Lord Jesus in the sight of the Apostles (and the
Angel declaryng the same) did ascend up into the heavens, Acts. 1.
and sits there now at the right hand of his father, of his infinite mercy,
he has left behind him this most fruitful, and most healthful Sacrament
unto our use: by the receauyng whereof, we might be exceedyngly comforted, and
should emprinte deeply in our memory, and reserve inuiolably the lively and
effectual remembrance of his most bitter death and Passion, apperteinyng to
the sauetie of our souls. Now if any man doubt whether this be so or no, let
him hear our Lord Jesus in the Gospel of S. John, John. 6.
so plain and perfect an interpretour of him self, that nothing can be added
to make it appear more manifest. My flesh (says our Lord Jesus) is meat is
deed, and my blood is drink in deed. He that eats my sleshe and drinks
my blood, the same dwells in me and I i^ him. Many therefore of his Disciples
hearing this, said. This is an hard saying, who can abide it? But Jesus knowing
with in him self that his Disciples did murmr at this saying, said unto
them. Does this offend you? The^ what if you shall see the son of (...)
ascendyng where he was before? it is the Spirit that gives life, the flesh
profits nothing at all: my words are spirit and life. Your speech is a hard
speech (Osori.) it is a hard speech of tra^substantiating the bread into the
natural body of Christ. Touching the carnal and fleshly eating of Christ's
body your saying is hard, yea as hard as iron: who can hear or abide it?

Let us here take our Lord Jesus to be the Expositour of his own words, who
does so atte^per and mollify this his speech being in outward apparaunce most
hard of all other with a most sweet interpretation, as yt nothing ca^ be
thought more mylde, and more apt for our consolation. Be not offended at my
words says our loving Lord and most sweet Savior Jesus: for I must asce^de
up unto my father, from whence I did de^ce^d unto you at ye first: And my body
I must needs take up with me, which you may not from thenceforth handle here on
the earth. Therefore in this case, to wit, to conceive this mystical eating
of my flesh which I have commended unto you, behooves of very necessity that
you be endued with a spiritual understanding. For it is the Spirit that does
quicken, the flesh pro^iteth nothing at all. John. 6.
That is to say, the spiritual feedyng upon my body, which is, given for you,
shall nourishe you to life everlasting. But that fleshly eating, which does
trouble you so much, profits nothing at all. At the last our Lord Jesus
concludes this place wholly unto them in this wise. The words that I do speak
unto you, are spirit, and life. John. 6.
The words which Christ spoke of the eating of his flesh are spiritual. The
flesh profits nothing at all, if we may believe our Lord Jesus speaking of him
self. Let us therefore take hold of that quickenyng spirit, which may make
us partakers of everlasting life, being authorized hereunto by Christ him
self: and sithence you can not digest this sweet and comfortable food of the
heavenly Table, by faith, and spirit, we will leave that other carnal and
gross banquet of the transubstantiated bread to you, and to your Capernaites.
You see now whereunto your testimonies, that you trusted so much, are come at
the last, whose authority I do not refuse, but reverence them: and suppose
that your transubstantiation is overthrown and utterly brought to naught by
conferryng those two sentences, with the other process of the text. Neither am
I alone of this judgment in the interpretation of these places. For S. August.
August. de doct. christi. Tertullian.
writing upon John alleges the same sentence in express manner of speech.
Tertul. also pronou^ceth the same most evidently in his treatize upon the
distribution of the Sacramental bread: which two have been always accoumpted
learned and ancient Authors.

You press me with a whole forest full of slau^ders affirming that this
Sacrament is fowly deformed by me, the body and blood of Christ is trodden under
feet, the power and force of this wonderful Sacrament is dusked and utterly
extinct by me. I demand of you again, what my words be? where these botches
do lurcke in my books? what I have written? what I have done, where? and by
what means? I am ready either to repulse your error, or to confess mine own:
if I have committed any such fault, I crave no pardon. But if there be no such
matter, if it be rather all contrary, if mine innoce^cie be blameles herein, I
call to witness God and men, heaven and earth against that most wicked tongue,
which has practiced falsely to condemn the credit of your brother, with so
grievous an accusation, and so horrible a crime. Fie fie (Osorius) what
unbridled licentiousness of Scorpionlike stinge is this, to make guilty of
the body and blood of Christ, your natural brother, that has not offended
you? as though he had written that which he never wrate, as though he had done
yt which he never did, as though you have affirmed that which you do not prove
nor can ever justify: nay rather which you have not endeavored to prove: for
what have you alleged of mine? what words what sentences have you noted out
of my writyngs, lastly what one thing have you explaned? whereby you may not
be adjudged of all men a most shameless slaunderour and notorious rayler.

Your process that ensues is stuffed full with demaundes, wherein albeit I
did pity your singular amazedness very much, yet could I scarce hold my
laughter in them, they were so cold, so frivolous, so variable, and to speak
my mind at a word, so altogether like Osorius him self. Your first question
is That though mine eyes are so dazeled in matters of Divinity, that I can not
conceive that wonderful change of earthly bread into the nature of heavenly
bread yet why I would notwithstanding with quarelling pervert so wonderful a
benefit of God? Truly I do confess, right reverend Prelate, yt mine eye
sight has been always so dymme, that I could never discern this your
counterfeit Tra^substantiation. But I ought to have been pardoned herein,
because it has been a general disease, and blindness of all times, of all
ages, and of all Nations. The Apostles never saw so foolish a thing. The
ancient Fathers could never discern so cloudy a forgerie: at the last Satan
opened the eyes of your Schoolmen, and made them so sharp sighted, that in
Distinctions, eccyties and quiddities, they could many time easily see that
thing which was no where at all. This kind of people, enlumined by the Prince
of darkness, furnished with the authority of the Laterane Counsel, and
Innocentius Pope of Rome, not much above 300. years past, did raise out of
hell, this newfangled monster of Tra^substantiation. Even then, when that
Council had sit abrood: Transubstantiation began first to peep out of the
shell, What time Transubsta^tiation was brought in first.
being never heard of before any where, nor known so much as by any name. Why
then do ye vpbrayde me with blindness so sharply, since your self (I say) your
self do know, that all the world was as blind, as I, before that Laterane
Counsel? But do you as ye list. I for my part, will continue blind still, with
Christ, with the Apostles, with the ancient Fathers, with all the commendable
company of godly Deuines, in this Laberinthe of Transubsta^tiation, rather then
I will acquaynte my self with so monstrous a frameshapen new start up puppet,
with your Schooleianglers, confessors and lousie Friars. But you begin here to
wax very whote and teastie and spur questions at me on all sides: What is it
(you say) that you do understand? what do you conceive in your mind, and
reasons? Lastly what is it, that your understanding does feel and know? I will
tell you, my good father, and without any cholor, I promise you, if you will
hear me patiently. First I do see that you do childishly wander in this
bitter talk, that demand one and the self same thing in three several
distinct questions. Then I do also plainly see, that you are so doltishe, and
blockishe a patron of Transubsta^tiation, that ye can not with any honesty,
open your pack amongst your own pedlers. But you never cease demaundyng.

You ask of me what does trouble me in the mystery of the Sacrament. Truly
nothing at all, grave Prelate, troubles me there, but your unmeasurable
unskillfulness in so great a mystery, which is no small reproach to your
profession and dignity, yea and to your gray hears also. But ye will know
more yet. Whether I do mistrust the power or the clemency of God? Neither of
both, finewitted Gentleman: no more do I trust your self, nor yet your
Transubstantiation, because ye go about to throw it upon us, contrary to the
meaning of the holy Scriptures, in the which God the Father has most fully
declared unto us, his power, and will, by his Son our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Lastly ye demand What the cause should be, why I should think
wherefore you should believe, that the body, and blood of Christ, is contained
in the Sacrament in a wonderful mean, and that I my self can not believe the
same? whereunto you annexe this, that in wit and learning ye do far
surmonte me: It is a very hard matter (holy father) to descry any peculiar
cause, which moves you to believe, and defend Transubstantiation: but I will
guess somewhat nearer the chiefest. Forsooth you are addicted wholly to your
Schooletriflers, and Confessors, but very little to the Scriptures: by means
whereof it is come to pass, that ye skyppe over the open Oracles of truth, and
are entangled in the weuett of error: peradventure also ye are become an
appre^tice to the Romish See, and ye mean to procure with the pretty
Marchau^dize of your pedlers pilfe, some Cardinals Hatte. It may likewise be,
that for countenance sake ye will face out your false pack with a card
often, because ye think it will empaire the credit of your gray hears to be
ouersene in any thing. Besides all these, custom perhaps of many years had
made your judgment rotten before it was ripe, as men use to say of common
liars, which redouble a lie so often, that by their often rehearsal believe it
to be true at the length: even so may you think to establishe the countenance
of your imagined Transubstantiation by alledgyng in defense thereof, a
continual allowaunce of long time. If none of all these have moved you: I
think surely overmuch pride has blinded you, wherewith ye swell in such sort,
that you dare boldly without blushyng make vaunt of your self, more like unto
a bragging Thraso, or if any thing ca^ be more vain the^ Thraso, then like a
Divine. A show of Osorius pride.
For you do not exceed me in wit (say you) nor excel me in learning.
Truly I will not compare my self with you, nor with any other person. Neither
do I profess my self to know any thing at all, but Jesus Christ, and him also
Crucified. As for you, if one drop of Christian humility, or civil
modesty, were in you, so hautie a brag of your brave wit, and learning,
would never have escaped you. Consider with your self in good earnest, my holy
father, this your foolish communication, and learn somewhat of Christian
humility, lest almighty God besides this your most unsavory error of
Transubstantiation, add a more heavy plague upon you for your unmeasurable
arrogancy.

You accuse me that I do trust to much to my natural senses, but that you do
direct all the course of your life to the faith of the Church: and that I do
shake of from my shoulders the yoke of Christ, but you take it upon you: and
that I do forsake the benefits of God, but that you do lean steadfastly to
faith. All which are clean contrary. For you apply your senses to ye
understanding of Transubsta^tiatio^, whereby you will have Christ to be felt, to
be tasted, and to be swallowed down into ye stomach. But I according to ye
doctrine, and approved use of the true Catholic and Apostolic Church, do
utterly renounce senses, accide^tes, substaunces, and transformatio^s: and do
advisedly behold, and comprehend in my mind, ye Sacrament, the mystery, and
the Spirit. You cast away the yoke of Christ, and embrace the licentious
outrage of the Romish Bulls. I am a poor miserable exile of Christ, and his
afflicted servant. You do choppe and change the benefits of Christ: with
the peeuishe trinckettes of your Schoolmen: I do search for the true doctrine
of Christian faith in the most approved preachyngs of Christ, and his Apostles.
Ye do snarle at my conversation of life as if it were most wicked. Wherein
though you do me a great injury, yet ye give your self a deeper wound,
which in so open and manifest a lie, do put all your credit in hassarde of
loss. For albeit I am a miserable sinner in the sight of God, yet I hope, I
have so led my whole life, through his only great mercy, that I need not to
fear Jerome Osorius to be mine accuser. I could call to witness for my
innocence here in Italy, Germany and England: in every of which Regio^s I
have so behaved my self, that having testimony of all good and commendable
personages, I may easily despise your slanderous, and shameless railing.
Wherefore a way with this your frivolous, and insolent custom of scolding once
at the last, for it empaireth not the estimation of honest persons, which
though be unknown unto you, yet have commendable report else where abroad: but
it rather hurts your profession, diminishes your credit, and loses your
estimation. You do praise the Sacrament plentifully, and with many good words
beautify the benefits thereof. Wherein you do very well: for what thing under
the heavens can be found, more praise worthy, more comfortable, more
honorable, more precious, more heavenly, then this sacred Supper of the Lord?
which we not only call by the names of Synaxim, and Euchariste, as you do,
but also bread come down from heaven, and Angels food. Neither can you devise
to speak so fully and aboundauntly, in the displaying of the excellent
worthynes of this most singular sacrament but I will gladly consent with you
therein.

Cyprian.
You say that Cyprian was accustomed to give this heavenly food to Martyrs,
and that he would likewise remove from this heavenly Banquet, men that were
notorious for any great crime. We do acknowledge this godly usage of Cyprian:
and the same do I for mine own part Imitate as much as I may: and I know not,
whether I have employed any so great endeavor, in any one thing so much, as
that the pure, and natural honor of this Sacrament might be established, and
the same daily frequented in all Churches. Let my books be perused, let
inquiry be made of my familiars, and such as I have been conuersaunt withal,
let the continual course of my manners, and living be examined, and I shall be
found of all men to have been a most humble, and daily follower, and guest of
this heavenly Supper. Wherefore the^ do you so immorderatly exclame against me,
That I do mainteyne combat against the ordinance of Christ, against the
doctrine of Paul, against the excellency of so delicate fruits, against the
known experience of that wonderful commodity and pleasantness, and against
the undefiled faith of the universal Church? Wherefore do you add hereunto,
That I have reprochfully abused the body and blood of Christ, and outragiously
perverted the benefit of Gods mercy? Why do you knitte up your knot at the
length and say, That I do sport my self in these mischiefs and do infect
many persons with the poison of this pestilent error? God co^founde that
unshamefast and blasphemous mouth with some horrible plague, most cursed Semei,
whose cancred tongue can find no end, nor measure in railing. I have always
most reuere^tly esteemed of ye Euchariste, as of a most precious, and most
fruitful sacrament of Christ's death, as a most assured pledge and Seal of
our redemption, as a most precious treasure and mystery of our faith, and
hereunto have I been enduced by the ordinance of Christ our Savior, by the
doctrine of Paul, by the judgment of ancient Fathers, and by the discipline
and received custom of the universal Catholic and Apostolic Church.
Touching the doctrine thereof I have often times spoken before: now therefore
touching the Custom: The same is perceived by the daily Custom of the
Disciples, which after Christ was taken up into heaven, did continually
persevere together in the doctrine of the Apostles, Acts. 2.
and in participation and breakyng of bread and prayers, as appears by these
words: Upon a day of the Sabbath, Acts. 20.
when the Disciples came together to break bread. etc. Awake Jerome Awake: you
do hear the holy Ghost call it Bread, and because you should not doubt thereof,
you hear it again and again, yea and broken also, and this much more ye
find, that the Disciples of Christ continually remained in this holy custom:
And yet it was not bare Bread, as you do wickedly diffame my sayings therein:
but it was mystical Bread, sacred Bread, finally, it was the participation of
the body of Christ, in the same manner, as the body of Christ may be delivered
in a Sacrament, by faith, and Spirit.

Therefore, The confutatio^ of the Transubstantiation.
for as much as our Lord Jesus has so instituted this Sacrament, to the
everlasting Remembrance of his death, and passion, sithence Paul does make
mention of the said institution after the same manner, sithence the ancient
Fathers have applied their doctrine to the same sense, sithe^ce the primitive
and Apostolic Church has confirmed the same with perpetual Custom, Awake
(Jerome) at the length for shame awake if you can, and rid your stomach of
that dronken Schoolesurfet of Tra^substantiation, which neither Christ did
ordeine, nor Paul acknowledged, nor the Fathers ever thought of, ne yet the
Apostolic Church did ever meddle withal. It is a new devised mockery,
founded first by Innoce^tius, proclaimed by Schooleianglers, scattered abroad
by Satan, to the rootyng out of the true remembrance of Christ, from out our
souls: to the utter overthrow of the power of that everlasting sacrifice of ye
cross: Lastly to the erecting of a damnable Idol in our minds, supplying the
place of Christ him self to be worshipped of us. For what else means this
your Transubstantiated bread, so much adorned with all ceremony of Religion, so
reverently carried abroad? so superstitiously reserved, and kept in box?
lastly so blasphemously holden up to the gaze, and worshypped? did Christ our
Savior do or teach ever at any time any of all these? did Paul? did the first
and primitive Church? did the ancient Fathers? Christ gave Bread to his
disciples. Paul pronou^ceth it by ye name of Bread, once, twice, thrice. The
Apostolic church brake Bread in the remembrance of Christ's death, and
perseuered in the same Custom. The Fathers name it Bread, and a Sacrament, a
mystery, and a figure of Christ's body. And yet Pope Innocentius coming
lately out of hell with a detestable superstition and horrible Sacrilege does
Transubstantiate this mystical Bread into our Savior Jesus Christ. Pope
Innocentius the third.


There followed him certain fantastical Schoolmen, which did most wickedly
defile the pure Supper of our Lord, with durtie school dregs. And now at the
length starteth by our Osorius a brave champion of this School tromperies,
Jerome Osorius I say, that great Master in Israel, a deep and incomparable
Divine, who^ no man exceeds in wit, nor surmounteth in learning, if a man
may believe him as he reports him self. Wherefore I would now ask one
question (good master Proctour) of you, of this Transubsta^tiation: whether
our Lord Jesus Christ when he did first institute the Sacrament of the
Euchariste, did make any mention in his speech, of any removing of the
substance of Bread? of the accidents that should remain? or whether the
substance of his body, should supply the substance of Bread? Did Paul touch
any of these? did the primitive and Apostolic Church receive any such thing?
have the ancient Fathers made mention of any such matter in their books?
Sithence therefore this your wonderful conversion of the Substance of Bread,
into the body of Christ (which your Schoolmen by a more gross name call
Trasubstantiatio^) has been shapen and forged out of these Monasteries,
whereof not so much as one title can be found in the holy Scriptures, in the
Custom of the Apostles, in the books of ancient Fathers: it is a wonderful
strange matter that a bishop, so exquisite in divinity, as you are, or would
seem to be, would yet undertake so desperate a cause, and obtrude upon us such
cold school dreams, in steed of most apparau^t and known things. Ye see
now how pitthily my Peter Martyr has answered you in all things: whose soul
you would not have teazed to quarrel, if you had had any wit. For he was
worthily esteemed an excellent Divine amongst the chiefest Deuines of our age:
whose Scholar you might have been in all knowledge and litterature, except your
eloquence only in the Latin tongue.

But you do leave our Peter now at yt length, who^ if you had never provoked,
you had done better: so needed you not to do me so great injury as to
challe^ge me for my familiar acquaintance with him. For if you think that ye
may with your honesty keep company and use friendly familiarity with that
doltish Calfe Angrence having no vtteraunce, no wit, no sense and no
understanding: why should not I rather acquainte my self with a man not only
excellent in learning but replenished with all comlynesse and civility of
manners? Make choice of your familiars Osorius, as you please. Suffer me to
enjoy mine own: neither is it reason that you should limitte me, or I you in
this kind of affairs: humanity, and common course of ma^s life requires
that choice be made of friendship as likes each man's own judgment best, and
not to be ruled by others fantasies. Be not you squeymish therefore at the
co^me^dations of godly and learned men, my especial friends Martin Bucer, and
Peter Martyr, I loved the^ when they lived, I will not forget them being dead,
I freque^ted their familiarity whiles they lived as much as I might, their
names, and remembrance of the^ though they be dead, I will defend as much as
I may, and if they were now alive, I would esteem more of a whole years
conference with them, then of one day with you, for their conversation had a
certain discreet pleasauntnes, their conference had a wholesome wisdom, ye
whole course of their demeanor was a most absolute pattern of honesty and
godliness: And I am thoroughly persuaded that nothing could have advanced my
estimation (such as it is) more, then mine acquaintance and familiarity with
these two godly Fathers.

You come at the length to our Church, the orders whereof you do captiously
snatch at, but this ye do so disorderly and sta^me ringly, that all men may
judge that ye did roaue at it in your dream rather then dispute being awake. I
affirmed, that faith came by hearing. What say you? is it no so? I said also,
that our Preachers are sent abroad into all the coasts of our Realm, to teach
the common people their duties in all things: what? will you deny this to be
done? You can not: the matter is manifest. But you exclaim, and say that our
Preachers are Lutherans, Bucerans, and Caluinistes. First of all, how know you
this to be true? then, if it be so, let the names go: confute their doctrine,
if you can: But this lesson you learned of your Cowled Coockowes, to braule
always with bare names, when you ca^ not overthrow a syllable of their
doctrine. Your Master ship will not allow that our Parliament and public
assembly of the Realm should entermedle with matters of Religion, for herein
ye suppose that the dignity of Priests is empayred. First what thing can be
publicly received, unless it be proclaimed by public authority? Then, our
Prelates and Ecclesiastical Fathers do propou^de the rules of Religion: after
that, the Prince, with the consent of the whole estates, do ratify the same.
What may be done more orderly or more circumspectly? This custom was observed
in the time of the kings of Israel: This usage prevailed in all Counseils,
until that Romish Ierarche had burst in sunder these laws, with his false
ambitious picklockes, and had commanded all things to be subject to his
absolute power. I wrate also, that there was great reverence given to the holy
Scriptures in our Churches, and that unity and the bond of peace was
wonderfully preserved. You demand on the other side, From whence so
troublesome contentions in opinions are raised in our Churches? Show what
contentions there be, and we will satisfy your request. But if you will not,
or ca^ not, hold your tou^g most wicked rayler, and require not to be believed
for your only affirmatiues sake. Deal in this manner with your charge of
Siluain, for ye shall obtain nothing here, but by meare force of Argument.

I did affirm likewise, 1. Cor. 14.
that our divine service is ministered with us in the mother and vulgar tou^g
according to Paul's doctrine, and the approved custom of the Apostolic
Church: Of unknown and strange tounges in Churches.
what say you to this? forsooth you can not like of it, because it is repugnant
to the ordinance of Rome, and yet you can not well deny so manifest a truth:
for S. Paul did establish this doctrine of the holy Ghost, with so many and so
strong Arguments, as though he did even then foresee in mind that some such
erroneous botches would infect our Religion, yt by such means they might blot
out, and utterly extinguish out of our Churches this most fruitful
worshyppyng of God, being the very foundation of all Christian godlynes. And
therefore this godly man, Ibidem.
and most excellent servant of God, Paul, trauaileth very earnestly in this
place, partly by course of nature, partly by reason, partly by examples, partly
by similitudes to prove that common prayers should be ministered in Churches in
the vulgar, and known language, and herein is so plentyfull, and so
abou^daunt, and uses so many infallible Arguments, that if the whole swarms
of Schooleia^glers, and Friars, and couled generation did conspire together,
they were not able to abide the force and strength of his disputation. And
therefore Osorius, craftily cloakyng this matter, slydeth away from thence to
the vices of men. And says that some of our Preachers are puffed up with pride
of their science, many of them be entangled in snares and difficulties and
doubtful questions. This is true: and this also is as true, that there is a
great rabble of false Christians, amongst whom our Doctor Jerome seems
chieftaine and standard bearer which call light darkness, and darkness light,
which forbid wedlock, deny lawful use of meats, observe serve days and
months, years and minutes of times, which are turned to the naked and
beggarly elements: Gallat. 4.
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, flow bellyes. Phil. 3.
And yet may not godly men be defrauded of the Gospel, because such Lurdaines
do abuse the holy Scriptures, to their lust and filthy lucre. For our Lord
Jesus Christ does thunder with manifold curses against such Pharisees, Masters
of ignorance and darkness: saying, Luke. 11.
Woe be to you Lawyers, for you have taken away the keye of knowledge, and have
not entered in your selves, and those that would have entered in, you have
forbidden. Math. 33.
And again. Woe be to you Scribes and `Pharisies hypocrites. For you shut
fast the kingdom of heaven from men, whereunto you enter not your selves, nor
will suffer others to enter in that would enter. You are a Bishop Osorius, you
have ye keys of knowledge, or ought to have, but you keep it close and hyde
it, and will not suffer it to be opened to your self nor to others. You are a
Shepherd of Christ's flock, or you ought to be, you lock fast the Gospel
(wherein is the kingdom of God) from your sheep, and enter not your self,
nor will suffer others to enter. This is dangerous, this is damnable, you are
accursed by the very mouth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, yea even by the
testimony of your own mouth, Osorius.

For after your long, idle and counterfaite devises imagined upon the words of
Paul, you conclude at length in this manner: Osori. fol. 69.
Paul does not forbid to use strange language. Yet he does prefer and
commend prophecyeng, that is to say the expou^dyng of the will of God, and the
manner of edifieng the Church. If Paul do prefer prophecieng more, why do
you embace it? if Paul would have the congregations to be edified, why do you
practice to destroy them. 1. Cor. 14.
If Paul of an infinite love, do command all things to be expounded in
Churches, by an interpretour, by what tyra^nie do you procure all things to be
kept in covert in Churches? and the people to be defrauded in all things of
understanding by means of strange tounges? For it is true in deed that you
say, that to speak with tou^ges is allowed of Paul, if you admit also an
interpretour, which may express the meaning of the tounges, But it is false
that strange languages shall be received in co^gregations, without an
interpretour. For this speaks Paul. 1. Cor. 14.
If a man speak with tounges, let the same be done by two, or at the most by
three, and so by turns, and let one interpret: if there be no interpretour,
let him hold his peace in the congregation, or let him speak to him self and
to God. Saint Paul commands strange la^guages to be silent in the
congregation, if there be no interpretour. Let us therefore obey him, or rather
the holy Ghost speaking in him with all humility, and banish from us this
chatteryng chough of languages to his Confessors and cowled generation.

But we can not so drive away this vnportunate fleshfly from ye godly banguets
of souls, for he is always bussing about the^ and at the last flees to this
desperate cario^, That this doctrine of Paul was but for a time, and enjoined
to be received to the Corinthians, and not of us, because we are not so apt to
be taught therein, as they were, and are also more inc^inable to arrogancy.
Does this kind of Exposition please you Osorius, and will you be accounted a
Divine and a Bishop in this your Divinity to say that ye doctrine of the holy
Ghost in matters of faith, in things eternal, in ordinances assured and
permanent, not in any part chau^geable in them selves, is but a doctrine for a
time? Our Lord Jesus commands otherwise. Search the Scriptures (says he)
the same be they which bear record of me. How shall we search that which we
do not understand? or how shall we receive testimony in a tongue unknown unto
us? There is a commandment of God the Father from heaven. Luke. 3.
This is my beloved son, hear ye him. And how shall we hear him, except he
speak unto us in a known tou^g? The Lord Jesus commands us to watch, and
to pray, yea to do the same continually, for that we know not in what hour he
will come: what therefore, shall we pray in an unknown language? Truly if it
be so, the spirit shall pray, 1. Cor. 14.
but the soul shall receive no fruit thereof, by the evident te^^^monie of
Paul. When I name the spirit, I do mean thereby, the breath that issues
out of ye mouth: for so does Paul interpret it in that place. Did our Lord
Jesus use a known or a strange language, when he taught ye Apostles the form
of prayer? Lastly I demand of you whether you can find one syllable in the
whole doctrine of the primitive Church, or whether any remembrance or use of
this praying in a strange tongue, was frequented in the time of the Apostles. I
add hereunto, that after the opinion of S. Augustine prayer is nothing else,
the^ a communicatio^ betwixt us, and almighty God. What request then shall we
make unto God the father, for our necessities, when we understand not what we
ask? No sober man will seem so frantic before men, much less will he
trifle so pernitiously with God. That foul mouth Osorius, that foul mouth
therefore would be choked up with everlasting infamy, which contrary to the
manifest doctrine of the holy Ghost, contrary to the received custom of the
Apostolic Churches, contrary to nature, to reason, and contrary to all
feelyng of common capacity, will auowe that prayers ought to be made in the
congregation in strange and unknown tounges.

You demand further of me. Why we have committed the interpretation of
Scriptures to all Carters and Porters? I ask of you likewise with what face you
could write so unshamefast a lie in your paper? You say that all order is
subverted with us, for that all are Pastors, all are Prophets, all are
teachers and thereupon that confusion of all things does ensue amongst us. Both
these are false Osorius, and it becomes you nothing at all, being a Bishop
and an old man, to imagine all things so licentiously and disorderly in the
face of the whole world after your own fantasy. Yet make you no end of
demaundyng. And therefore you desire to know, what we did lack at any time
heretofore to the sober discipline of good minds? There lacked both the old
and the new Testament, which is the only instrument of the health of our
souls, being close locked fast from us, by the wicked practice of your
Confessors, and Friars and Monckes: John. 21.
we wanted godly Pastors, and especially good Bishops, unlike unto you, which
should have fed the flock of Christ committed to their charge, with that
heavenly food of the holy Scriptures, according to Christ his own institution.
And yet ye demand once again. Whether we wanted learned Priests, who could
deliver out so much of the holy mysteries, as was needful, which without
danger might have been expounded to unlearned men? What is this that you say
(Osorius) so much as is needful? do ye believe that in the Scriptures is any
thing to much? will ye prescribe any bounds or limits to the holy Ghost? our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was of an other mind, who spoke in this manner.
Luce. 4.
Man does not live by bread only, but by every word proceedyng from the mouth
of God. Your meaning is that some taste be taken only of the holy Scriptures:
Christ commands us to be instructed in every word: you teach that men should
warely touch so much of the heavenly doctrine, and as far forth as may be
without danger. But the holy Ghost by the mouth of Paul teaches far
otherwise, in these words. 2. Timo. 3.
All Scripture inspired by the holy Ghost, is profitable to teach, to
admonish, to reprove, to instruction, which is in righteousness, that the man
of God may be made perfect, and prepared to all good works. Paul does
commend unto us all heavenly Scripture, and judges that we ought to be
instructed with the same unto all perfection of godlynes. It pleases Osorius
that so much only be taken, as may be delivered without danger. O blasphemous
tongue, do you fear ieopardie in the doctrine of the holy Ghost? do you think
that there is to much in the Scriptures? or any thing needelesse that may be
cut of, and left out?

But this foolish demaunder proceeds yet forewardes and enquireth, If
heretofore wanted any that might supply the place of the unlearned, that might
pronounce this word, Amen. Truly I dare not term you by the name of an
Idiot, my Lord, being a stately Prelate and a profound Divine, but I shall not
do amiss if I call you a plain blockish Ass. Paul commands all doctrine
and all prayer to be uttered in the congregation, in a known tongue, that all
the people understanding the matter may say. Amen. You in stead of the whole
congregation, do appoint some one Idiote or unlearned Parish Clarke to utter
this word. Amen. But I beseech you with what reason, by what Custom, with what
Argument do you prove your Assertion? except you will object unto us the
monstrous rabble of your Cowled generation and Confessors, late vpstartes,
whose wickedness and ignorance we do condemn as execrable and abominable:
at the last our Sir Jerome concludes. That errors, vprores, pride, and a
thousand other discommodities, are wont to ensue by the understanding of
Scriptures. These do so in deed as you say Osorius, The knowledge of
Scriptures ignorance according t^ Osoriu^.
but they come from the devil, they proceed out of the durtie pudles of your
Massemongers, Confessors and Monckes, not from the pure rivers of holy
Scriptures, which are plentyfull unto us into everlasting life: John. 4.
Not from the engraffed word, which is able to save our souls: James. 1.
not out of the preachynges of the Prophets, to whom we must give diligent
heed as to a candle geuyng light in the dark: Peter. 1.
Lastly not from the readyng of holy Scriptures, which our Lord Jesus Christ
commanded us to search, because they be the same that hold most faithful
testimony of our Savior Jesus Christ. You may now perceive by these most true
and invincible sentences, partly taken out of the Decrees of our Lord Jesus,
partly out of the Apostles, how detestable, and blasphemous your conclusion is,
which does make the Scriptures to be Authors of all wickedness: when as by the
infallible testimony of the holy Ghost, Psalm. 12.19.
The law of the Lord, is an undefiled law, conuertyng souls, the testimony of
the Lord is true and gives wisdom to the simple, whenas the Statutes of the
Lord are right, and rejoice the heart, and gives light unto the eyes. In deed
this is the wisdom of your scarlet Doctors, whiles you are not contented to
persecute the professors of the Gospel with all manner of cruelty, but also
diffame the Gospel it self, and make it guilty of all naughtines. When
notwithstanding that godly reverend Elder Peter (whom ye do shamefully allege
as founder of your Church) does in express words pronounce, 1. Peter. 1.
That the word of the Lord, which endures for ever, is delivered unto us by
the Gospel: Now you do perceive Osorius, or the Christian Reader may easily
understand (although ye will exclame against it) how you have behaved your
self in this question, not only mischieuously and wickedly, but blockishly
and ignorau^tly, whiles ye do so blasphemously defend that prayers should be
ministered in the congregation in an unknown language, contrary to reason,
contrary to ancient Custom, contrary to nature and contrary to the holy Ghost.

And now glauncyng along by the rest of the doctrine of the Church, you make a
long rehearsal of my words, and yet touch not one syllable of the^ so much as
to confute them. Surely (my Lord) you are at very good leisure, when you can
spare so much time to entermixt whole sentences of mine in your writyngs, and
play mumme budget in the^ all, if you do allow them, why do ye recite them? if
you do not allow them, why do ye not reprehe^d some one of them? was ever any
man besides your self, so frantic, that would in a long discourse recite
whole sentences out of the writyngs of his adversary, and would refell nothing
in any one of them? This is very fond, foolish, childish, and utterly to be
scorned at, but it is altogether your own, the common fault of your self
Osorius. Consider I pray thee (Christian Reader) and behold what a sage and
wise adversary I have. At the last you take up that by the toe, which I did
confess. That we had shaken from our necks the Popes yoke. At this you seem
to be wonderfully displeased, yet I know no cause why you should not be
pleased withal. For you prove nothing, you discover nothing with any Argument,
but after your old manner heap up a number of slanders together, wherein is
neither truth, nor any likelyhoode of truth. At the last, you add hereunto a
devise no less wicked then false. To wit, that the ancient Church is
perverted by our Deuines and a new Church fashioned after our own fantasies.
Which do you call the ancient Church Osorius? truly you name the Catholic
and Apostolic Church to be ancient, or so you ought to say, founded in the
Patriarchs and Prophets, enlarged by our Lord Jesus and his Disciples with
undefiled doctrine, and vprightenesse of conversation. Have we perverted this
holy Church Osorius? have we erected a new? nay rather, the matter is quite
contrary. We do most reverently embrace this blessed Church, sealed unto us by
the finger of our Lord Jesus and ordered by the pure ordinances of his
Disciples: we do appeal unto this Church, the same Church do we urge against
you: and the same we do oppose against you, we combat against all your filthy
corruptions with the decrees of this Church. Herein we do persiste, and cleave
fast unto this Church, and fight against you in her defense directly with her
own weapons.

You are fallen away by little and little from this ancient Church the
invincible fortress of all truth, and have set your trust upon the whyueryng
reed of the Romish See. Then also you are so whirled up and down as it were
with whirlewyndes, with the whirlyng and unsavory Constitutions of Schooleme^,
each contrary to other, that ye ca^ find no ankerhold any where. Out of these
tempests and whirlewindes of vpstart doctrines, out of this immoderate gulf of
your idle brains, so manifold routes of feigned Gods peeped abroad, so many
sundry sorts of prayers, made unto them, so many and so tedious pilgrimages,
to dumme blocks, so many impieties of offrynges, inuocations, massinges,
adorations: Finally so many blasphemous markets, and fayres of pardons, and
redeemyng of souls out of Purgatory pickpurse are made. To this beadroll may
be linked, superstitious swarms of Friars, Mo^ckes and Nuns, sproutyng and
daily buddyng one out of an other, in infinite droues and innumerable factions:
This even this, is the true Image of your Church, Osorius, whereupon you do
brag so much, increased with the ofscombe of rascal brothells, made dronken
with the drousie dregs of Schoolmen, and so far estranged from the right
trade of the ancient and Apostolic Church, that there is scarce any hope,
that it will ever have any regard to her former duty, or ever return from
whence it is estrayed. In this your new Church or rather Conuenticle of
lozelles, which you have newly erected unto your selves with the motheaten
mockertes of your Schoolmen, you moyle and wallow after your accustomed manner.
We are desirous to renew the ancient dignity of the Catholic Church, as
much as in us lies. Hereunto we do employ all our endeuoures, to this we do
direct all our thoughts: that siftyng through, and throwyng away all the
damnable darnell which the enemy has scattered abroad at this present in
these new Churches, we may at the length be united and gathered again into
the true, and ancient worshyppyng of God, prescribed unto us by Jesus Christ in
his Gospel.

Of Christ being a king and a Bishop.
And here our old peevish wayward, piketh a new quarrel against me, because I
will not acknowledge any other chief Bishop, but Jesus Christ, and that I do
also by the name of a Bishop, call him a king. Truly I heartily confess, that
our Lord Jesus was both a Bishop, and a King, but that the name of a king, is
contained under the term of a Bishop is false, as you have set it down as
all other your doings are, for the most part Osorius. But our unconquerable
Logicia^ goes onward, and demau^deth, Why we do admit any other king besides
the Lord Jesus, and yet abandone the chief Bishop? whereas both dignities are
contained in the person of our Lord Jesus: and in this place our glorious
Peacocke pounceth out his feathers, and the same question repeateth again and
again very boyeshly, in other words and sentences. If it be lawful (says
he) that ye may have upon earth an other King, Vicare of that great king: what
reason is there that ye will not have an other most holy Bishop, Vicare of that
high Bishop? Will ye know why we do acknowledge a king upon earth Uicare of
that great and heavenly king? The holy Ghost shall most evidently and
expressly answer for us, and shall answer by the mouth of Peter, from whom
you derive your claim of supreme Bishop: 1. Pet. 2.
Be ye subject (says he) to every humane creature for the Lord, whether it
be to the king as chief over the rest, or to the Magistrates which are
appointed by him, to the punishment of the evil doers, and the commendation of
well doers, for this is the will of God. etc. Behold how plainly, how
distinctly, and how ple^tyfully, Peter does answer you: A kyngly power.
which by express speech, has settled the Majesty of kings, in the highest
place above all, unto whom he commands us to be subject for the Lord. Then
next under that authority, he places other Magistrates, whom notwithstanding
he ordeineth, to be Ministers of his high power. Besides this, he instructs
us withal, how commodious this authority of kings is, and whereunto it ought
to belong. Lastly to take away all doubt, he concludes that this Is the will
of God.

If you had any drop of shame at all in you Osorius: You would not have moved
this question so malapertly. Why we do acknowledge a kings authority upon
earth: When as ye can not be ignorant of this doctrine of Peter: nay rather of
ye holy ghost, being so evident, so firm, so notable, so ple^tyful, and so of
all parts defensible: When as also Peter a little after commands in this
wise, Fear God, honor the king. Romans 13.
When as Paul likewise does pronounce that A king is the Minister of God, to
whom he commands every soul to be subject, to whom he gives the sword,
and wills Tribute to be paid, in every of which things most royal and
principal souereignetie is contained. And to ye end the sentence of Paul
should stand firm out of all controversy, 1. Tim. 2.
he commands That prayers, intercessions, petitions, thankesgeuynges be
frequented for kings, and all others, that are set in authority. What say you
now, brablyng Sophister, what ca^ you hiss out against so many, so strong, and
so notable testimonies approuyng the authority of kings? What shall be done
unto you (brablyng Sophister) that will so maddely, so proudly, so
blasphemously kick against the doctrine of the holy Ghost? But ye allow of
the authority of a king (say you) in some respect, so that we will likewise
admit the supremacy of the high Bishop. We have already justified the
authority of a king, by the invincible testimonies of ye holy scriptures, if
you can in like manner coin unto us out of the same Scriptures, a chief Bishop,
we will yield. But you can not, for there is not one syllable of chief Bishop to
be found in the Gospel besides our Lord Jesus alone, and besides that
question moved of the rites and ceremonies of chief Priest, used of old
amongst the Jews. To the Hebrews every where.
Sithence therefore these things are so apparaunt, either you do wickedly
dissemble the truth, or you be shamefully ignorant in all Divinity, when as
in the mean time you being an old man and a Bishop, will needs be accoumpted
a most passing Divine. Here our Jerome tosseth and tumbleth to and fro, and
snatcheth after Sophistical shadows, but the more he trauaileth to get out,
the more he is entangled in perplexities.

He says that we defend the title of kings not the authority, because many
are found as well in Portingall as in England which do exercise kyngly
authority without the name of king, and those (a Gods name) he thinks must be
called petty kings. Truly I am not able to speak any certeintie of your
usage in Portingall. But of England I dare affirm, yt no man as of him self
does presume upon authority royal, further the^ he is thereunto authorized by
the king, neither do we know any such pettye kings: but of your shameless
custom in lyeng we are most assured, and the same can not choose but abhor,
in respect of your person. Like idle time ye bestow upon debatyng of your
Monarchy. As though it were as necessary, that there should be one chief
supreme Bishop over the universal Church of Christ, as we defend in England
the supreme power of the king. O most senseless Sophister. Perceive ye not how
your comparison is wrested to things that are mere contrary each to other?
Can you not see that the one part of your comparison, concerns the particular
Church of England, the other part indirectly altogether, all the whole
Churches of Christendom? And yet suffices it not that you play the fool
mo^struously your self, unless with your supposall ye make me partener also
of your errors, which all and every of my senses do utterly abhorte and
detest: nay rather your comparison ought to have been framed contrariwise. As
because in all several commonweals, several kings have the principal and
chief pre-eminence, so in all several Churches, several Priests should
govern, who ought to have singular authority in matters of Religion. After
this manner should your comparison have proceeded, if you had followed herein
the advice of Philosophy. But sithe^ce we argue now as Deuines, setting
Philosophy apart, we must enforce only the testimonies of holy Scriptures,
wherein because we find commanded by express words, yt it is ye will of
God, That we must honor the king, that we must obey the king, that we must be
subject to the king, that we must fear the kings sword, that we must pay
Tribute to the king, that we must make our supplication and prayers to God,
first and chiefly for the king, We can not choose but acknowledge, and
reverence this chief royal and kyngly authority, so often and in so many
sundry manners mentioned in ye Scriptures. As for your high and chief Bishop we
will make no more accoumpt of, then of a stranger until ye can justify his
supremacy by the authority of the holy Scriptures. And yet in the mean time
shall you find amongst us, all degrees of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical: by
the which all matter apperteining to the Church is duly and orderly executed.
Which albeit can not content our troublesome Prelate, yet we doubt not but will
thoroughly satisfy all virtuous, wise, and well disposed persons.

I did write that the garment of Christ was not cut in pieces amongst our
Deuines, as you seemed to conster of us; but that the Bishop of Romes Pall
peradventure was somewhat scratchte. What do you say to this? Do you make any
demonstration by holy Scriptures that we have divided or rent asunder the
unity of the Church? (I mean always the Catholic and Apostolic church)
do you allege any arguments hereunto? do you prove it with examples? you do
nothing less. What do ye then? truly eue^ as you are wont, and as you have
accustomed to do, and as ye have learned of your father the devil: that is to
say, you do continually throw out of that foul mouth, most noisome poison of
slau^derous lyeng: Wherein though ye be so nooseled yt he have stuffed up the
greater part of your Inuectiues with false and venomous accusations: Yet
because this place does bewray your mo^struous insole^cie by singular
demo^stratio^, I will set down here your own words, as you have pe^ned the^,
that the Christian Reader may by the same, discern the meekenes of a Bishop,
the modesty of an ancient Divine, and with what spirit also ye were inspired,
when ye vomited out this foul filthy choleric baggadge. And these are your
words.

When as ye do daily behold swarmyng round about you, such pestiferous
dissensio^s of sects and so horrible divisions, whereas you have no sure
faith, no agreement in Religion, whenas daily almost you bring in new
confessions, Articles of the Creed amended, old places blotted out, and new
places propte up in their places, when as many sundry sects grow and
increase, and the ancient Church is rent and cut in so many gobbettes, dare
ye yet say, that this falling away has not cut the garment of Christ in
pieces? A show of Osorius slanderous speech.
When as also ye see with your eyes, insolency, arrogancy, rebellion,
lauishnes of tongue, slanderous backbyting, lust, wickedness, uncleanness,
tumultes and vprores to attempt all things in all places boldly, wheresoever
your masters take once footyng? with what face dare ye affirm, that your
manners and conversation of life has been well ordered amiddes all this
rebellion? The matter declares it self evidently: daily examples make good
proof thereof, the places of public government, yea the most secret closettes
do bewray the same. Behold here (good Reader) the lively pattern of Osorius his
eloquence. Behold a mighty and unconquerable champion of the Romish See, is not
this fellow worthy to be made a Cardinal suppose you? that in so many
choloricke, sharp, venomous and Scorpionlike words has uttered nothing, but
that the most Rogishe Rascal coming out of some Brochellhouse would have been
half ashamed of? has he not made a trim speak against us, and proved
thereby that we have most haynously scattered abroad, and torn in sunder the
unity of Christ's Church? in this that he does nothing else, but exclaim
against us backebiters, insolent, slanderous, lecherous, wicked, unclean and
rebels? O frantic and mischievous raylour? of whose cursed speech, because
I have delivered this little taste, I will from henceforth as much as I may in
silence despise and pass over his infinite accusatio^s, and will deal with
his pretty poppet Arguments briefly. I did cite out of Paul. One God, one
Faith. Now (says he) neither one God, nor one Faith is received amongst the
Ministers of your Gospel. First of all, I did not signify of what opinion
every of us were particularly, but I showed what ought to be received of all
Christians generally. Then where you affirm that we do not worship one God
only, nor profess one faith only, how can you persuade so incredible a
matter? It is very manifest (you say) for one of you does sacrifice to lust, an
other to frenzy, an other to the paunche, an other to slau^deryng. Cursed be
thou, thou Chapplein of the devil. Thy sect does publicly worship a piece of
bread, insteade of a golden Calfe, and lies grouelyng on the ground before a
God made of bread: your solemnities be lo Bacchus, lo Venus. You are defiled
and contaminated with all kind of wickedness, you do most abhominably
maintain slewes, and Brothelhouses, and yet in the mean whiles will translate
your Idols unto us. But ye ca^ not Osorius, Printe, and painte and do what ye
list, ye ca^ not bring that to pass. All the world almost is so well
acquainted with your horrible filthy life, that a boy of seven years of age,
can point with his finger at the places, the persons, and the whole course of
your abominations.

But where as you add further, that there is one faith of Luther, an other
faith of Bucer, an other of Zuinglius, and an other of Calvin. This is your
old quarrel, always hacked upon, but never proved. These worthy persons and
grave Fathers of the Church were always of one faith: and of most agreeable
consta^cy, to the overthrow of your erreonious devises. In some points they
did vary, but in the substance of faith they were of one mind. The like
blemish happened to Augustine, Jerome and Cyprian, men very famous for their
learning and virtue: in Origin and Tertullia^ were somewhat greater blottes:
whose faith notwithstanding, as far forth as is agreeable with the Scriptures,
is not discredited by our Deuines, ne yet by your own Maistershyp (if a man
may be so bold to tell you, as also what I think you shall perhaps know
hereafter) in those your huge Uolumes entitled De Iusticia, The books of
Osorius De Iustitia.
wherein you are of a clean contrary opinion to that learned man August. in ye
thiefest part of all, not in any small matter, but in ye Treatise of
righteousness it self, wherein is contained the foundation of our faith: and
herein ye wrangle so bitterly, so obstinately, and so ouerthwartly that
Cardinal Poole did wonderfully reprehend your arrogance herein, and thereunto
replied with most godly words. Cardinal Pooles judgment of Osorius books of
Iustitia.
That the ability of man could not be to much embaced, and the power of God
could not be to much advanced. But since you can presume so much upon your
self, as with such proud boldness to attempt the overthrow of so notable a
father, in the principal point of our Religion: We need not marvel, that ye
can not forbear us, if we vary in small matters of no value: for amongst
them truly was no little controversy in matters of great importance, if they
might have had upright judges and learned, unlike to this our Osorius. The
function of the Apostles was equal, their Jurisdiction in all respect one,
whereby it comes to pass, that amongst them no one may be in highest
authority, and this have we partly approved before by the examples of Paul,
Peter and James, and the same also have I made so manifest in this Book, where
I treated of ye Monarchy of the Romish Prelate: That you have now no startyng
hole to hyde your head in.

You say that it is evident in the writings of Clement, of Euaristus, Lucius,
Marcellus and Pius, that they were of opinion always that the supremacy of
the vniuersa^l Church of Christendom was attributed to the Romish See. You
rehearse unto them Irenaeus, Augustine and other holy ancient Fathers.
Afterward you vouche the whole Register of Antiquity. What impudency is
this? What intolerable arrogancy, nay rather what retchiesse negligence and
singular foolishness is this? you do reckon up many Bishops of Rome by name,
and yet allege no one syllable so much out of their writings, to establish
this prerogative of this Romish See: no more do you cite out of Augustine and
Irenaeus, any one title for the maintenau^ce of this your Ierarchie. Lastly you
make mention of all the ancient antiquity, and yet vouch no one word out of
all that great number of years: whereby that may appear to be true, whereof
you make so stout a warraunt by your bare affirmative. Is this to be
accoumpted a Divine? Do ye defend the Romish See, no better? Have you no
better a Target to cover this your holy and Emperourlike power? Belike ye come
unto us a new Pithagoras, and would have the old Poesy in ure again (...).
(...) He has said.
But we yield not so much Osorius, we receive not your affirmative: neither can
you wring any thing out of our hands, in the conference of matters apperteinyng
to faith, more then that you shall be able to Justify by good and sound
Arguments. We follow not your says, as the which we have tasted to be almost
in all things most detestable. Wherefore if you mean to win any credit
herein: Let this be a watchword for you, that ye must unfold again, all that
lump of confused disputation, and abandone those unmeasurable raylinges,
forsake those clamorous exclamations, and renounce that unadvised rashness of
bare affirmatiues: and argue with probable reasons, justify with approved
Arguments, and make good proof by express sentences of holy Scriptures and
ancient Fathers. But you are well furnished with Fathers forsooth, for in your
Bedroll, ye have lapped together not only the old fathers, but unfold also
unto us a certain new School of Fathers. That is to say Ecckius, Coclaeus,
Rossensis and Pighius. Auaunte with all these sworn bondslaues of your
Monarchy: whereof part were common dronkardes, some lechers, and some
traitors, the remembrance of whom is odious as yet, and notoriously infamous
for sundry their notable crimes. Or if ye will needs allow of these dregs
of the Church, being in deed the sworn humble vassals of the Romish See. Yield
me this much again my request, to peruse the writings of Bucer, Melancthon,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr, Calvin and Beza, men most excellent in
conversation of life, and of singular learning. And ye shall see the contagious
botches of your Papacy, so raked abroad and ransackt by them, that ye will
never hereafter take any regard to any such scabbed Iades, if you be wise.

You seem to marvel much that I being a Ciuilia^, and exercized in pleadyng
temporal causes would spend my time to know your mysteries. Truly you are
herein somewhat to inquisitiue Osorius. For albeit I do profess the Civil
Law, yet am I a Christian and desire to be edified in the law of the Lord: And
if you will have this much granted unto you, to apply your self to the
knowledge of the tounges, to be addict wholly to the study of eloquence, to
raunge in the books of Philosopers, and will notwithstanding be accounted a
ruler of the Roast in Divinity, as in the special peculiar of your own
profession: look not so coye upon us poor Ciuilians I pray you, because we
give our endeavor to learn ye Statutes of Christian Religion, and are desirous
to bathe our selves somewhat in the lively wellsprynges of holy Scriptures,
wherewith we acknowledge our souls to be thoroughly watered to eternal life.
You are very much offended with me, because I did write That Gregory would not
acknowledge this extraordinary Papane pre-eminence: and ye do believe, that I
can not justify this to be true. If therefore I do cite the place, if I do
direct your singer to Gregory's own speeches, wherein he does mislike the name
of universal Bishop once, twice, thrice, and more, yea and as much as in him
lies, utterly detect and reject the same from him self, what shall men deem
of you reverend Prelate? which either of a singular ignorance know not, or of
an horrible impiety of gaynsaying, will dissemble so manifest a matter? so
confessed and so often rehearsed? and how dare you desire to be credited in
all the rest of your Protestations, when as your self have wiped away your
whole estimation by facyng out so false a proposition? Gregor. lib. ^. Epist.
^0. 24. lib. 7. Epist. 3^. lib. 4. Epist. 34. 38. 36. etc.
Look upon Gregory who that list, turn to the places that I have noted in the
Margent, and judge the honesty of this man. Nay rather have recourse thereunto
your self, and learn at the least to shake of this shameless custom of
cauillyng. I proved by the examples of the Apostles, that the pure, and
primitive Church did never acknowledge this Papal Monarchy. I cited to the
same effect, their successors Bishops of Rome, some that were godly men, and
Martyrs, which did never aspire to that superiority, and hereupon I argued,
that the same principallitie being altogether unknown to those best, and
purest ages of the Church, might also have been let slip over of us. What say
you unmeasurable brabler? why do you quarrel so bitterly? why do ye so
contumeliously stomach against me? why report you that I prove nothing, when
as I do make all things evident with examples? why do ye find fault with the
sequel of things then the which there can be none greater or more assured?
Finally why do ye reject those sayings as mere false, the falseshoode whereof,
ye endeavor not in one syllable so much as to discover? unless paraduenture
you be of opinion that your bare braules, shall be received as infallibe truths:
which I will never yield unto, as I have said before. I added also a little
after that we might lack this Papane Monarchy well enough, yea that we ought
to be without it, as well because the Gospel interditeth it, as also because
reason reclaimeth against it (At which words, the Gospel enterdityng) Our Sir
Jerome sets up his bristles and although he know my meaning, yet mooseleth at
the words, and accuses me that I can not express mine own meaning sensibly,
what say you Osorius. Are ye so suddenly fallen an old Doctor of Divinity to a
punie Scholar and carper of words, are ye so suddenly disgraded from a Reverend
Prelate and become a malicious and hungry fawconer of titles and sillables? O
gravity beseeming a Bishop, O fu^ctio most agreeable for those gray hears. But
let us view the matter it self. We ought to lack this Papane Monarchy (the
Gospel interdityngit) yt is to say because the Gospel does enterdite it,
forbid it, commands ye contrary, lets it, hinders it, withsta^deth it,
resists it, openly exclaymeth yt no such Monarchy be admitted. Do I not
speak after ye Latin phrase? does not every of these words properly and
plainly express the things that I mean? Enquire amongst all your
Massemongers and of that betlehead Dalmada your familiar and companion. They
will all condemn you for tomme trifler. And your sweet piggesnye Emanuell will
smoyle close in his sleaue, that somewhat is found out in the world at the
last, that exceedes his filthy Commentaries, and blockishnesse.

But our Aristarchus proceeds notwithstanding Peacock-lyke, and requires
proof, whereby the countermaunde may be manifest, that we should now be
subject to this only great Vicare of Christ? First of all, this do I answer,
that it is sufficient for me to deny all things with a bare nay, to him that
affirms all things by a bare yea: for there is no difference of authority
betwixt our estates, but ye ^urisdictio^ of a Bishop, which may hold your
charge of Siluain to consent, but touches not me. And therefore after that you
had packt together a tedious Epistle to the Queens Majesty full of reproaches
and slanders, and had in the same uttered all your cankred malice, against the
professors of true Religion, yet all the whiles had used thereunto neither
proof nor probability, it sufficed for me to have confuted that pestilent
inuectiue, fortified with bare affirmatiues only, even by the contrary thereof,
to wit bare negatiues. But now for as much as you have stopped up a few shardes
in these your last tedious Commentaries, though very hardly and quyte from the
purpose, yet as well as you could: I thought good to reply likewise with some
Arguments, thereby to overtake you at every loupe hoale. So that I have now so
enta^gled and snarled fast in coupe your Lordly Ierarchy, by force of holy
scriptures, eue^ with ye same tools, that you believed to have erected and
established it, that I need nothing doubt, of ye consent of all ye godly, but
yt they are fully satisfied herein. As for you nothing can content you, yt are
so captious in titles of words, as to slip from Divinity to extreme
Sophistry.

I affirmed that an Italian Monarche could not aptly be a ruler over us, and I
alleged the cause in these words. For the head ca^ not Conveniently be
distaunt from the members so far asunder: Here Osorius plays the man, and
utters all his skill at a brunt. And believes that some monster I cannot tell
what, lurketh in those words, and therefore rusheth upon me, with pretty young
questions. Must ye be taught to speak Latin (says he) for what means
this? What is this, co^uenie^tly to be distau^t? For that which agrees with it
self, does not dissent, wherefore when you say that some one thing is
conveniently distaunt, To be conveniently distaunt.
ye do not speak true Latin but use a monstrous kind of Latin phrase.
Listen hereunto again prattlyng Sophister. I do not affirm, that any thing
does conveniently disagree, as you do maliciously imagine: but I do plainly
deny, that the head ca^ conveniently be distaunt from the members. But you
being ignorant what difference is betwixt an affirmative, and a negative
proposition, must be turned down again behind the Schoolehouse door,
amongst the apsie boys, to learn this lesson again. And because you are so
gross of co^ceauyng, that ye ca^ not perceive a thing spoken briefly, and
aptly, I will rehearse my words again, and will apply hereunto other phrases
of the like effect. That all men may know, what a childishe and blockeheaded
adversary I have. This is it therefore. For the head can not conveniently be
distaunt from the members so far of. That is to say, it is not convenient
that the head should be so far asunder from the members, A friend does not
conveniently disagree from his friend: nor the Scholar from his Master, nor the
Servant from his Lord, ne yet the wife from the husband: That is to say it is
not convenient that the friend from his friend, the Scholar from his Master, the
Servant from his Lord, or the wife should disagree from her husband. What say
you Osorius, is any of these not spoken after the Latin phrase? are they not
uttered plainly? and properly? do ye not in all these conceive the negative
and not the affirmative? Are you not ashamed? do ye blush nothing at all at
this manifest fault and mark of your folly? I have a boy of sixten years
age, whom I keep to Grammar School, who should have felt the smarte hereof,
if he had made so foul an escape in these Grammar principles. Truly I am
weary long sithence (gentle Reader) to be so childishly occupied in siftyng out
the titles and sillables of words after this manner, but you may note the
amazedness and ouerthwartenes of mine adversary, to whom the fault must be
imputed according to reason, which being both bussardly blind in ponderyng bare
words, and also fondly frantic, and senseless in the substance of things,
does altogether deny any difference to be in this: how far so ever a sunder
the head be separated from the members so that they be united in one faith.
Surely experience has not only taught us here in England, but the practice of
all other nations also does plainly bewray his singular ignorance and
blockishnesse, what it is to be severed from Italy, by far distaunce of
regions when as in matters of Religion justice and equity could not be
ministered, but it must be procured with immesurable charges, and tedious
pursuit of many years. From which inconuenie^ces we have good remedy
provided through the special goodness of God. For we have in our own Realm
both Judges and Consistories.

But our reverend Father ca^ not digest this by any means, that the Queens
Majesty should entermedle with ye Church, and after a long frivolous preamble
after his accustomed manner at the length choppeth down to a sentence of mine,
videl. The Queens Majesty is Lord over all manner of persons in England.
Dominari.
And these words he supposes to be spoken barbarously: because the
government of a king is not with force and Tyranny, nor tends to keep his
Country people, (whom he has undertake to defend of a fatherly love) in
servile subjection nor is referred to the consideration of his own profit,
but to the public sauetie of his subjects: And therefore, says he, it is
false that a king does rule as a Lord unless we should take him for a Tyrant
rather then a king. Harken I pray you, harken unto this Alderma^ brable, harken
unto this most subtle corrector of the Latin tongue. There was never such an
other Valla, or Varro in our time: for this our notorious Prelate does far
surmount all Vallaes and Varroes who by his fine pythe and polished Judgment
has fishte a Poole and caught a Fool: and with his new sharpness of wit,
has espied that, whereof no man could ever conceive so much as a shadow in his
dream, what say you, my Lord Bishop, does no man rule as a Lord, except he be
a Tyrant? Ergo, no man is a Lord unless he be a tyrau^t, if at least he bare
any rule. Truly you had need of Helleborous to purge that Calves brains. Romans
14.
Our Lord Jesus Christ is said sometimes to be a Lord of the quick and the
dead, sometimes to be a Lord in heaven, and in earth, and in all the holy
Scriptures throughout is called by this name Lord. Therefore this your
blasphemous and horrible Grammar distinction ought be accounted a Tyrau^t, this
can not be denied. Becomes you an old Bishop to utter such mockeries? can you
being a Prelate either through fury or maddenesse to be so frame shappenly
translated to be openly frantic and make your self a laughyng stock to
little boys? Truly I am ashamed in your behalf, for I did never see so great,
so foul, and so monstrous absurdities in a man of such years, that has been
all his life long conuersaunt in learning. A miserable distinction of Osorius.
Afterward you do make a very subtle distinction I promise you of the
authority of kings: yt is to say, though they govern all their subjects,
yet are they not Lords over all causes. Yes in deed (good sir) they are
Lords over all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, which may seem to
apperteine to the good government of the common wealth. How far and in what
causes kings do bean rule.
And yet they do not minister in their own persons in matters Ecclesiastical,
as I wrate before: for how can they so do? but they do assign and authorize
other Magistrates under them, who may execute every thing in due order. In like
manner albeit Emperors be only chief of their Armies, yet have they under them
Centurians, Lieutenau^ts, Serieauntes, Corporals, and other meaner officers,
which do train in due order and exercize the whole affairs, the rest of the
Soldiers. So do Masters of Nauies and Ships, appointe under them their
Mates, and Boateswaynes, and other meaner degrees to their several offices, by
this means to preserve their course the better at Seaboorde: whereby appears
that the chief authority is resiaunt always in the chief and known estates,
but the travail, toil, and execution of orders, is ministered by inferior
Magistrates.

But ye require to make demonstration how these things can be so? First of all,
your question is worthy to be scorned, being so void of reason: to have
evident demonstration to be made of those things which common course of man's
life, and daily practice of all commonweals, may assure you, were you never
so void of sense. But I will satisfy that captious grossehead of yours in
this matter, with three words. I do affirm that the authority of kings is
above all other, and yet that kings them selves do not minister in
Ecclesiastical matters. Which two are most manifestly proved as well by the
government of kings in the old Testament, as also in the later age, in the
time of the new Testament. For David, Solomon, losias, Ezechias, and other
godly kings amongst the people of Israel, did command the Priests in
matters of Religion: yet did not they entermedle with execution of any thing.
In the time of the Gospel, Paul that great teacher of the Gentiles
commands That intercessions and public prayers be made with faith and
truth, first of all for kings, then for all others that are set in authority.
1. Timo. 2.
Peter also that excellent Elder, (For other name then Apostle or Elder did he
never acknowledge, howsoever you do co^uey your false Papisticall See from him)
Peter (I say) in open and express words does verify my saying, Peter. 1.2.
when as he gives commandment in this wise. Submit your selves to every
humane creature for the Lords sake, whether it ^ee to the king as most
excellent, or to the Magistrates as to them that are sent by him, assigning the
punishment of the wicked doers and the laud and praise of them that do well,
for so is the w^ll of God. Behold you have both my propositions out of Peter.
First the chief and most excellent authority of kings, then rulers and
Magistrates sent and assigned by kings, for the punishment of the ungodly, and
the comfort of the godly. Lastly you hear also, that it is the will of God,
that by this means execution of Justice may duly proceeed. Wherfo^^ cast away
all your cauillations, and being an El^^r your self (if you be wise) give
attentive and speedy ear to Peter the Elder. You thunder out your malicious
slanders against the demeanor and ignorance of our Bishops, and discharge
your venomous stomach against them. And here unhappily as it chanced, ye
begin your talk with extreme incongruitie, yea redoubling ye same for your more
skill.

Il^^ne.
For thus ye write. What Bishops name you (Illino) whether they whom you have
disgraded from their Sees, and deteine them in chains? Illi.
or (Illi) they rather who^ you have taken out of Brothelhouses and Tauernes
and have enstalled in the degree of holy Bishops? False Latin in Osorius,
puttyng Illi, for Illos,
Is it eue^ so proud comptroller? Can you make so evident a fault contrary the
principles of Gra^mar and write Illi they, in steed of Illos them? Enquire of
your wormeeate^ companion Dalmada, he will amend your escape, and will be sorry
that you have s^ypped your pen so childishly, I do meddle with these trifles
much against my will, neither would I have done it at all but to tread down
your hautynesse a little, which can continually quarrel with me for titles, and
sillables, yea and without cause. I know that such escapes chanced many times
to Tully him self: but I ought not forgive you any fault at all, considering
you do so with cruel words ^ourge my poor speech, though otherwise both clean
and pure Latin. And now this I do answer to that your filthy accusation
against our Bishops: Ofori. railing against our Bishops of England. 1. Timo. 3.
that they are replenished with more ornaments of true Bishops (whereof Paul
made mention to Timothe) then Osorius has, or ever will have except he shape
him self to a new man betymes. And how much ye more their virtue and godlynes,
beau^ified with singular learning, is manifestly approved and extau^t to all
our ears and eyes: so much more detestable and hateful is your quarrel
against those ancient Fathers, especially for that you do rage so beastly
against your brethren, who^ ye never have seen, nor do know. Paul commands
that a Bishop be unreprovable, but you do not only reprove, but maliciously
deface the estimation of Bishops, who have never offended you in word or deed,
I pray you good sir, how can you clear of reprehension and fault, that your
ca^kred choler so lauishly vomited against those grave Fathers whom you know
not? You demand also why those same Bishops, did not undertake the defense of
Religion against you? and by what means I crept thereunto being a Ciuilian?
Truly I do franckely acknowledge my self to be a Ciuilian (Osorius) and not a
Divine. As for you, you are neither Ciuilian nor Divine, and therefore I might
be the more ^old to try Maistrie with you. Let any men that will peruse that
your tedious Epistle to her Majesty, and he shall find nothing therein, but
huge heaps of idle words, mad mazes of long Sentences, full of
irksomeness, unmeasurable and heinous lies and slau^ders against true
godliness. Again let your second great Uolume be laid abroad, what is in it
else but a dounghill of tauntes and reproaches against me? No sparcke of
Divinity except those pestilent devises forged out of Schoolmen, of pardons,
of couled Uipers, Confessions, flames of Purgatory, and other patcheries of
these late vpstartes. Wherefore if ye will provoke our Bishops to disputation,
you must open your Budget, and make a show of better ware, of purer, or at
lest somewhat more learned Divinity: then you shall find what spirit and
courage they be of, in the mean time, whiles they are occupied in matters of
more importance, you may content you with Haddon, being but a mean
adversary, which has and will always have skill enough to suppress your
insolency, and confute your trifles.

You demand an other question touching our Bishops. By what Religion, by what
Ceremony, by what authority they were instituted? who laid hands upon them?
who consecrated them? how holyly? how sincerely this matter was executed? I
answer you at a word. Hands were laid upon them lawfully, and prayers
likewise poured out for them, according to the prescript ordinance of the
Gospel, we do use our own ceremonies, like as you do yours, and as other
Nations do minister their own. At the last you Enquire of their holiness,
foolishly forsooth, considering it is an inward action of the mind, and whereof
no man living can pronounce any certainty: Ye murmur I can not tell what Of a
confused function of Bishops and Deuines, because I ascribed the office of
administration of the Sacraments to Bishops, but of determinyng causes to
Deuines. As though Bishops are not Deuines, and Deuines Bishops? or as though
several functions may not be undertaken many times in ye Church? or as though
Bishops being the chiefest of ye Clergy, have not a charge to execute matters
apperteinyng to the Church in their own right: or as though this question
seems not to have proceeded from a captious Sophister, rather the^ from a
gray headed Bishop. You say That the rumor goes abroad how that our Bishops
are chosen to this end especially, that being contented with some portion of
Revenues of their Byshoprickes, the rest should be confiscate unto our
possession as a clear gain. If this be a rumor, this rumor is wicked and
slau^derous, and such a one, as the gravity of your person should stop your
ears from, and deceit in heart. But if this lie be devised by you, and your
fraternity, into how horrible a sin do ye wilfully drown your selves, that
will scatter such wicked slanders against your brethren who^ ye know not? But
you say that I and such as I am, are charged with the greater part of this
infamy, for when we choose such Bishops, we give just cause to men to conceive
some suspicion of our avarice and covetousness: Ye write monstruously Osorius:
Do we choose Bishops? or do I choose Bishops? how long and in what places has
this custom prevailed, that every particular subject or the vulgar multitude
should choose Bishops? your fra^ticke communication denounces you a man more
worthy to be whipped in Bedlem, the^ to be disputed with all in Schools. For
ye seem to be altogether void of common sense. The election of our Bishops
Sir Jerome, is ordered according to the ancient, and best received Canons: and
choice is made by the Deane and Chapter of the most excellent in virtue, and
learning: The Prince does confirm the election. The Archbyshops do consecrate
them that are chosen: Of who^ some are nothing inferior to your Master ship
in auncientie of race, wherein you vaunt your self so much, yet this descent
in ge^try, was not valued of Paul amongst the virtues, and qualities, which
he assigned to a Christian Bishop: But other ornaments, where with I wish you
were better acquainted: perhaps ye would then seem somewhat a worse
Rhetorician, but sure I am you would be far better Bishop. But now you have
enured your self so much to unmeasurable raylyng, that ye seem rather a
common brauling Thersites, Thersites a notable brauler Homer in Iliad.
the^ a meek Prelate.

You think that I yield to much to the authority of kings, because I
affirmed that the kings of Israel did rule the Priests in matters of
Religion. And this you say is not true. Why so, I pray you? Out of the books
of the Kings and Paralipom.
is it false because you say that it is false? O notable Pithagoras, the
credit of your naked affirmatiues being bolstered up with no reason nor
witness be not crept so far on high benche as yet, to be taken for Judges,
I did allege a little before David, Solomon, Josias, Ezechias. Peruse who so
list, the Chronicles of them, and the^ let him decide this controversy betwixt
us. The sentences of Paul and Peter in the new Testament are very manifest, as
I have said before. For Paul Commands prayers to be made for kings, and
for all other set in authority. In which sentence you may discern a distinct
degree of Power, and Nobility, and unless you will be blinded with malice
conceived against the truth, you may also see the king to be placed first and
highest. In the same wise Peter Submit your selves to every humune creature for
the Lord, whether to the king, as most excellent, or to the Magistrates, as
being appointed by him. Lo here the like degrees, lo here also the king
placed chief, and most excellent. Here you cry out and exclame Comically, or
rather tragically. O heaven, O earth, O the Seas of Neptune. When as it had
been better for you to stop that lauishe foul mouth, with the evident
testimonies of the Apostles. But you proceed on rather Saying, if kings
obtain the highest authority, the whole world would be turned vpsidowne as ye
think: for that kings would be subject to flatterers, and so nothing could
be executed in due order and truth, but all things would be governed after the
lust of flatterers. First of all, kings of this our age are much beholding unto
you surely, and amongst the rest your own king especially. The courts of
Princes subject to flatterers.
For if it be true that you stamp out so boldly, that all Counsels of kings
are corrupted by flatterers, what one thing do ye leave upright in their
government? Behold (my good Lord) and behold earnestly, how trecherously and
perillously you beguile your self with rashness and ignorance, that blemish
all regiment of kings with so common an infamy. But admit unto you for this
time, that your saying is true in this respect that to to great store of
flatterers swarm in Princes Courts. What then? does this let, that in the
Palaces of your holy Monarchies, this kind of vermin (that we call a
flatterer) is not fostered? is not dallied with all? yea n^urished, and had in
high price? I will pass over mine own neighbors and will refer you to all
that new puddle of Schoolmen, amongst whom you shall not find any one sound
Exposition of Divinity, but whole Commentaries of flatteries and Parasiticall
poison.

For they beautify the Pope with these Titles videl. The Popes Parasites.
They call him the Sun of the world, they ascribe unto him both swords
Temporal and Spiritual. They create him the Lord of Purgatory. They advance
him above the authority of the Canon Laws. They deny that he is to be
directed by any other person. They affirm in their writings that the Pope
has all laws engraven, or rather locked fast in the closet of his heart. They
say that the Pope can be guilty of no fault, though he throw many thousands
Souls into hell, they make the Pope high Steward of Pardons, as though they
were the treasury of the Church, so that he may forgive infinite sins both
past already, and sins not yet committed. Furthermore they have enthronized
him chief Uicare of Christ upon earth, who can neither err him self, nor
bring others into errors: unto whom only all general Councels must be in
subjection, at whose feet Emperors and Kings ought to prostrate them selves:
last of all whom all Christendom must honor, and worship as an earthly God.
These blasphemous flatteries, detestable and horrible blaunchyngs, are not
uttered only by mouth, at all adventure, but are extaunt in the monuments and
books of the Romish patrones, written by them advisedly and in earnest. Can
you charge any kings Courts with the like? Ye name Henry the eight a most
excellent king endued with all kyngly ornaments, King Henry the viij.
who ye say took unto him absolute authority over his subjects, through the
enticeme^ts of flatterers and love that he bare unto the^, boylyng also with
malice against the Bishop of Rome, from out which fountain forsooth, I know
not how many floudes of wickedness and mischief did issue. These be no proofs
of a sober Bishop (my good Lord) but dro^ke^ dreams of a drousie Sophister.
For the noble king of most famous memory attempted nothing, either of love, or
of hatred, or by procurement of flatterours. But when he perceived that it was
most evident by the Gospel that generally all England was committed unto him,
as his proper peculiar charge as well by the authority of Gods law, as man's
law, he banished out of his Realm that foreine authority, and resumed his
own lawful government wholly into his own hands, studying to reserve the
same inviolable to him self, as meet was: wherein he performed the duty of
a wise, and perfect king, and easing so his subjects of great, and importable
travails, and charges, he left unto his successors a very rich and
florishyng kingdom. But touching the Justice executed upon More and Roffensis,
was not without much sorrow of his Royal heart, in respect of their wit, and
learning: But after that they were publicly attainted of high treason, and
would by no persuasion be reclaymed from their wilful errors, he must needs
suffer the law to proceed against them, left wynking at their treachery, he
might have opened a greater gappe of obstinacy and rebellion to others.

At ye length you are come to Peter's words, but by ye way spurnyng at me, and
calling me a most filthy person. Wherein you do me no small injury like a
wicked Sophister. You demand of me out of what words of Peter, I framed my
sentence, which I vouched before, touching the superiority of kings? whether
that enduced me, because Peter does name the king to be most excellent? Not
that only (grave Gentleman) but the whole process of Peter's communication.
You do argue in this wise: That men are many times called excellent either in
nobility or learning, because they be very notable therein, not because they
are set in authority above all men: and here a Gods name it pleases you to
produce me for example: whom though some may be of opinion to excel in the
knowledge of the Civil Law, yet will not forthwith under that title, yield unto
me the like commendation in the interpretyng of holy Scriptures. All this
matter is resolved at a word (O counterfeit Grammaria^) For if according to the
doctrine of Peter, and Paul, certain degrees be limited in each dignity,
and by the same doctrine likewise determined, that ye royal dignity of a King
does excel above all other power: Then is it manifest by the same decree, that
the authority of the king must be honored without all comparison as chiefest:
But after your wonted guise ye run at raundon with many words, concerning
the meaning of Paul, and of a distinction to be made betwixt the civil and
Ecclesiastical authority. First of all no man can so snaffle that unbridled
tou^g, but that it will roue and raunge triflyngly whether it lusts: And yet
the meaning of Paul and Peter can not be unknown to any men, that will have
but a will to understand it: for they do make a division, or special
distinction of Magistrates by certain degrees, and in the same do precisely,
and manifestly ascribe chief rule, and highest authority to kings: And albeit
ye triumph iolylye in your difference of times, yet this will nothing prevail
you.

For ye believe that this speech of the Apostles, ought not to be applied to
Christian kings, because it was written in the time of wicked Emperors, which
were enemies to Christian Religion. Consider the sayings of the Apostles more
advisedly peevish Prelate, and acknowledge once at last your own
unskillfulness. Peter writes in this manner. Submit your selves to every humane
creature for the Lord, whether it be to the king as to the most excellent, or
to the Rulers as unto them who are sent by him to punish the wicked doers, and
to advance the well doers. Now therefore I demand this question of you
(Osorius) whether God did send Nero that sauadge and beastly cruel Tyrant,
Sueto. in the life of Nero.
and (as you know) an horrible bloudsucker of Christian profession, to punish
the wicked and advance ye well doers? if ye affirm that he did, you are
mad: if ye deny it, then all your former Assertion, lies in the durte. Let
us see likewise what Paul says. Whose sentence herein is much more
plentyfull: Romans 13.
Princes (says he) are not fearful to well doers, but to the wicked: will thou not fear the power? do well then, and thou shall have praise of the
same, for they be the ministers of God appointed for thy wealth. But if thou
do evil, then fear thou, for they bear not the sword in vain. For they
be the ministers of God to take vengeance on them that do evil. What say you
now? could this speech of Paul touch Nero in any respect, which embrued his
sword in ye blood of innumerable Christians? who always oppressed the
innocents? who wallowed all his life long in all manner of outrage and
cruelty? No discreet or sober person, will think so. But albeit the Apostles
being enspired with the holy Ghost, gave these precepts in the time of
tyrannous Emperors, yet they had relation thereby to Christian and godly
kings: because they should undertake the defense of their subjects, and
should be nurses of the congregation of Christ, according to the Prophecy of
Esaias. And yet due obedience is not thereby forbidden to be given unto kings in
Civil causes, though they be in^idels: as appears manifestly both by the
example and doctrine of our Savior Christ. You are contented that kings
should be placed above the Nobility, Civil Magistrates and other officers in
temporal causes, according to the saying of Peter, but not to be above the
holiness of Churches, nor the profession of Relig^ous persons, ne yet to
reconcile the favor of God. Paul commands every soul to be in subjection
to the higher power, amongst whom the king is chiefest: Romans 13. Math. 17.
^uce. 20.
And therefore all ye Bishops, together with all other what soever
Ecclesiastical orders, are holden subject under the authority of the king,
unless ye be without souls, as perhaps your maistershyp is: if then ye be
subject to kings, ye ought to obey their commandments, Wherein the office
of a king consists.
unless they prescribe against God. And yet they bear no function in your
Churches, nor ^it in your Churches as rulers of them, nor administer the
Sacraments: but they may and ought to chastize you, and reduce you into good
order, if happily ye neglect your duties, or behave your self unseemly in
your function, which is to be approved by the authority of both the old and
new Testament, as it is oftentimes repeated before.

To confirm your Assertion you bring for example Core, Dathan, and Abyron, of
a singular blockishnesse and ignorance. For they made Rebellion against Moses,
and to use the very words of the holy Scriptures. They were gathered together
against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.
and said unto them. Ye take enough and to much upon you, seeing all the
multitude are holy every one of them and the Lord is amongst them. Why lift
you your selves up above the Congregation of the Lord? Behold here in this
their execrable speech, over and besides a most pernicious rebellion, we hear
also in the same one only equabilitie in all degrees. For as much therefore as
they did abrogate all manner of authority from Magistrates, being appointed by
God, as the Anabaptists of our age do practice, they were according to their
desert swallowed up of ye gapyng gulf, provided by God for that purpose: But
why do ye thrust these persons into the stage, who ca^ occupy no part of the
play? For we do neither entreat of any Rebellion, nor of any traiterous
suppression of Magistrates, but our communication tends to this end, whether
kings have any lawful government over Ecclesiastical persons? No less
foolishly have ye patcht to your purpose, Oza, Ozias and Balthesar, whom ye do
affirm to have been grievously plagued of the Lord, because they did rashly
handle holy things: and thus ye say was done according to their deserte.
Likewise should our kings be worthily punished of the Lord, if they would
undertake to minister Baptism to infantes, or would in their own persons
distribute the Lords Supper, or clymbe up into pulpittes, and usually preach.
For they should entrude into other men's functions, namely Ministers, and
Elders, whom God has peculiarly chosen to execute those orders in Ministry.
Even so the Lord has advanced kings in highest superiority, because they
should commau^de, and provide that all matters should be executed, by others
their subjects in due and convenient order. This doctrine being both ^ounde
and profitable, approved by the testimonies and examples of the purest ages,
and most applyable to the ordinance of holy Scriptures, yet this our pelting
Prelate seems so squeymishe at it, that he spares not to curse us to the
pit of hell, because we will not agree with him in his most frivolous
Assertions.

Ye marvel much, why I am so hatefully bent against the Bishop of Rome and why
I do always inueighe at him. Truly I do not hate the Bishop of Rome, for
he never did me any injury personally: it is his extraordinary superiority,
that I write against. Because in my opinion it is a manifest rebel against the
holy Scriptures, against salvation and the whole state of Christianity:
Neither do I reprove their Canons, especially those, which were established
in that first and purer age of the Church: ne yet those later Canons such I
mean, as do concern Judicial Courts. Which teach good and commendable
precepts and rules for the administration of Justice. But I do utterly detest
and as much as in me lies abhor those ambitious, and flatteryng
constitutions, and pestilent dispensations, and such like infinite filthy
absurdities, erected for the procurement of dignities, or for pillyng and
pollyng of coin. I will allege two holy constitutions for example sake.
Whereof the one is described in these words: Distinct. 22. Cap. Omnes.
The Lord has committed the charge of all earthly and heavenly Empire, unto
Peter being appointed porter of eternal life. What Christian heart can
willingly suffer such Sathanicall arrogancy to be yielded unto a mortal
creature? And yet I will show one other of the same stamp far more
horrible. Decrees full of blasphemy.
The Pope has an heavenly will, and in those things that his will is bent
unto, his will must be taken for law, neither can any man say the contrary why
he should not do so: For he may dispense beyond all law, and make that to be
right, that is quyte contrary, in amendyng and alteryng of laws: because the
fullness of all power rests in him. These be those golden Decrees for sooth,
wherewith our Sir Jerome would have us yoked. This is that notable Jurisdiction
of that Papane See, for the which our Osorius waxes so whotte: That (though I
burst in sonder) yet ought all Christian Nations be subject unto it (as he
affirms.) But I on the contrary part do justify, that this Papane supremacy
is no more mentioned in the Scriptures then a meare stranger, The Popes power.
and so altogether unknown unto Peter, unto Paul, and the rest of the
Apostles, and to the succeedyng course of the primitive and purer Churches,
that there was never one word spoken of it, until the reign of the Tyrant
Phocas, at what time was the very first hatchyng of it. Afterward in deed by
little and little through pride, pillage, and peltyng flatteryng, it enhaunced it
self so far above measure, that it claymeth now Jurisdiction over Heaven,
Earth, and Seas, as I have declared somewhat before, and does more ple^tyfully
appear by other blasphemous Decretalles, published by the very mouths of
these holy Popes them selves. Wherefore this extraordinary Jurisdiction of the
Pope, is a most frivolous, painted, disguised, and deformed frameshapen
chaungelyng, though Osorius would hang him self therefore. And kingly
authority shall bear chief pre-eminence upon the earth, according to the
sundry and everlasting testimonies both of the old and new Testament, unto the
which Peter and Paul do in express words subscribe, and whereunto all
co^me^dable antiquity, and most approved au^cientie, have willingly yielded
their agreeable consent, which has always exercized their government in so
well disposed moderation, as being contented with her own limits and
territories, has not licentiously presumed unlawful claim over all the
world, as your most arrogant chair of pestilence does challenge: whose
insatiable greedy gapyng for filthy lucre the heavens, the earth, nor hell it
self is able to satisfy. You affirmed in your Epistle: that through the
abolishyng of your Canons, all fear, and care was utterly rooted out of our
hearts. I made answer, that many men were wonderfully enriched by your
Canons: but very few enduced to have any especial regard to fear God by ye
knowledge of them. But you trustyng to discredit mine answer, demand a
question of me, Whether the Civil Law do instruct men in the fear of God?
which albeit they do not (say you) yet the monumentes thereof ought not be
consumed with fire. What is the matter Osorius? How hanges this together? The
question was moved of Canon Laws, and you on each part vbrayde against us the
Civil Law. Our communication was concerning the fear of God, You deny that
the Civil Laws ought to be burnt. Are ye starcke drunk? or do ye babble this
out in a dream? Are ye not ashamed of this monstrous talk? truly it is very
irksome to me, and I am thoroughly tired out with so blockish an adversary.

I affirmed that the authority of the Canon Laws did so far forth prevail
with us, as they were found agreeable to godlynes: and that Justice was
ministered by the Decrees thereof in our Ecclesiastical Courts. You marvel
how this ca^ be true for so much as Luther had already burnte them all. First
of all I demand this question of you. Why do ye marvel at that thing now,
which earste ye did so constauntly deny? why did you so without all shame
dissemble in matters so evident? Wherewithal neither all Portingall nor your
Maistershyp could, but be acquainted, considering the daily intercourse and
continual traffic betwixt us. Again what moves you to name Luther herein?
Uerely we for our parts have the name of Luther in such great admiration, that
we do firmly believe that you might likewise have easily been his Scholar in
Divinity. All which notwithstanding, we name not our selves Lutheranes, but
Christians: neither do we judge any man so absolutely perfect amongst the
whole ofspryng of Adam: whose words and deeds we may accoumpt without
exception unreprovable. Furthermore I found fault with you, because you
accused our Preachers, as though they taught in their public Sermons,
unpunishable liberty in sinning: and herein I likened your saucie
malapertenes, to little better then to blasphemy, because with so horrible
reproach you did infamously slander ye doctrine of the Gospel, preached by
our Deuines: which sentence after your wonted guise you turn in and out, and
pervert the same from things to persons: and say that I do ascribe Divine
Godhead to Luther, Bucer, and Martyr. O monstrous vermin: did I ever speak
or think any such matter? I did esteem them in deed, when they lived as
famous and worthy personages, in respect of their learning and godliness, in
like manner now they are dead, I will defend the remembrance of their names as
much as I may, namely Bucer, Martin Bucer.
and Martyr, Peter Martyr.
with whom I was familiarly acquainted: and did know them, to be ancient godly
Fathers exquisite in all virtue and learning, and so much more furmountyng you
in Divinity, as you do excel that your drawlatche derlyng Dalmada in your
deintie delicacie of ye Latin tou^g. But sithence it has pleased you with so
gross and foolish a lie, to forge new gods for me, who^ I should worship: I
will be bold by our leave to disclose your Idol, The Idol of Rome.
whom maugre your teeth ye shall not deny, but your self do worship with
Divine honor, I mean that Romish Prelate of the Papal See: The which for
as much as (according to your own saying) has authority to dispense with
sins, by virtue of his Bulls, not for a day, a month, or for a year only
but for ever and ever, which also keeps the keys of heaven at his pleasure,
wherewith he gives the kingdom of heaven unto some persons, and from others
locketh it fast, which is invested in the fullness of all power: and is ye
undoubted Uicare of God: to whose most royal majesty: all and every other
powers and Magistrates must humble, yield and submit them selves: Whereas (I
say) you allow of all those titles of dignity, and not only teach and
defend them in this your unbridled insole^cy, but also so lustely and
courageously vau^te and raise up your crest: What do you else in that blazyng
bravery of speech, but coin to your self and others, a most manifest Idol
which you may worship, before whom you may prostrate your self, and most lowly
and humbly make intercession unto.

And therefore dissemble Jerome as ye list, yet that is your Romish Idol. Your
self also a manifest Idolatour. You must with all willyngly endure all
travail be it never so hard, to attain the favor and blessyng of that your
God: perhaps you may pick up some crommes thereby, and through him be
promoted so high, that ye may more nearely behold yt your earthly God, and be
enstalled under his elbow in his palace, wherein you may do sacrifice unto his
Majesty. You say that I do provoke you to disputation. This is untrue. I do
not provoke you, but confute your false accusations, wherewith you charge us as
mainteinours of a faith void of all virtue and Religion. And ever among you
thrust in the name of Luther. What pertains that to us? Cast out your
challenge to some one Divine in England by name, The books of Osorius de
Iustitia. Ten.
you shall see how quickly he will take up your glove, and with no labor crush
your Sophistical canes in pieces, You do wish me to peruse those your books
entitled De Iustitia, and in the^ you say that I may thoroughly satisfy my
self touching the iustifyeng of faith. Truly I have perused your Uolumes
divided into three books entitled De Iustitia, in the first whereof ye speak
much in the commendation of faith, and therein use testimonies and Arguments,
who does reprehend you herein, I pray you? And yet all that your endeavor has
obtained no more, but to show your self an unnecessary arguer in an undoubted
controversy. Of the same stamp also is your second book, wherein you commend
much the worthynes of good works: and herein we do nothing dissent from you,
but will advance the same as much as you will wish us. But your third book,
is almost altogether a Pelagian, and being thoroughly poisoned with the heresies
of the Greek Church, does blasphemously inueighe against the free mercy of God
the Father in Christ Jesus: and namely against S. Augustine, an vnvanquishable
patron of the heavenly grace. And therefore this your gaye poppet, so
gorgiously painted, which likes your self so well, is partly frivolous,
overwhelmed with to much tattlyng, and partly wicked and execrable, whiles it
practizeth to tra^sforme us from natural men almost to be Gods. Neither am I
alone of that opinion, for Cardinal Poole also was for the most part of the
same Judgment: who^ although Rome had maruailously disguised, yet all men knew
to be far better man in living, and much more expert in Divinity then you
are: he did always withstand your attempt of publishyng in printe, that your
delicate impe, which you as the^ did so louyngly embrace, and had in so great
estimation, as your own derlyng. And accomptyng the same to be most perilous
and pestiferous, gave this famous verdit thereof worthy to be deeply engraven
in the very entrails of all Christian hearts. Cardinal Poole his judgment of
Osorius his books.
It is not possible (says Cardinal Poole) it is not possible to yield to much
to the mercy of God, nor to abase the strength of man to much. If you had had
so much grace, as to have conceived and emprinted in your brains this doctrine
of humility and abacement, you would never have so nakedly stripped Christ of
his grace, nor so hautely and arrogantly enhaunced the power of man's will: ne
yet so proudely and boldly reproved and despised S. Augustine.

This word Osor. signifies bold in the Portingall tongue. Ascham.
But what dare not Osorius do, who according to the nature of his name dare
boldly presume upon all things? peradventure you will demand, how I knew
Pooles mind herein. I will tell you. Our familiar and very fre^d not unknown
unto you M. Ascham did sundry times aduertize me thereof, affirmyng yt he did
hear ye same uttered by the mouth of the Cardinal him self. This also does
trouble you very much, because I affirmed it to be your own error, as which
being imagined in your own braynsicke mazer, you would falsely lay to others
charge. What then? did I not say the very truth herein? is it not your own
lie, your own heinous act? your own slander? yea your own error? feigned,
coined, and imagined by your self, though afterward you would poast it over
to others without cause? And yet you spare not to pinche me cruelly for so
saying. And amongst other scorns reproach me of my stammeryng speech as
though I can not speak plainly? But in the mean whiles you wring your self
by the nose, and give your self two foul blows. First of all in the matter
it self, as even now, and else where I have declared sufficiently. Then in the
manner of speech: where in steed of barbarous endytyng, ye reprehende me for
my stammeryng tongue. Which never any person would do, that has been enured to
write pure and clean Latin. Surely Sir I do speak very plainly and
distinctly through the inestimable benefit of God, Sta^meryng of ^he tou^g
turned upon Osorius neck.
but your tou^g does both stammer and stutte, if the report of them be true,
who have had conference with you, which blemish, because it proceeds of
nature, I would never have objected against you, if you had not first of all
vpbrayded me with ye same fault, wherewith your self are naturally encombred.

At the length you are entered into the treaty of Justification but first ye
snatche at a few sentences of Scriptures, Of the cause of Justification.
which I have set down. And the same without all reason after a certain
continual crooked usage of cauillyng, ye writhe and wrest ouerthwartely. And
therefore I will bid adewe to that your unmeasurable captious Sophistry: and
will sift your Divinity a whiles, which will appear to be your own, that is to
say most foolish and detestably corrupt. You rehearse out of my writing, eue^
as it is, that these works are unprofitable to Justification, and yet that
they ought not be despised: because Paul does seem to verify both positions.
Let us see what our Doctor Jerome says to this? for sooth he raungeth abroad
to original sin altogether besides the cushian. He does cruelly accuse
Luther, Calvin and Melancthon, because they do condemn all the works of the
most holy men, being compared with the glory of God. And that the same could
not be forgeuen, but through the merits of Jesus Christ. What then? does not
Paul affirm truly that Jews and Gentiles are all concluded under sin? Does
not ye Prophetical king David likewise long before him pronounce truly? Psalm.
13.
There is not one righteous person, no not one, there is not one, that will
understand, not one that will seek after god. All are gone out of the way they
are all together become unprofitable, there is not one that does good, no not
one. If there be not one righteous man, no not so much as one, what shall be come
of the worthynes of your works then, yea even amongst the most perfect and
godly? If there be no man that will understand, then also the best works of
the godly are of no value. If no man seek after God, what can be duly
performed of any person? If all have declined out of the way, where be they
that have walked perfectly in the right way? Lastly if there be no person that
does good, whether then are all your excellent workemaisters vanished a Gods
name? if all, I say all, as well Jews, as Gentiles, that is to say, if all
generally are concluded under sin, where can those pretty holy men be
found, of whom ye will needs have some, but Paul utterly none at all?
Through the sin of one man, sin is poured upon all flesh to condemnation.
These be the express words of Paul, which will not admit any startyng
hole, yet your Mastershyp notwithstanding will urge a certain perfection of
our works, contrary to the manifest authority of sacred Scriptures.

But this Prelate does make more account of the words of Christ our Savior,
saying. Not he that says Lord, Lord: but he that does the will of my Father
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. And then he demands. If the yoke of
sin be so always fastened unto our shoulders, that it can by no means be
removed, how we may then obtain the state of righteousness through the grace
and goodness of Christ? Your self have told it wise man, truly even through
the very same grace and goodness of Christ, which you have named. And therefore
David being full of ye holy Ghost, lifting his hands up unto God, cries out
in this manner. Psalm. 50.
Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin, for I
knowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me: Why should we desire to
be washed, if we did not welter in the filthy puddle of sins? and why should
we require to be cleansed, and thoroughly purified? if we were not corrupted,
and wholly defiled with ye stinckyng dregs of sin? Romans 13.
As by the fall of one man (says Paul) sin is derived by way of
propaganacio^ upon all men unto comdemnation, even so by the righteousness of
one, good is extended unto all men to justification of life. Again. The same
Paul: Romans 11.
God has shut up all men under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.
From our selves therefore proceeds evil unto damnation. And from God comes
Justification unto life. Of our selves rises unbelief: but mercy issues from
God. But let us hear our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ him self most sweetly
co^fortyng us with these words. Math. 11.
Come unto me all ye that do travail and be heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. And therefore all anguish and grief of sin, all burden of trespasses,
wherewith we are ouerladen and haled down not only to the ground, but even to
hell gates, spryng out from our own selves: even so the asswagyng of all
sorrows, and ease of all our importable burdens come from Jesus Christ only.
If you be ignorant of these sentences good Sir, wherewith the holy scriptures
do every where swarm so plentyfully, what is it I pray you that you
understand in the Gospel? if you do know them, why do ye so maliciously
inueighe against those learned men and singular servants of God without
cause, especially being as now departed this life? against whom if they could
speak for them selves, ye durst not mutter one word. For what are you being
compared with them? But to let them pass, whom I did not undertake to defend:
what extreme amazedness is this in you, to rehearse my words, and cull them
out of purpose, to carpe at them, and from them to glau^ce away to Luther and
Calvin? if your quarrel be to me, why do you not let them alone? if ye list to
strive with them, then also cavil not with me. Does not reason require this?
and is not my request allowable? Surely it is extreme maddenesse, to challenge
me unto the Barriers, and then to sckyppe over away to others, and to pursue
them with your venymous tongue.

You say further that it seems by my masters doctrine (for so it pleases
you to term the^) that the force of sin is not as yet extinguished in us
through the blood of Christ. Truly you and I both may acknowledge those men
whose names you did recite before, to be our masters, not in Divinity only
but in practice of piety also. But whereas ye would have them to teach that
the force of sin is not as yet extinguised through the blood of Christ (I do
express here your own words) This is only your horrible and most shameless
slander against them. For unto this mark always they bent their whole
endeavor to express unto you Jesus Christ lively, before your eyes, and the
same also crucified, to emprint thoroughly, in the very bowels of your souls
the most precious blood of Jesus Christ shed for us upon ye Cross: Gallat. 3.
to preach unto us remission of sins through his bitter death and passion, to
beat into the blind and deaf ears of the world this glad tydyngs of the
Gospel, being overwhelmed and oppressed by your couled generation,
massemongers, confessors and men's traditions, and altogether choked and
buried under ground, through the silence of holy Scriptures, and to disclose
again abroad into the open light, and put miserable captives in remembrance
of the said doctrine, being utterly subverted by the tyrannous treachery of your
gallauntes. And therefore in all their sermons, lessons, and writings, they
used these and such like speeches. 1. John. 1.
The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all sin. You do know that you
were redeemed from your vain conversation which you received by the tradition
of your forefathers not with transitory things as gold and silver, 1. Peter. 1.
but with most precious blood as of an undefiled lamb. etc. Apoc. 1.
neither whoremo^gers, nor worshippers of images, nor adulterers. etc. shall
inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 1.
And such ye were, but you are cleansed, but you are sanctified, but you are
justified through the name of Jesus Christ, and through the spirit of our God.
You hear, men cleansed from all sin, redeemed from their vain conversation,
washed, sanctified, and justified through the blood of Jesus Christ: Ye know
likewise that these men did take upon them always infinite labors and
travail about the establishyng and enlargyng of the Gospel of Christ: and are
you not ashamed to obtrude unto them this gross error which is each where
most evidently convinced in the whole discourse of the Gospel, and treatise of
holy Scriptures? Ca^kred malice has not only blinded you (Osorius) but so
bewitched your senses that as ye can not see the truth your self, so yet of a
most arrogaunt waywardness, you will frowardly kick against the Preachers of
the truth.

Romans 7.
And yet this notwithstanding is most true, That sin does always dwell within
us, and that there is always a law lurking in our members rebellyng against
the law of the mind, which draws us as bondeslaues to sinnyng. But the Lord
does deliver us from this body of death through the blood of Jesus Christ, not
by rootyng out sin from us altogether, but for Christ's sake pardonyng the
sins of them that repent. And hereof arise those comfortable reioysinges of
the faithful. He that spared not his only begotten Son but delivered him to
be slain for us all, how can it be possible, but that he should give us all
things together with him? Romans 8.
Again, who shall accuse the elect of God? Thirdly, it is the Lord that does
Justify, who shall condemn us? These are not spoken to the end to set out our
innocence and perfection, whereunto we can not aspire whiles we are pilgrims
in this miserable flesh: Luke. 5.
but do express unto us that God does give us free remission through Jesus
Christ: so that we will set our whole affiaunce and hope upon him, which
pronounces of him self that he was sent not to the righteous but to the
Sinners, because they should repent and amend their lives. But you can not
well digest these sayings, my Lord, for what can you being an old Bishop,
allow in the Scriptures, that have bound your self apprentice to such
bussardly Schooledregges? And yet this confidence in the death and blood of
Christ, will raise us up into heaven at that dreadful day, when you and your
couled generation, with all your peltyng trinkettes of superstitious works
shall be thrown headlong into hell, unless ye repent in time. For we do
assuredly know, that if we confess with our mouths our Lord Jesus, and
believe steadfastly in our heart that God has raised him from death to life, we
shall be saved. Romans 10.
For with the heart we believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth we
confess to Salvation. And yet this confession of faith, does nevertheless
want no testimony of good works, as where withal she is always accompanied,
for we are not so indebted to the flesh, that we should walk according to the
flesh, for if we live according to the flesh, we shall dye. But if in the
spirit we mortify the sins of our bodies we shall live. For all those that
are guided by the spirit of God, the same are the sons of God. Romans 8.
Wherefore renounce once at the length such loathsome communicatio^: where
withal, like a most filthy hog mooselyng in the durtie swynesty of Epicure,
you use most wickedly to scorn and deride the faithful servants of Christ.
For ye write that it is the manner of their thought: We are in good case enough,
for we are most acceptable unto GOD through faith. Wherefore we are as righteous
as Peter and as Paul, yea as the most holy mother of God. Ye go amasked
altogether (Osorius) the faithful Ministers of Christ do not acquainte them
selves with this unsavory and hautie spirit of pride: but rather do earnestly
call to their remembrance the sayings of Paul. Romans 13.
The night is passed, the day is come nigh, let us therefore cast away the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk
honestly as it were in the day light, not in eating and drinking another in
chambring and wantonness. etc. But let us put on Jesus Christ, and not make
provision for the flesh fulfill the lusts thereof. etc.

Hitherto Walter Haddon.
The residue answered by I. F. beginning where Master Haddon left against
Osorius.
APelles the most famous Painter of the world, Plinius lib. 35. cap. 10.
endeuouryng in most curious and exquisite manner, to express the feature of
Venus, at Coe, in Greece, That is to say coming out of the Sea.
called in Greek (...) was prevented by death (as Pliny reports) when as
yet he had drawn but the half of ye portrait, and thereby compelled to
relinquishe the residue so unperformed, that no man of the Art, were he never
so expert, durst at any time after presume with pencill to pursue the
President. The like lot albeit in unlike endeavor, that ouertooke Apelles
amiddes his blazing the beauty of Venus, seems to have encountered our noble
Gentleman, Walter Haddon, in displaying the verity of the Gospel. For after
he had undertaken the commendable, and praise worthy defense of the truth,
against Jerome Osorius: albeit he neither obtained to beautify the part, which
he had begone, nor to accomplish his purpose in the rest, and yeldyng over to
nature, was amyddes his race, constrained to surcease his exploite, yet has
he so poolished that part, which he left unfinished, with Apelles Pencill,
that is to say, has framed so singular a Pattern in excellency of Art, that
with the sight thereof the whole posterity, may be afraid to set hand to the
attempt. For determinyng with him self to answer the slanderous Inuectiues
of Jerome Osorius, compiled into three books, although it was not granted him
to perform the whole, yet has he so singularely endited one book, and the
half of an other against the same, and confuted the reasons, which were none
at all: discovered his lies, which were most shameless: daunted his hauty
pride, and utterly discomfited his vain glorious Peacocklike Rhetoric, with
such gravity, wisdom, and so well disposed style, that if there were no
supply made by any other, the truth of the Gospel being of it self otherwise
unvanquishable, might seem to have no need of any other patronage.

Wherefore so long as we enjoyed the life of this excellent learned man, and
him self endured amongst us, as the Church of Christ had a very worthy and
valiant Captain: So had Osorius also a courageous and puissaunt an
enconterer, and meet conqueror for such a monster. But now sithence he is
taken from us, albeit the verity it self have no just cause to despair, yet
can not we chose but be vnderfully dismayed, if not for M. Haddons sake, yet
for our loss chiefly. For as concerning M. Haddon, he can not but be in most
happy estate, whom Gods good providence has mercyfully translated out of this
furious wretched world into more blessed, and quiet calm: even then
especially, when as being conuersaunt in the race of perfect godlynes, he
employed his virtuous endeavor in so sacred a cause, where now neither Jerome
Osorius, nor any other braulyng barker can from henceforth disquyet or molest
him. The decease of M. Haddon.
There is greater cause rather to move us, and all the learned to much sorrow
and grief of mind, who have lost so great and learned a ryngleader of
learning, the loss of whom does by so much more increase our heauynes, in
respect of this present entreprise undertaken against Osorius, chiefly, by how
much we feel our selves bereft of so singular a Patron, and so altogether
dispoyled herein, that without wonderful difficulty, scarce any person of
knowledge will be found able to supply the rest of the answer, with like
success, and comme^dation: Not for that the matter is of so great importance,
(for what can be more easy then to refell the reasons of Osorius, wherein is no
substance at all? and his triflyng toys, which are manifold, as also to
despise his slanders, wherewith he is ouerlauishe?) but because the person
will not easily he found (I suppose) which after learned M. Haddon dare
presume to entermedle in the cause, and to join his own devises with M.
Haddons writings. So that I fear me, now M. Haddon is dead, the same will come
to pass in this discourse, that Plutarch makes Relation of, of a certain man
that was not well thought of: who rashly and youthfully seems to cou^teruaile
with the politic prowess of Themystocles.

What then? because we can not atteyne to M. Haddons actiuitie, shall we
therefore like dastardes flee the field, and leave the truth of the Gospel
succourles in the camp of her enemy? (the quarrel not so much apperteignyng to
M. Haddon, as to almighty God him self) and suffer shame to prevail more
with us, then piety and godliness? or because one champion is taken from the
Barriers, which was approved at all assayes, shall we therefore yield over the
conquest of the whole challenge to Osorius? And permit this glorious Thraso to
triumph and tread down our cowardice? or because we prefer our M. Haddon to
the first onset in arms, shall we therefore bear no brunte of the battle? or
shall not his valiant attempt rather teaze, and provoke us to prick on with
courage? And yet I neither speak, nor think in this wise, as though I did
either mistrust the time, or the wits of our age, so plentyfully florishyng
at this season especially, wherein I do know very many that are skillful
enough to mainteyne the quarrel, if they would either vouchsafe to yield their
endeavor thereto, or could be persuaded to think, that their travail would
counteruaile their studies. And yet albeit happily may be found some one, so
nymble of mind, and endued with learning, that can Judge him self able enough
to perform, yet scarce shall ye find that man, who being not otherwise
exercized in weightyer affairs, will so little esteem the loss of his time,
as in such unprofitable contention, snarlyng, and snatchyng, to spend one hour
upon Osorius, Osoria melancholycke brauler.
that is to say upon so wayward, and melancholicke an adversary, being nothing
else but a raylyng brabler. Whereby neither profit may redounde to the Reader,
nor praise to the victor.

There is no cause therefore (gentle reader) why thou should require at our
hands, that exact and absolute furniture in the supply that is coming forth,
and should have been perfited by M. Haddon, either because it is not so easy a
matter to reach unto that exquisite plot of his singular President, (as to the
table of Apelles) or else because the chiefest of our adversaries arguments have
been by sundry persons long sithence crushte in pieces already, and are such in
effect, as deserve rather with discretion to be scorned, then with reason to be
scanned. I will touch only certain chief places of the controversy scattered
here, and there, as they come in ye chase, and see to avail most for his
challenge, reteinyng my self within the lystes of Neoptolemus law, that is to
say briefly, and in summary points to touch, and away. Neither do I think it
needful to stay long upon the through debatyng of every particular point,
especially, because three words only may suffice to overthrow the whole
Battrye of these three Inuectiues, be they never so tedious. Forasmuch as the
Author has uttered nothing in all his confused work else, but that which
sauoreth of lies, The sum of all Osorius work, briefly comprehended in three
words.
slanders, and errors, what other reasonable answer may any discreet person
require, then three words only, which when I have spoken, I shall be thought to
have expressed in few words, all what soever that huge rabble of that scoldyng,
and triflyng Sophister does contain.

1. Mentiris. 1. You do lie. 2. Maledicis. 2. You do slander. 3. Falleris. 3.
You do err.
And to the end it shall not be said, that I charge him with a lewd devise of
mine own imagination, contrary to the truth of the matter, I will allege
certain evident proofs, although not all, (for it were can infinite labor to
number the Sands of the Sea) whereby the dilligent Reader may easily descry his
wonderful vanity in lyeng, his execrable wickedness in slaunderyng, and his
monstrous blindness in Divinity.

And first of all this one place offers it self to the view: wherein two
especial points full of heinous accusation are contained. That is to say, two
detestable lies whelped at one lytter (so pregnant is this worm) in the one
whereof he does accuse Martin Luther, as though he did wickedly teach extreme
Desperation, in the other, a bold and presumptuous Confidence of Salvation.
Truly this is a grievous and perilous accusation if it be true. Afterward
out of these two monstrous falsely forged propositions, he stampeth a
conclusion forth with no less false the^ malicious: wherein he exclameth
against Luther, Exclamat^o^ of Osorius against Luther.
as the only subuertour of all virtue, studious Industry, and careful
endeavor. Nor is this to be wondered, that Osorius does argue in this wise. For
whereas even from the very beginning of his book, he has accustomed him self
to nothing else but to a continual course of lyeng, I should marvel more a
great deal, if he would now altogether change his Typpet unlike him self,
and begin to speak any thing truly. But the matter goes well with Luther,
that his works are extaunt as yet, and are usually frequented, which as are
true witnesses of his doctrine, so ca^ testify truly of their masters
innocence herein. Whereupon two things may be easily coniectured, whereof the
one of great likelyhode is to be suspected either that Osor. has never read
those things, whereat he cauilleth: or that of very nature he is a notably
shaped Sicophaunt. Osorius page 141.
Martin Luther (says he) does teach extreme Desperation. I would feign know
where, or from whence you have pyked out this? Luther preached many Sermons:
Co^piled many books: some published in his own country language: Many also
turned into the Latin tongue: The readyng and perusing of the which has
recovered many persons (I doubt not) standing upon the very brincke of
Desperation, and in grievous anguish of mind: amongst whom I do with an
unfeigned, simple, and humble conscience thankefully acknowledge before God, my
self to be one. But I did never hear of one person so much, that has
perished through Desperation, by readyng Luthers books, The doctrine of
desperation, whether is it more proper to the Papists, or to the Lutherans.
or hearing his doctrine: On the contrary part, diverse monumentes and histories
are replenished with examples of such as have run headlong into utter
despair, which have gaynesayd, or withdrawn them selves from the doctrine of
Luther. As touching Frauncisce Spira, who revolted from the participation of
the doctrine, which he had once received by Luthers preaching, because the
Record thereof is somewhat old, I will for this present omit, what remains
in history of him. I will more willyngly use fresher examples of our later age,
and yet not all ingenerall, for it needs not, neither is any one man able so
to do. But I will rehearse some of the most notable. And first of all a
certain man called Iacobus Latomus, a man sometimes wellbe seen amongst the
Deuines of Louayne. I can not tell whether you your self knew him (Osorius)
when he lived. This man mainteinyng the same quarrel, wherein you do now
turmoyle your self against Luther, is reported to depart this life in the
self same Desperatio^, whereof you make mention: who at his very last gaspes
brayeng out most horrible and fearful roaring noise, uttered none other sound
in the ears of all men that heard him, but that he was utterly damned, and
forsaken of God, and had no hope of Salvation laid up in store for him,
because he did wilfully resist the manifest truth, which he knew before to be
most true. I will couple two others with him of the same fraternity, Guarlacke
Reader of Divinity Lecture amongst the Gertrudianes, and Arnolde Bomelye
Scholar to Tilman: of the first of who^ it is said, that even in the last
panges before his death, he spoke in this manner, that he had lived desperately,
and could not endure the Judgment of God, because he did acknowledge his
sins to be greater, then that they could obtain for geuenesse. The other
(having fully gorged him self with the doctrine of Desperatio^, wherein he was
instructed by his Schoolemaister of distrust) surprised at length with
intolerable gnawyng of conscience practiced first to kill him self with his
own Dagger, at the last being wholly swallowed up of Desperation, did cut his
own bowelles out of his body with an other man's knife.

It shall not be amiss to join unto those Sadolet Cardinal of Rome, who
after sundry disputations maintained against Luther, gave up the ghost, not
without horrible trembling and torment of conscience. I suppose also that you
are not ignorant of the like that happened to Cardinal Crescentius Legate of
the Apostolic See, and President of the Tridentine Council, being astonyed
with sodeine horror, and troublesome abashement of mind in the same City.
1552. of whom John Sledan has made relation in his Commentaries. What shall I
speak of Castellane Archbishop of Aurelia? and of Ponchere Archbishop of
Turone? who procured to them selves Gods indignation and vengeance, as
appeared by the wonderful fearful passions wherewith they were oppressed at
the time of their death: not because they did hear Luther and read his books,
but because they did cruelly persecute his doctrine. In ye same Beadroll may be
reckoned the remembrance of John Eckius, John Eckius with others.
whose whole course of life as was nothing else but a continual mortal combat
against Luther, so his yeldyng to nature was so altogether void of spiritual
consolation, that even in the last gaspes he uttered no other words, but of
money, and certain thousand of crowns. And what need I here rehearse out of
the Records of ancient Chronicles Minerius, Cassianus, Renestenses, Martinus,
that miserable Mo^cke called Romanus, Prattes, Lysettes, Rusius, Morines, who
being horribly plagued by the severe Justice of God, may be sufficient
Presidentes to teach you, what it is insolently to kick against the prick of
Gods unsearchable providence.

The History of the French king Henry ye second, Henry second French king his
death.
is yet but fresh in memory, and deeply emprinted, not in the minds only,
but in the eyes also of all men: who extremely boylyng with inward hatred
against the same doctrine, received his deaths wound in the self same eyes,
wherewith he was determined to view the execution of others: and was forced him
self to become a manifest spectacle of Gods Justice to all the world, before
he could bathe his eyes in the blood of ye innocent. And not long after the
said Henry, followed also the king of Navarre, who procured unto him self most
just cause not only of Desperation, but of death also, through none other
occasion, but by persecutyng this doctrine, which you do slanderously
reproach to be the doctrine of Desperation. I could here make a Register of an
infinite number, not in England only, but of other Regions also, which after
they had received wonderful comfort out of ye sweet juice of this doctrine,
which you call Lutherane, fell headlong into miserable anguishe and gnawyng of
conscience, by reuoltyng from this doctrine: who could never attain one
sparckle of quiet mind, before they had reclaymed them selves from their first
Apostasy. Last of all, how many thousands of men, women, and children young
and old, can this our age truly record, who have showed them selves more
willing to yield their carcasses to fire, fagottes, sword, rackyngs, and all
manner of horrible Torture, rather then they would recante, and renounce that
comfortable doctrine, where with they were enstructed: which I suppose they
would never have done, if they had suspected never so small embres of
Desperation to have lurked therein. But I perceive what Osorius does mean by
this word Desperation. If he could either express his mind aptly, and
distinctly, or were willing to deal simply and plainly. To the end therefore
I may frame mine answer, having regard to the meaning of the man, rather
then to his speech, I will examine the manner of his disputyng somewhat more
advisedly.

The affiaunce and assurau^ce of salvation, wherein is it to be placed.
Luther does teach (says he) that no man ought to place affiaunce of his
righteousness in merits and good works. Go to and what is concluded hereof?
Therefore Luther does teach the doctrine of Desperation. A very new found and
strange manner of Argument, framed perhaps after the rule which concludes
from the staff to the corner. I suppose men of Syluane use this kind of
arguyng in their woody forests. But I make this answer to the Argument. If
God had determined, that our Salvation should have been purchased through godly
actions, and virtuous endeavor of man's life: it were not altogether without
reason that Osorius does speak. But for as much as our hope and confidence is
limited within the bounds of the faith of Christ, and the foundation thereof
builded upon this Rock only, I suppose surely, that the person which does
allure us home unto Christ, from confidence of works, and teaches us to
repose our whole trust in him, as in the only Sanctuary, and shoteanker of our
Salvation, does declare rather the true way to assured hope, then abolishe the
same: Neither does he by and by, rende in sunder the sinews of man's endeavor,
who does but embace and disable that part from ma^s power, which does properly
apperteine to the son of God: I think that he discovers rather the well
sprynges of the comfortable glad tidings of the Gospel. But lysten I pray you
to Osorius disputation, and wonder a whiles at his deep insight in Logic.
For in matters past recovery (says he) and in most assured confidence, there
is no man that will be enduced to raise up his mind earnestly to any virtuous
endeavor. You have here given us a right Rhetorical position: now mark a
concludyng determination more then Catholic. Ergo (says he) Whereas Luther
does partly dispoile us of the hope of righteousness, and partly does place
the the same wholly in the righteousness of Christ, which hope ought to be
proper and peculiar to each person, what does he herein else then utterly
subuerte and extinguishe all duties and endeavors of godliness in us? Truly
I do not deny, but that in all manner of enterprises, which happen in usual and
daily practice, well conceauyng hope does minister wonderful courage to the
mind of man: the whole force, and lyuelynes whereof, through Desperatio^ or
distrust, is many times utterly daunted. But to what purpose is this alleged
against Luther? Whose teaching and Lessons tend to this only mark, not so
much to instruct us in the rules of good life (which is the only peculiar
office of the law) as to lead us to know, whether we ought in these good works
of ours to repose our affiaunce, or else to ascribe the same wholly to the free
mercy of GOD, through Jesus Christ: not because godly endeavors and virtuous
works are not prayseworthy, but whether our works be of so great estimation,
as may satisfy Gods judgment, and deserve eternal life, so establishe our
consciences in sauetie. This is the ground, and principal point of the
controversy, which ought in this place to be decided.

For as much therefore, Two kynd^ of desperation.
as there be two kinds of Desperation (as we have said) it behooved you
(Osorius) to have distinguished the same, before you had raised your Battrye
against Luther. There be some persons, which do utterly despair of forgeuenes
of their sins, and of the mercy of God toward them. As for example: the
Desperation of Cain, Saul Esau, Antiochus, Judas, Minerius, Latomus, Sadolete,
and such others. And this kind of Desperatio^ belongs properly to the
ungodly and wicked, which are altogether estraunged from God, and nothing
agreeable with Luthers doctrine. There is besides this an other kind of
Desperation: as in the attempt of any enterprise, if a man be wholly discomfited
to attain the Maistrie, and can not be the foremost, will not yet be
discouraged, but will employ his ability as much as in him lies, that he may
be the second at the left: For the Archer that shoots somewhat near the
stick,
Deserves his praise though he hitt not the prick,


In like manner we all, every one of us, do march onwarde paynefully, in this
warrefarre of Gods law, as it were in a runnyng game, to try Maistric, wherein
albeit was never found man, which could in this life assure him self to
attain the appointed goal: yet are we not therewith so thrown down in
conceit, as to be in despair of our Salvation. Neither ought we so to
interpret the law, as though through the practice and guidyng thereof only,
and by no means else, we could obtain everlasting life. The law has other
purposes, and ends to direct us unto, which Osorius might have learned out of
Paul and Augustine, and diverse others, if he would not wittyngly, and wilfully
have been blind. The end and office of the law.
The first Rule and use of the Law is, to represent unto us the inestimable
righteousness of our creator, after whose Image we are created. The next, to
condemn our unrighteousness, and abate our pride. The other, to be for a
time in steed of a Schoolemaister to lead us to Christ: which albeit could
not of her self give full righteousness to that people unto whom it was
delivered first, might nevertheless in the mean space, through wholesome
severity, hold them back and keep them in fear, and restrain the
unbridled licentiousness of their flesh, in some orderly comlynesse,
lest-they should run headlong into all execrable, and wicked impiety. Truly
these seem to me be the principal uses of the law, the absolute and exact
perfection whereof, as never any man of that race hitherto was able to satisfy,
though vpholde^ altogether with the gracious aid of God: So if you (Osorius)
can remember any one man, sithence that time (the son of God only except)
that has thoroughly performed all, and every part, and duty required by the
law, I beseech you name him, or if you ca^ name no one of all the ofspryng of
Ada^, which has perfectly accomplished the whole law, what moves you so
furiously to rage against Luther, who teaches that all our righteousness is
imperfect? But be it, that he has likewise affirmed (as the truth is) that our
righteousness is not only imperfect, but had condemned all our righteousness
to be more loathsome, the^ the defilynges of a foul menstruous clothe? even as
Esaias the Prophet did? or what if according to the saying of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he had adjudged not only all our deeds, and words what soever,
though never so precisely handled, not in the time of the old law only, but
after the coming of Christ also, neither of us alone, or the rude unlettered
multitude, but even of the Apostles them selves performed, to be altogether
vnauaylable to the purchasing of eternal life? yea and that the^ selves also
were in no better plighte, and condition: then servants, and unprofitable
bondeslaues? what a stir would this Da^^s have kept? But now, sithence no man
can be ignorant of the most manifest sayings of Christ and the Apostles,
either must Osorius cite these fellows unto the Chapter house together with the
Lutherans, or if he do acquyte them, he must not from henceforth quarrel with
Luther in the cause.

Again where the same Lord in the Gospel does promise a teacher, The law
unprofitable to salvation.
the holy Ghost, Which should convince the world of sin and of
righteousness, what shall we think that he mente by sendyng this teacher
other, then that he purposed to establishe those two things especially, which
Osorius does seek chiefly to discredit? That is to say, that godly hearts
being enlightened by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, may be instructed to
feel their own weakness, that from them selves as from their own power,
they have no hope of Salvation, and that for the attainement thereof nothing
wants in Christ Jesus: and how that without Christ, all that ever we have, is
but in dispayred case: A wholesome kind of trust and mistrust.
but in him all things rest most safe, and assured. Out of the one whereof
arises unto us a very comfortable Desperation, out of the other flows a most
holy Affiaunce. A Desperation (I say) not such a one as does exclude true trust
in Jesus Christ, but which does abrogate vain confidence of our works only.
Neither do I here mean the confidence, which does let louse the reins to
licentious boldness, and unpunishable liberty, but the same confidence which
does minister necessary and comfortable gladsomnes, to the godly and afflicted
consciences.

But our Porting all can in no wise allow of this confidence, fearyng this
thing forsooth, Lest this way be to swift, Osori. page 141.
and to easy to the attaynement of salvation, as that which will draw away
the variable mind of man from labor to slothfulness, and therefore it were
much better, that every man being uncertain of his own sauetie, should be
holden still in fear rather. And this perhaps he might seem to have spoken
not without some reason, if eternal life were such a thing, as did depend upon
any covenant or condition of works. But whereas now it consists wholly, in
the free mercy of God, which neither can deceive, nor has respect to the
worthynesse of him that receaueth this grace, The trust of salvation depends
upon promise and not upon the Law. Ergo, the more assured.
but rests upon the only credit of him, that promises: is not apportioned
to our good works, but freely given, not to them which deserve, but unto them
which do believe in him that does Justify the ungodly: what remains, but
that Osorius must either strippe the Scriptures naked of Gods promise toward
us, or of necessity, conclude our trust, and assured affiaunce under that
promise: or that him self is utterly ignorant, what that promise of the
Gospel purporteth: and so bewraye his singular blockishnesse herein? which is
rather likely to be true. Now I would have him first make me an answer unto
this. Whether God have made us any promise at all? Promise made before the Law
and without the law.
Then, whether that promise be the law it self? or some other thing ordained
besides, and before the law. And hereof Paul seems to be a very fit
interpretour: who reports that the promise was first of all given to Abraham:
Then, that after ii^. C. and xxx. years, the law was published, and
therefore, that it could by no means make frustrate the Testament, which was
given first: For if inheritance came of the law, then is it not now of
promise: Galat. 3.
If we think good to believe Paul rather then Osorius.

The promise of salvation free and simple without condition.
These things being now granted, I demand further, (if this Gentleman will
vouchsafe to teach us) What kind of covenant that was of the promised
inheritance unto us? whether he will confess the same to be free, or not
free? If he deny it to be free, then will S. Paul forthwith cry out against
him, who does ascribe all that promise made unto Abraham of the blessyng, of
the seed, of the inheritance, of the kingdom, of eternal life unto grace,
and not unto the law yea: and so also not only before the law, but even when
he was not as yet in Circumcision. But if he will confess (as he needs must)
that the bare promise proceeded not of any covenant made in respect of our
works, but was freely offered by the free goodness of the geuer only, what
reason will Osorius render unto us, why we should not receive the same with all
assuredness, and most certain assurance called in Greek (...). For if
faith, as Osorius has described it in his books entitled De Iustitia, be
derived of having affiaunce: upon whom may a man settle his affiaunce more
safely, then upon God? or when, more assuredly, then when he promises simply
without condition: or what can be of more certeintie, then that which is
promised by God the Father almighty, to all men, without exception, freely,
and of his own accord, yea and that through faith only? Freely (I say)
whereby the bountiful mercy of God poured upon all flesh, may shine more
lively to the comfortable cheerfulness of afflicted consciences. Through
faith I say, because all things depend upon this one condition. That is to
say, That we all should believe in the son of God, in whom all the promises of
God, are yea and Amen. Faith only how it does exclude and not exclude good
works.
I add also, faith only, not because I will exclude good works from her
company, simply, as though they should not be put in ure, but in such sort, as
that they shall not be esteemed to be of such valewe, as to be able to
Justify: not that being Justified, we should not exercise our selves in them:
But that we give not unto them, the chief pre-eminence in Justification: not
because we should let lowse the reins to voluptuousness, and tread the tract
of unbridled lust, or dissolve the severity of ancient godly discipline: nor
that we should utterly extinguish all virtuous endeavors, blot out the glory of
honest actions, or choke up the light of true Religion and undefiled
sincerity: finally not to the end we should defile the commendable praises of
worthy renown, under color of unpunishable liberty of sinnyng: in deed
these are the painted florishyngs of Osori. forge, and glorious glytteryngs of
his Sophistical talk. Wherein this our Simme subtle, does nothing at all
degender from the slye craftiness of his predecessors. Neither is this any
new devise, or practice of those, which, when they are ouercharged with
arguments, which they can not resolve, cast up presently, such smocky, and
confused mistes of words and slanderous reproaches, of purpose to dazell the
eyes of the Readers, that they may not see the open light. After the very same
fashion Tertullus the Advocate of the Jews did behave him self against Paul.
Tertull. Actc. 24.
Whose doctrine when he could by no means emproue, he rusheth upon him like a
Iolye Sycophaunte, with slanders and reproaches, uttered in smoathe and
delicate order of speech with lies, untrue reports, forged accusations and
outcryes, exclaimyng against him that he was a troublesome man, seditious, a
raiser of new sects, and a defiler of the Temple. For even with all the self
same co^tumelies Tertullus did then reproach S. Paul before Foelix then
President, like as now this our Tullian Tertullus with like vanity; and no
less impudency does accuse Martin Luther: of all which generally he is as
innocent and clear now, as Paul was at that time of his araignement. Surely
good consciences wayeng the matter indifferently, ca^ not be ignorant, nor
Osorius him self (I suppose) will deny, if he be willing to yield to the
truth, but that never any such braynesicke thought did enter into Luthers head,
as to give any scoape to the ungodly to pursue wickedness: but rather that he
was always of this mind, to comfort afflicted consciences, and to discover
the most sure founteines of consolation in Christ Jesus Crucified for us.

Whereby you may perceive most vain glorious Tertully, what manner of
Desperation, and what kind of Affiaunce Luther does teach, not that Affiaunce
which is enemy to Salvation, but that necessary and undoubted Confidence, which
is able to approve it self allowable by the infallible promises of God, and
most assured testimonies of holy Scriptures. For otherwise if Christian faith
had no other fortress whereunto it might safely trust, Christian peace and
affiaunce.
I would then feign know of you, where that peace, where that rejoicing in
Christ Jesus is, whereof Paul does certify them, Which being Justified by
faith, have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ? wherein we stand
assured, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. Romans 5. Romans 5.
Where is that access with confidence and boldness, through faith in him?
Ephe. 3. Ephesians. 3.
Where is that access to the throne of grace with assured Affiaunce? Hebr. 4.
Hebr. 4.
To what end does our Lord so often in the Gospel encourage us to conceive
courageous boldness? using this reason, That he alone had overcome the world
for the behofe of all people? John. 16. John. 16.
If as yet every one of us must be enforced to purchase to him self, the
victory by his own endeavor, Where is that fullness of joy in the holy Ghost?
If employeng our service after the manner of bond servants, not as children,
we must live under the law, and hope to attain the possession of our
inheritance, as a reward of our works, and not thorough free adoption
rather? Galat. 4.
Where is then that Spirit of Adoption, cryeng in our hearts, Abba Father?
Whereof S. Paul does so oftentimes make mention? or if you be not yet satisfied
with these sentences, what answer shall we make to Esaias the Prophet, Esaias. 35.
Where he foresheweth everlasting joy unto them, which being redeemed by
Christ are converted in Syon? Esaias. 61.
Where is that cherefulnesse of heart? Comfort in steed of mournyng? glory in
steed of Ashes? the oil of gladness in steed of the spirit of sadness?
Esaias. 52.
Promised in ye behalf of the Messiah, that was yet to come? More over where
the same Prophet does wonderfully commend the feet of those, which should
preach peace to the people: what other thing else does he note in these words,
then that most excellent glory of the Church, which should aboundauntly flow
through affiaunce of the Mediator, upon all that should believe on him? what
means that cheerful Prophecy of Jeremy concerning the coming of the
Messiah, and the comfortable consolation of the Gospel to come? Ierem. 23. 32.
In those days (says he) Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell with
confidence. Again the same Prophet. And I will make them to dwell in Sauetie.
Whereunto accords likewise the saying of the Prophet Ezechiel: who
prophesying of the raising up of a Shepherd, and of the blessedness of that
age, even in the same phrase of speech almost, does promise, Ezech. 39.
That it should come to pass, that men should dwell and rest in security,
without all fear. etc. Now remains to learn of you (Osorius) what this
saying, to dwell in security without all fear does emporte? which for as
much as your self will not confess to have relation to the flesh, then it
must follow of necessity, that we interpret the same to be spoken of the
Spirit. But in what sort shall it appear that this saying must be applied
to the confidence of the Spirit? whenas ye shall defraude the Christian faith
of assuredness of Affiaunce, as though ye would dispoyle the world of the
benefit of the Sun? Finally what certeinetie of confidence shall remain, if
the same do depend (as you say) wholly upon works, and not upon faith of the
promise, and free mercy of him that does make the promise? If you grant
thereunto, one of those two ye must needs confess, either that you ought to
obtain so much by the vprightenes of your works as shall answer and
satisfy the Judgment of God: which you can never do: or else that the
variableness of your mind shall always stagger hither, and thither, in
perpetual amazed vncerteinetie. Do ye not perceive (Osorius) into what
streightes this your Divinity forces you? Go ye to therefore Master
Tertullus, and think with your self whether of you two, either Luther, or
Osorius with your Tullianisme do more stiffely maintain the doctrine of
Desperation? Surely S. Paul will teach you a lesson far unlike this: who
abrogatyng all confidence in works, which is none at all, or at the least most
unassured, does conclude all things under faith only. Romans 4.
Therefore through faith (says he) that it may be known to proceed
according to grace. That thereby the promise may be assured, to the whole
seed. And wherefore I pray you so through faith? forsooth because if the
proportion of affiaunce must be measured by the deservings of our works: It
is so far of that any man may possibly conceive never so little hope of
salvation, that he shall be forced rather to procure unto him self a headlong
downfall into the bottomless gulf of Desperation.

The righteousness of the law and of faith.
And therefore S. Paul discoursing upon both sorts of righteousness as well of
that of the law, as that other of faith: after that he had very exquisitely
distinguished the one from the other: because of the mutual contrariety or
disagreement betwixt them wherewith they do vary each from other, does
conclude at the length: That the Principal substance of the whole matter
depends upon faith, wholly according to grace. And wherefore according to
grace? verily because having abandoned all the righteousness that comes by the
law, which works indignation, and therefore engenders vncerteinetie, ye soul
might be established in Grace, and taking holdfast of the promise, through
faith, might attend for nothing else, from whence she should conceive any other
assuredness of hope, to attain everlasting life. For as it is an usual
custom amongst men earnestly to awayte for due performau^ce of these things
that are promised, so contrariwise such things as are granted conditionally,
are then, and never till then assured, but when the conditions are observed.
Now if the conditions were such, as might be thoroughly accomplished according
to that absolute perfection of fullness, wherewith they are limited: the^ no
doubt, the law were of it self effectual enough to Salvation. Leuit. 18.
For he that does keep the Commandments shall live by them. But as the
case stands now, for as much as we are all (will we nill we) subject to the
breach of the law: and that no creature can be found which dare affirm him
self able to perform all the conditions annexed to the law of God (that I may
be so bold to place your Maistershyp one of the number) then must we all of
necessity, seek the means of our Salvation not from the law, but from
somewhere else: because this eternal life must be ascribed to an other man's
death, and not to our life: neither after the opinion of our works, but unto
the free mercy of God, Which does only overcome when he is Judged. Wherein
for examples sake, let us hear, how David him self though never so well
beloved of God, does as it were tymorously humble him self in his prayers,
beseechyng God that he will not enter into Judgment with his servant. Psalm.
142.
And where with was he dismayed I pray you? Because (says he) no flesh
shall be Justified in thy sight.

If so be then, The affiaunce of works.
this so noble a King, and worthy a Prophet, standing to be arrayned before
almighty God, durst not commit the protection of his cause to the deseruyngs
of his works, shall then Osorius, or Hosius, dare be so bold to do it? We
read what remains in Record of Barnarde, being otherwise a prayseworthy man,
that when her foresawe the end of his life to approach, and that he was then
Summoned to appear before the Judgment seat of the eternal God, that he
began to express a wonderful fearfulness, and to be very much dismayed in
his mind: whom as his friends standing about him would have recomforted, and
encouraged to cheer him self with confidence of the good life that he had
lead: in deed (says he) I perceive, Barnard.
I may seem to be in such estimation amongst you: but I fear me, least the
Judgment of God is far unlike the Judgment of men. Truly this was aptly
remembered of Barnarde: Who albeit knew it well enough before paraduenture, yet
as then being at the point of death, he perceived much more effectually: Even
as we see to have chanced to many others of this Popish brood: Who though
they delight, and flatter them selves never so much in the glory of their
merits, and uprightness of their works, yet when death knocks at the door
of their consciences, and wills them to bid adieu to the world, then
forthwith castyng away all trust of merits, and as it were according a
recantation of ye doctrine, they shrowde them selves wholly in the death of
Christ, and hereupon fasten the chiefest shooteanker of sauety, as it were in
the most assured haven of perfect blessedness. Whereby you may understand (ye
Porting all Prelate) how all that your frame of righteousness, which you
builded upon the deservings of works, is unjointed, and shaken in pieces: the
force whereof was never yet of such efficacy, and value in any creature, as
could not only not abide the incomprehensible unmeasurableness of Gods
Judgment, but also be so wholly appalled, at the encou^tryng of death, that it
can not endure the sight thereof, but must needs yield as thoroughly vanquished.

How far the works of the law come short to true righteousness.
Moreover sithence this place offers it self to debate of virtues, I would
wish you to consider advisedly with your self, what that wellknowen saying of
Augustine does purporte, and how far it does dissent from this your
contentious quarrel of righteousness: whereas treatyng of virtue, and
charity, he speaks in this wise. Augustine.
Virtue, says he, is a kind of charity, wherewith we love that thing, which
ought to be beloved: This charity appears more in some, in others less, in
some also nothing at all. But the fulness thereof which can not be increased,
whiles man lives in this world, was never seen in any: for as long as it may
be increased, truly all what soever is less then ought to be, and will
admit a supply, comes of default: through which default, all flesh can not
be Justified in his sight: wherein pause a whiles I pray you with me, and
debate thoroughly with your self, whether if that charity, which is in
Christ^ans, though it be never so apparauntly discernable, yea after their
regeneration also, be lame, and defective, what may be thought of them, in whom
scarce appears any mean resemblaunce thereof? but what shall be judged of your
self Osorius chiefly, amongst all other, in whom not one sparcke so much of
true charity, nor any jot so much of humanity can be seen? in so much, that
who so shall read those Inuectiues of yours, may easily conjecture, that he
hears not the modesty of Osorius a Christian Bishop, but rather some
Tragical Orestes furiously ragyng upon some Stage. But to return to
Augustine, of whose judgment in Divinity I know not how well Osorius will
allow: truly what small accoumpt he made of the worthynesse of our
righteousness, he could never have more vehemently uttered then in these
words: Aug. Confess. Lib. 9. Cap. ^3.
we be to the most upright life of man (says he) if God examine the same
setting mercy aside: In like manner Gregory does very little vary from Augustine
in words, though nothing in sense. But altogether dissenteth from you
(Osorius) where expoundyng the saying of Job in their. Gregor. in Job. Cap. 9
Chapter, videl. Man can not be justified being compared to God. The holy man
(says he) does perceive that all the deservings of our best works are
faulty, if they be wayed in the righteous ballaunce of the just Judge. Gregor.
Com. Cap 11.
And by and by in the xi. Chapter, as it were redoublyng the self saying of
Augustine. Because (says he) if excludyng mercy, works be examined, the life
of the most righteous will be found to folter and faynte under the burden of
Sin. Hereunto may be annexed the consent of Barnarde (of whom we made mention
before) worthy to be noted, Barnardu.
touching the same matter. Who making a long discourse of the unrighteousness
of man's righteousness, demands a question at the last, of what value all
our righteousness may be in the sight of God? Shall it not be reputed filthy
(says he) like unto a foul menstruous clothe according to the saying of the
Prophet? and if strickte and narrow examination be made thereof, shall not all
our righteousness be found unrighteous and nothing worth? at the last, as
though the matter were confessed, and without all controversy, he concludes
saying: And what shall become then of sin whenas righteousness it self has
nothing to allege for defense?

For as much therefore as it is so, and that this doctrine is so manifold, so
manifest, confirmed by so many, and so famous Authors, emprinted in holy
writ, allowed with so many invincible testimonies of sacred Scripture,
published by the approved writings of the best learned interpretour,
established with the unvanquishable authority of the holy Ghost, ratified with
the common consent of the ancient primitive Church, finally so manifestly
known by experience of all ages: where is then that heinous crime, Osorius
Page 142.
that cruel offense, that shameless trespass, and that intellerable fact (as
you say) not to be suffered in Luther? Nay rather to speak as the truth is,
from whence, or out of what puddle have you sucked ye shameless impudency
(Osorius) singular foolishnes, unmeasurable Sycopha^ticall rage, frantique
tragical furye, and so cruel and unreasonable a custom of raylyng against
your Christian brethren, without all cause, or reason, who have rather deserved
well, the^ evil at your hands? I know not whether this proceeded from any
cankred malice lurkyng within you, or through corruption of your nature. Sure I
am that you never learned that insolency out of holy Scriptures, or out of the
rules of the Gospel, or by ensuyng the example of Christ and his Apostles, or
their mylde and courteous conversation. But perhaps Osorius has determined with
him self, to leave to ye posterity some especial Jewel, as a monument of
his eloquence: as Cicero did his Inuectiues called Phillipica. etc. Phillipica.
Yea it had been more convenient for him, to have chosen some other Method to
treat upon, and far more seemly to have bent the rage of his pen against
some others, rather then against Luther, Bucer and others the like. For if he
were willing to confess the truth simply, what other doctrine does Luther,
Bucer, Haddon and all others, (who discourse upon one self same Gospel)
teach, then the very same matter that S. Paul in so many his Epistles, does
so earnestly enforce? That is to say. That we should ascribe all ye hope of our
salvation in Jesus Christ only, and in him alone repose all our whole ankerhold
of righteousness, not in our selves, but in ye son of God: not in the law of
works, but in the law of faith: not in the precepts of godly life, as
Augustine witnesses, August. Epist. 105.
but in the faith of Jesus Christ: not in the letter, but in the spirit: not in
the merits of good deeds, but in the mercy of God: Finally after that sort
in his mercy, that we should not accoumpt this mercy, to be mercy at all,
according to the saying of Augustine, unless it be altogether freely given.
How now? are Christians now a days straighted in such brambles, that it may
not be lawful to speak franckely in the congregation the self same, which
the Prophets, Apostles, Christ him self, the holy Ghost and the purest
Authors of ancient antiquity have set down in writing, but that the party
so doing shall be forthwith detected as though he practiced to subvert all
honesty, and virtuous endeavor? and shall be constrained to plead for him
self, as if he were arrayned a common Barretour, and had committed some
heinous horrible, and execrable fact more detestable then high Treason?

Neither are these all the crimes yet wherewith this Tertullian rayler does
rage in his raylyng: but crawleth foreward by enceasing degreees of
amplificatio^. For being not satisfied to have accused Luther, as an vndermyner
of all honestye, and virtue: to have cut in pieces the very sinews of godly
exercise, and virtuous endeavor: besides this horrible accusation he charge
him also, with a crime passing all measure intolerable. And what is that?
Because (says he) he does wrest the mind and wisdom of Paul to serve his
own lust. page 142.
And redoublyng the same again in other words, because he will not seem to
be an unskillful Ciceronian, he adds further. And he does abuse the
testimonies of holy Scriptures to establish his own unshamefastness. etc.
Where Sir I pray you? For sooth in sundry places of the Apostle, and especially
in the Epistle written to the Romans. Wherein because it shall not only be
conceived in mind, but also perceived by the view, how disorderly Luther the
Standard bearer of all heritiques, and his Cabbenmate Haddon, and all the
counterfaites of this new Gospel have always hitherto in the interpretation
of that Epistle, gropyngly like nightowles lumpred in darkness: Let us all
and every of us open our eyes, and ears now, and lysten to this new starte up
Prophet, whiles this our most elegant Tertullus sittyng at high deske, may
instruct us all blockyshe Asseheades, and as it were an other Archymenides with
line upon the sand, chalk us out a way, and set up some special marks,
whereby we may find out the lively and natural sense, mind, and meaning of
that Epistle.

Osori. Exposition upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans.
And first of all concerning the Gentiles (because he may begin with them as
Paul does) he says, that it is evident enough, that they were enlightened
with a singular gift of nature, endued with excellent understanding, adorned
and beautified with wonderful ornaments of Nature. Who has ever denied this?
Go to what follows hereof? Page 142.
Wherefore for as much as this so great force of nature, excellency of
understanding, knowledge in learning, yea so great worthynesse of reason and
capacity, could avail nothing at all with the Gentiles to perfect and
righteous living: (for they did exceed in all iniquity and outrageous lust)
thereby appears plainly, that nature was void of all aid and help to
attain the righteousness of eternal life. And this much by the way touching
the Gentiles. From whom after the Apostle had removed away all confidence,
which was usually ascribed to the law of nature, he turns his speech
forthwith to the Jews. And because the Jews them selves did in like manner
place their whole affiaunce in those shadows and outward ceremonies: The
Apostle likewise, yea more sharply also inueyeth against them, declaryng that
all those Ceremonies of the law, and Ordinances prescribed by Moses did
profit them nothing at all, whereby they might be any jot more restrained
from running headlong into all kind of wickedness, nothing less inclined to
all filthynesse of conversation, neither any myte less estraunged from
virtuous endeavor then the profane Gentiles: whereby appears that the effect
of Paul's Conclusion te^deth to this end: To make this manifest, that neither
nature, nor the Ceremonies of Moses law, that is to say, washyngs, Sacrifices,
clensinges, Circumcision, and such like corporal ordinances, (with the
confidence whereof that people did swell and were puffed up in pride) did take
away sin, or did any thing at all avail to righteousness. By this discourse
of Osorius, I doubt not (gentle Reader) but that thou do sufficiently
understand, if thou be of any capacity, what the meaning of Paul, and the
whole sense and disposition of his doctrine in this Epistle to the Romans does
purporte, according to Osorius his Divinity. That is to say. That we may
learn, how that we may not hope for any aid toward our Salvation, from
nature, or any ordinances of the old law: which being granted, it remains
further to learn out of this Oracle of our great Master, from whence we ought
at length to seek for the true way of Salvation, and in what point it chiefly
consists: forsooth in righteousness (says he) that is to say as Osorius does
define it. Wherein the sauetie of a Christian consists according to Osorius.
In Eschewyng sin, and earnestly embracyng all godliness, virtue, and
piety: unto the which righteousness only we ought to refer all surety, and
ankerhold of our salvation. And hereupo^ is coined a new Oracle, not from
Delphos in Boeotia, but forged by Osorius in the wilderness of Syluain, worthy
to be Registered to eternity of all people and tounges. Page 142.
For righteousness only (says he) does reconcile God to mankind. The man
has spoken.

This mystery being exquisitely piked out of the hidden mysteries of Divinity,
sithence Osorius requires so earnestly to be granted him without
contradiction, what shall become of that Faith only, wherewith those
Lutheranes and Bucerans do prattle so much, them selves to be justified by? Nay
rather what shall become of any Faith at all (Osorius) if the only
righteousness of works, do accomplish the absolute fullness of our
Justification? Oingenious head, and wonderful deep conclusion, framed through
conference of reasons, and apt application of the middle proposition with the
first, and Clarckely concludyng, and shuttyng up the same into one knotte
together. Unless this our deep Divine had cunnyngly culled this Argument out
of the closet of the Popes own breast, as out of some horsepoole, within whose
bosom all knowledge of God, and man is enclosed: or unless this Endymyon had
soundly snorted in Aristotle's Ethickes, as it were in the hill Parnassus: can
any man doubt, whether he could ever have been able so happily, to have
pierced into the inward, and hidden meaning of the Apostles doctrine, with so
great sharpness and force of wit, and understanding? or have ever descried
the sense thereof so effectually? and discovered it so aboundauntly? Why do we
not triumphauntly rejoice in this happiness of learning in this blessed estate
of the Catholic people, and this our age? and be joyful for ye good success
of that notable Realm of Portingall especially? Which being otherwise renowned
for the great treasure of their trade in Marcha^dizes, is yet become most
fortunate in respect of this inestimable Jewel of ye world: which except in
this great darkness of understanding had gratified us with this wonderful
Divine, who might restore unto life all piety and Religion suppressed by
Luther, who could with such singularity express the meaning of Paul, being
sinisterly corrupted after the sensuality of naughty packes: and could so
exquisitely have hitte ye nail on the head: all men might justly have doubted,
lest Divinity should have growe^ into great peril of utter undoing, and have
been throwe^ into an unrecoverable downfall. For what man in the world would
have interpreted Paul's Epistle in this wise, if he had not heard this man
before?

Truly I for my part and others like unto me, being not inspired with so
profou^de and deep capacity, did always heretofore conceive of the matter
after this manner: That the Apostles whole endeavor and travail in that Epistle
te^ded to none other end, then by making men behold the greatness of Gods
wrath first against sin, he might the better enduce them to perceive and
feel how all nations and people, as well Heathenishe, as the Jews also them
selves chiefly, continuyng in the profession of Gods law, were yet concluded
under sin: and so might dispoyle them all of all matter to glory upon, and
so having humbled, and brought them into subjection before God, might raise
again their comfort in Christ, by denouncyng unto them firm assured hope,
wherewith who soever did as then, or would believe in him afterward, should
obtain everlasting life: not through the merit of any work, but by the
especial grift of the free promise: not for our worthynesse, but for our
faythes sake simply, without works: that the promise might be infallible, not
through any our merit, which is none at all, but by the mercy of God: not
according to the proportion of that singular righteousness which is of our
selves, and peculiar to every of us, but according to that righteousness,
which is through the faith of Christ Jesus, which is of God: even that only
righteousness which is through faith. Phil. 3.
I have been always hitherto persuaded that this was the very natural meaning
and sense of Paul's doctrine: The true understanding of justification according
to S. Paul.
and this the right rule of Justification: neither could I ever guess, that
when Paul pronounces us to be Justified by faith without deeds of the law,
that part of the law was excluded only which did treat of Ceremonies, and had
relation to the body, and apperteined not to the soul. But I according to my
gross dullness rather, did conceive of his saying in this wise: and not I
alone, but many other good men iarryng always upon the same stryng, mistook
the note as I did, and were of opinion, that Paul by that his exemption, did
not exclude the Ceremonial, and shadowishe law only, which served the letter
only, but that most absolute and perfect part of the law also indifferently,
whereof he makes his whole discourse in that Epistle: the which also he does
note by name, to be spiritual, and says that it procures wrath: which was
common to the Jews and Gentiles all alyke. Even the same part of the law
which commands that thou shall not lust: Romans 7.
by examination whereof Sin is discerned: Romans 4.
Finally the same handwrityng contained in the ten Tables written against us,
Romans 3.
which was fastened upon the Cross of Christ. Ephesians. 2.
Because all those sayings could not be referred to the Ceremonial law, but
to that part of the law which was contained in the precepts of manners, we
could never otherwise interpret the sense and meaning of the Apostle then by
such comparison of his own words together, until this new Doctor had
published to the world this new light of Exposition. Co^sideryng therefore the
matter is in this plight: It remains now (gentle Reader) that I appeal to
thy Judgment, and abide thy verdite herein: whether it may seem to thee that
Luther have wrested the mind and words of the Apostle after his lust, or
Osorius rather have perverted the same to his own folly. But go to: I think
good now to note the Arguments wherewith Osorius judges him self to be
strongly fenced.

If Paul (says he) had said, Page 143.
that the Jews were comme^dable for their integrity and innocence of life,
and yet that those deeds of godlynes did nothing avail them to attain
righteousness, and so had concluded afterward, that they were not justified
through the works of the law, the matter would then have opened it self, that
by the name of works, he did mean the best actions and duties of virtue.
Here is a strong foundation enough (I suppose) of an infallible Sillogisme
delivered unto you, attend now the other proposition of the same.

But this (says he) is not found in that whole discourse of Paul, nay
rather he does condemn them as guilty of all wickedness and cruelty. This
groundworke being this laid, it remains that we ra^me fast this buildyng up
with some good mortar, which in the manner of a conclusion, is applied in this
wise.

Therefore Paul does rightly conclude, that where he affirms no man to be
justified through the deeds of the law, he means, that the Ceremonies,
shadows, and Cleansinges of the law, which consisted in outward observation,
did nothing at all profit to the attayneme^t of Righteousness. O passing
pearcyng wit of Chrysippus. O miserable Luther utterly overthrown with this
Argument. But go to, let us aid Luther somewhat, and help to unloose this
Gordian knotte if it be possible. And although we may utterly deny the form
of this Argument at the first choppe, because it contains more in the
conclusion, then was spoken of in the premises: yet either pardonyng, or
wynking at this escape: Let us examine the substance of the first proposition.
If Paul (quoth he) had perceived the life of the Jews to have been undefiled,
and all the endeuoures and works of their life sincere and perfect: and then
had concluded that no man had been Justified by the works of the law. etc. In
deed (good Sir) I confess the same to be true. If the Apostle had perceived
this at the first, and then had added that also that you speak, it might
happily then in some respect have followed as you have conclucluded. But it
could not be possible Osorius, that the Apostle would ever speak after that
sort. For it is evident by Gods Scripture, that it is impossible but that he
which performs the Commandments shall live by them. Deuteronomy. 4. 5.
Wherefore if their conversation had been void of all blame, and with like
integrity could have answered and thoroughly satisfied the perfect law of God
unto the uttermost title thereof: it can not be doubted but that Paul would
never have denied that those should be justified by the works of the law, who
do lead a perfect and upright life. Yea rather he would have affirmed this that
he spoke there, which is most true: Romans 2.
Glory, honor, and peace be unto every one that works righteousness, to
the Jews as well as to the Gentiles. etc. But now when as he foresaw, that the
Jews did swell with a certain Pharisaicall opinion of their works, and
proudly vaunted them selves upon them, disdaynefully detestyng all other as
Heathenish, ungodly, in respect of them selves, neither seemed to stand in any
need of the Mediator: Therefore to the end he might shake away from them that
pestilent persuasion of their own righteousness, and force them to seek
succor at Christ: hereupon he did utterly dispoyle all works of ability to
Justify: that is to say, he so takes away all Affiance of our works being of
all parts imperfect, because he may ascribe it wholly to faith only, and
repose the same in Christ alone.

Therefore that I may orderly and distinctly make answer to that your Mayor,
being Hypotheticall, and Copulative which you do so intricately entangle, and
miserably choke up with obscu^e speech. First of all we must remember that the
observation of the law has a double understanding: A double observation of the
law.
for after one sort Christ did observe the law of his Father: but mortal men
observe it after an other sort: Christ most perfectly and absolutely: but we
weakly and rawly, yea I know not if we perform any portion thereof very
meanly. Whereupon arises a double consideration of righteousness: the one
perfect, and is peculiar to Christ, and is only of value with God: the other
imperfect, and lame which properly apperteineth to man, and perhaps carries
some resemblaunce of holiness in the opinion of men, but is of no estimation
before God, nor suffices to Salvation. Moreover to the purchasing of that
first and sincere righteousness, man must be furnished with two principal
Tallentes: the one, that he so accomplish the whole law, that no part thereof
be defective: The other, that he so thoroughly perform every part thereof,
that nothing may be added to absolute perfection. Or else he may hear what the
Scripture threateneth. Deuteronomy. 27.
Cursed be he that persisteth not in all the words of the law to do them.
etc. Gallat. 3.
Again, He that breaks the least of them, is guilty of them all. James. 2.
Now for as much as never any man was able to bring that thing to pass but
Christ only, it is out of all controversy, that all other mortal men, as
well Jews, as Gentiles, are fast holden under the curse: Whereupon the
Apostle, after long debatyng of the matter, concludes: That no man can be
Justified by the works of the law. Which sentence is not yet so to be taken,
as though no deeds of the law being sincerely, and, perfectly done, according
to the prescript rule of law, could profit any thing at all toward
Salvation, for the very same was performed in the person of Christ, whose life
being of all parts, free altogether, from all blemish of Sin, could not be
attaynted with that saying of Paul, That no man could be Justified by the
works of the law, for that he was justified through his own works,
especially. With as good right also, might we maintain our like challenge
therein, if our infirmity were able to raise it self, to that perfection of
Christ. Whereupon we hear the Apostle very aptly arguyng in this wise. Galat.
3.
If that law (says he) had been delivered, that could have given life, then no
doubt righteousness had come by the law. Gallat. 3. But wherefore is it said
that the law can not give life? Wherefore the law justifies not.
Not because the law wa^ted her efficacy to give life, but because we were
destitute of sufficient power to accomplish the perfection of the law. For
otherwise what can be of more force to righteousness, then the law? or what
more effectual to eternal life, then righteousness? if at the least the same
were perfect, or that our nature were capable of that righteousness
absolutely. But now being environed with so great weakness of the flesh, and
of all sides beset with Sins, yea and sold under Sin, when all our endeavor
is yet so imperfect, that we neither perform the whole law, neither comprehend
any small portion thereof with duetyfull and exact righteousness. Therefore that
saying of the Apostle may rightely be applied unto us, wherein he affirms
That no man is Justified by the works of the law.

What works do signify by Paul.
For as to that, which Osorius with his crooked conueyaunce does wrest these
deeds of the law to the Ceremonial law, is altogether fond, frivolous and
worthy to be scorned, as being overthrown with many sound reasons. First,
besides that it does manifestly appear, by the whole discourse, and phrase of
that Epistle it self, that Paul treated there, of none other law, then the
moral law, it is to be approved chiefly in these words, where the Apostle
does not only testify him self, of what law he made mention in that place,
but also of what part of the law: he does reason in this wise, of the self
same law. For that which the law could not bring to pass, even in that part,
wherein it was weak by reason of the infirmity of the flesh. etc. But this
part surely consisted not in the Ceremonial law, but in the Moral law of the
ten Tables: whereupon we do argue against Osorius in this wise: No man is
bereft of righteousness, but in that part only, wherein offense is committed.

But the Jews offended nothing in the Ceremonial law, only they sinned in
the Moral law.

It is manifest therefore, that Paul spoke not there of the Ceremonial law,
but of the law of the ten Tables.



Moreover whereas Paul did discourse of that Law which procures wrath. Romans
4. Romans 4. 5.2. 3.7.9.13.
Which was given that sin might be more sinful. Rome. 5. Which is said to
be written in the hearts of the Gentiles. Romans 2. Which does discover the
knowledge of Sin. Romans 3. Which forbids to lust, which is called holy, and
is spiritual, by the which Sin does show it self more aboundauntly to
purchase damnation. Romans 7. From which law we be delivered by the death of
Christ. Romans 7. Which is called the law of righteousness. Romans 9. Final the
full accomplishing whereof is love. Romans 13. These and many other places if you
have not perused in Paul's Epistles I desire you to vouchsafe to read them. If
you have read them, then I beseech you to answer me, whether to your
Judgment these sayings seem to concern the Ceremonial law, or that part of
the law especially, which consists in the actions and duties of manners, and
common conversation of life?

But you say that the Jews did put over much confidence in their Ceremonies:
The righteousness of the Jews.
And therefore to drive away the confidence which they reposed in them, the
Apostles meaning was to aduertize them, that they should ascribe true
righteousness to those outward Ceremonies shadows and cleansinges. What a jest
is this? as though the Jews did settle their confidence in the Ceremonies
only? and did not much more rather glory in their Race? in their Parentage? in
their worshippyng and calling upon God? in their Prophets? in Gods promises?
in the deeds and works of holiness? Furthermore whereas this Epistle was not
written to the Jews, but to the Romans, what answer will Osorius make
here? Were the Romans also instructed to the observation of those Ceremonies?
or did they rest so much upon them, that it behooued the Apostle of necessity,
to forewarne them in his letters written unto them? But what better weapon
shall I use in this conflict against Osorius then one taken out of his own
armory? for thus he speaks. Page 143.
If the Apostle had first praised the Jews for their virtues, and good deeds,
and afterward had said that those virtues and good deeds were of no value
toward the purchasing of righteousness, and then at last had concluded, that
they could not have been Justified through the works of the law, then the
matter had been clear that Paul had not excluded the Ceremonial law only,
but the Moral law also from righteousness. Mark well gentle Reader, and note
aduizedly what he speaks. If Paul had first praised the works of the Jews,
and afterward had derogated Justification from these works. etc. Uery well:
and what if out of the same Nation I do name some men, whose singular
integrity of life and study of righteousness Paul could by no means
reprove, yea whose godly endeavor and upright dealyng procured them no drop
of righteousness notwithstanding? what will this Sophister say then?

The faith and righteousness of Abraham.
And first of all let us behold the works of that most holy Patriarche Abraham,
who for his inestimable godliness, can never be condignely enough commended of
any of us. And yet will ye hear (Osorius) the testimony of the Apostle
touching the same Patriarche? Romans 4.
What shall we say (says he) that our Father Abraham did find according to
the flesh? For if Abraham were Justified through works, he has wherein he may
glory, but not in the sight of God. Romans 4. What then? did he not obtain of
God to be called righteous? Yes verily: but let us see by what means, not
through works says the Apostle: but by the commendation of his faith, which
only makes us appear worthy in the sight of God. Gene. 15.
For Abraham believed God, and it was Imputed unto him for righteousness. It is
manifest therefore that he was accoumpted righteous, but by what means?
forsooth not simply nor in respect of his works, but by way of Imputation
only. Now what soever comes of Imputation, proceeds from mere mercy of
him that Imputes, and is not given in reward after the proportion of duty,
or of debt. For no man Imputes that to an other, that is duly owyng unto
him. Now let us here the testimonies of the Scriptures concerning that which
was Imputed. Not because he did the things which he was commanded (albeit he
did many things wonderfully well) but because he believed God, this was said to
be Imputed unto him for righteousness. And why was not righteousness imputed
unto him as well in those respects, because he did sacrifice unto God? Because
he forsook his native country? Because he offered his only son to be
slain? Neither does the Apostle ouerskippe, or conceal those causes,
especially because that he which was the Parente of the Posterity, ye same
also should be the Author of the doctrine. For why? this was written (says
Paul) videl. That it was Imputed unto him for righteousness, not for his sake
only, but for us also to whom it shall likewise be Imputed, that believe in
him, which raised our Lord Jesus from death to life. etc. Rome. 4. Romans 4.


And thus much concerning Abraham, who though alone may suffice in place of all
others, so that we need none other example, yet let us join to this holy
Patriarche, as holy a King: The faith and righteousness of David.
David with Abraham both being dear unto God, both equally endued with like
excellent orname^tes of godliness and virtue. Whereof the one as he had
nothing whereupon to glory before God, so the other did so disclayme altogether
from righteousness, that he besought nothing more carefully of God in his
prayers, Psalm. 142.
Then that he would not enter into Judgment with his servant. And renders a
Reason of his most earnest prayer. Because all flesh shall not be Justified in
thy sight. And what other thing is meant by this, then that which Paul
affirms in the self same words almost, That no man is Justified by the
works of the law? Go to then: And where are now those wonderful fruits of
works? Where is that glorious show of righteousness? Finally where shall
Osorius him self appear with all his cleannes? good disposition? temperaunce
of mind? singular humanity? lenity? patience? chastity? unfeigned charity?
and with that absolute huge Chaos of bountyfull virtues so unseparably united
and linked together as it were chayned fast with iron ropes? When as David so
great a King and Prophet, a most choice vessel, according to Gods own heart,
dare not presume to offer him self to Judgment? The righteousness of Job.
when as Job a man commended of God for his singleness of heart, and approved
holiness, being asked a question of God, durst not answer one word.

The faith and righteousness of Paul.
It will not be Impertine^t to the matter, if we speak somewhat here of Paul
him self. Whose conversation (which he led unblameable, being as yet a
Pharisie) Tertullus him self could not charge with any fault. The same being
afterward engraffed into Christ, lived in that vprightenesse of conscience,
that Osorius ca^ not justly reprehende him, as worthy of crime. And yet all
those so great and so many ornaments of holiness, did so nothing avail him to
righteousness, that he him self accounted them for dross. Wherefore
consider here with me Christian Reader a good fellowship, how much difference is
betwixt Osorius and Paul: where as the same works which Osorius does with so
glorious pomp of eloque^t words, garnishe so gorgiously, Paul in plain
terms, does compare the^ to durtie dross and filthy dounge, Phil. 3.
whereby he may be found in Christ not to have any his own righteousness by
the operation of the law, but that only righteousness grounded upon faith
which is through the faith of Christ. etc.

The faith and righteousness of Cornelius before god.
Cornelius of whom mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles: was a holy
man, and feared God, together which his whole household, dealyng much alms to
the poor, and making continual intercessions to almighty God. This was a
great, and glorious commendation truly, of excellent godliness, which no
sensible man would say, ought to be referred to the Ceremonial law, but to the
Moral law rather. And yet the self same Cornelius, being never so notable for
his commendable bertues, unless by ye aduertizement of ye Angel, had sent
for Peter, which might have endued him with the faith of Christ, what profit
had he gotten toward the attaynement of righteousness, by all those helps,
and aids of pity?

What shall be said of the rich young man in the Gospel who being commanded to
keep the commandments, The rich young man in the Gospel.
made answer that he had observed the same all the days of his life? What
shall I recite the example of the Pharisae prayeng in the Temple, The Pharisie
praying in the temple.
who vauntyng him self proudly upon trust of his works, gave thanks to God,
that he was not as others were, that he lived not of the spoil, did not
fraudulently deceive any man by contractes, nor prodigally consume his own
goods, nor defile his neighbors wife, committed not adultery, was not
murderer, or wrong doer to his neighbors, neither was of that sort like unto
the Publicane, but fasted twice in the Sabbath, gave the tenth of his goods,
to the poor? etc. What need I to produce Nathanaell, Nathaniell the true
Israelite.
whom Christ him self did both acknowledge to be a true Israelite, and praised
him for his unfeigned simplicity? Do ye not perceive that these persons,
besides their duetyfull obseruaunce of the Ceremonial law, did in utter show
express a certain resemblaunce of good works, and studious endeavor in the
Moral law? all which notwithstanding they were not ye valewe of one myte more
regarded in the sight of God. Albeit I do not allege these things to the end I
would extenuate the fault of the Jews, whom S. Paul affirms to be
inexcusable. But Osorius does not see the ground of Paul's accusation against
them. First of all the Apostle did very well forsee, that the law of God is of
all parts most perfect, and that it requires an exquisite, full and absolute
obedience to the same: which (as he conceived) could not possibly be performed
by any industry of man. Neither was he ignorant of the unmeasurable and
arrogaunt pride of that Nation lynked with like vanity: which being by a
wonderful far way distant from the mean observation of the law, did yet
swell, and were puffed up with a most false glaueryng conceit of their own
excellency and perfection, as though they had left no part thereof undone,
persuadyng unto themselves salvation thereby, wherein they had much rather
deserved utter destruction. And so did incur double offense. First, because
they did sundry ways horribly dishonor and defile Gods most sacred law: Then,
as though it were not material that they had not perfitely accomplished the
whole law: a man might justly marvel, how wonderfully they flattered them
selves, and as though they had trimmely behaved them selves at all assayes,
seemed in their own conceit to be pretty holy men, despising with a certain
Pharisaicall hautines all other Nations besides them selves. Wherefore the
Apostle indifferently tenderyng the miserable error of each Nation as well
Gentiles as Jews, does earnestly debate three things chiefly in that place.
The scope of Paul's disputation to the Romans.
First, that he might convince the Jews, as also the Gentiles indifferently,
that they were sinners before God. Then, that he might remove from them all
false opinion of Affiance. Lastly, that he might emprinte into them the true
way of Confidence. And in this last purpose of the Apostle, Osorius does openly
bewray his blockishe ignorance, swaruyng and varyeng altogether from the
intent of the Apostle. For although his Judgment be sound, and agreeable with
the Apostle in this, that the trust which the Jews reposed in the law of
Moses was no less vain, and void of reason, then the Confidence of the
Gentiles, who framed their life after the law of nature: yet when question is
moved touching the assignyng of true righteousness, Paul will teach one
thing, but Osorius an other.

Works of the Ceremonial and Moral law both are excluded from Justification.
For whereas Paul does bend the whole force of his disputation to this only
mark, that excludyng all other deeds, works, and endeavors, whether they
apperteine to the Ceremonial or Moral law, or to the rule and doctrine of
manners, he might refer the sum of our Justification, and hope of Salvation
wholly, and only, in the faith of the son of God. What other thing else does
this Ciceronian Tertullus discourse in those books entitled `De Iustitia?
Wherein he plays so much the Philosopher, as though he were in ye School of
Moral Philosophy, what else does he breath, practice, and and so greedely
maintain? then to persuade us, that wheresoever S. Paul does exclude works
from Justification, Osori. does take the works excluded from Justification for
the Ceremonies of the law.
he does exempt nothing else but the Ceremonial law: And so for conclusion,
that true righteousness is not that righteousness in the sight of God, which
Christ does Impute to the beleuers through faith, but that righteousness,
which every man does properly procure, and make peculiar to him self, through
his own virtue, sincerity, innocence and good conversation: Offryng the
combat pardy to Paul: whether in this quarrel of Justification, S. Paul
shall with more probable Arguments exclude Confidence from works, or Osorius
drive faith into utter exile: unto the which faith in all his books he leaves
no manner of place, truly yeldeth very little credit thereunto. Neither is it
any marvel: Page 142. ^, 140. ^.
For if the matter be as Osorius does report, That we ought to be just before
God, and not Justified before God: Faith has no place almost with Osorius.
And if righteousness only do procure the favor of God and Reconcile God to
mankind, wherein only we ought to settle all our sauety and worthiness: And if
no man an be righteous but he that keeps the law. That is to say: if the
just man shall now live but by works and not by Faith. Judge I beseech thee
(gentle Reader redeemed with the blood of Jesus Christ) of what efficacy
either Christ's blood shed for thee may be, or of what estimation thy faith
toward Christ must be. Truly by this means Osorius with his glorious
eloquence, may as well pluck down Christ out of heaven, banish Faith out of
the earth, snatche Paul out of our hands, root the Gospel out of our
hearts, and all comfortable consolation from our consciences: Finally despoyle
the world of the light of the Sun, that we may all together lumper and groape
in darkness, after this blind guide and Captain of darkness.

But here are one or two places of Paul objected against Paul him self,
whereby Osorius may ye better maintain his challenge against Paul with Paul's
own weapons. Page 143.
What? had not Paul (says he) a most sharp conflict with the Jews always
touching the Ceremonies? What hereof the^? Does he not in his Epistle to the
Galathians, protest in this wise? If ye be Circumcised, Christ does nothing
profit you: I confess this to be true. In like manner writing to the Hebrews,
does he not say that the law does avail nothing to perfection, meaning the
Ceremonial law? Conclude at the length therefore Osorius in despite of Logic
though she be never so angry. Ergo, wheresoever Paul does make mention of
abandonyng the law in the treaty of our Salvation, there we must of necessity
interpret the same to be spoken only of the Ceremonial law, and in no wise
of the Moral law. Ueryly I would not much stick with you herein good sir, if
according to your Logic it may be lawful to derive a conclusion from the
part to the whole. Osori. objection confuted.
But what kind of Argument is this? or who instructed you to frame an Argument
in this sort? In some places Osorius sporteth bitterly enough, using his
Rhetorical digressio^s, and is sometimes very pleasauntly disposed to play
with Haddones Schoolemaister his nose, who soever he were that informed him in
the principles of Rhetoric, when he was young: but how much more just cause
might I take here, if a man would use the offered occasion, to give the counter
scoff against your own Master quareller, whosoever he was which nooseled
your youth in Logic, Osori. does err in the rules of Logic.
and taught you so foolishly and senselesly to make bald Arguments, and to
fetch a Conclusion from an insufficient numbryng of parts to affirm ye
whole? For this is your disordered order of arguyng in this place. Paul once
or twice, or perhaps speaking oftentimes of the law, has relation to the
Ceremonial law. Ergo, wheresoever he makes any discourse about the law of
God, there his meaning tends to the same construction, eue^ through his whole
discourse, and in all his Epistles: Nay rather, if you did understand Paul
thoroughly, and would not crookedly wrest his meaning after your own gross
sensuality: Ye should easily perceive, Osori. Paralogisme from the
insufficient, enumeration of parts.
that by way of Negative, he does orderly proceed, after the surest manner of
arguyng, from the whole, to the parts, and from the universal, to the
particular: For if the universal proposition may justly be denied, it
follows of necessity, that the particular propositio^s may not be admitted.
As where he does say. No works at all of the law do Justify, ye may duly
conclude hereof. Ergo, neither the Ceremonial, Moral, Natural, Politic,
Civil, nor any other law does work Justification.

And mark here Osorius how much I do bear with you when as I do cut of so
much of mine own right unto you, which you could never be able by Argument
to win at my hands. For to admit the foundation of your Argument, which is
otherwise altogether false, we will yet for this present time grant it to
seem true, as you would your self it should be: that when Paul does reason
of the law, he does chiefly mean thereby the Ceremonial law. Yet what a
monstrous Argument is this, whereby ye travail to confirm the affirmation of
one part, by ye nagation of ye other part, in this wise: Paul does deny that
ye Ceremonial law does Justify ye Jews. Ergo, the Moral law does Justify
them. Nay rather how much more soundly should you have reasoned turning your
conclusion backward? If ye Ceremonial law which was ye principal substance
of Moses law do not Justify, Ergo, neither any other part of the law does
Justify. Albeit I will not deny, but that in the very swathlyng cloutes of the
primitive Church, many doubts arose amongst the Disciples them selves,
touching the reteinyng of Moses Ceremonies, in so much that Peter him self
durst not be so bold as to receive Cornelius the Captain into the fellowship of
the Gospel, before he was commanded by the heavenly Oracle. Neither could the
strife about the Ceremonial law, be yet so appeased amongst the brethren: for
the false Apostles, and such as were of the Circumcision, did stiffely, as it
were, with tooth and nail, The Ceremonies of the law very hardly abrogated in
the primitive church, Acts. 15.
defend the obseruaunces of the Ceremonial law, neither would give their
consent, that the Gentiles should be received into the congregation, unless
they would be Circumcized after Moses law, and endeavored all that they could
to charge the Christians with ye yoke of the Ceremonial law, Until in a
Counsel holden at Jerusalem the holy Ghost did determine, that the Gentiles,
should not be charged with any Judicial Traditions, except a very few only.
And it is not to be doubted, as Osorius does say, that Paul had much ado in
every place, about this Ceremonial law, yea and dealt ofte^tymes therein, not
without manifest peril of life. Yet all this whiles, appeared not so much as
one sparckle of dissension, or doubtfulnesse, nor any one question was raised
amongst the brethren, against the Moral law, the keepyng whereof was yet
adjudged most necessary. The controversy remained as yet about the Ceremonies
and customs of Moses law. At the last, when this question was decided,
further inquiry began to be made afterward of that part of the law, which
seemed to challenge chief authority and especial government over the
consciences of men.

The moral law abrogated, not in respect of the use, but in respect of
Justification.
And even here through the inestimable benefit of GOD sprang up unto us S.
Paul. Who first of all did call back the controversy of this question, from
the special, or particular, to the general or universal: disputing not only
of the outward Ceremonies, but of the whole doctrine of the Moral law also.
Whereunto I suppose he was moved not without great cause. For he had an
incklyng surely, that the very same thing would ensue thereof, which
afterward came to pass. That the Ceremonial law being once made altogether
ineffectual, many persons would wrongfully ascribe their free Justification
purchased with the blood of Jesus Christ, to the works of the Moral law:
which thing as Paul did foresee in the false Apostles, the self same we may
easily perceive now to happen in our Pharisaicall Rabbynes in these our days:
and amongst all other in this our Osorius chiefly, at this present: wherefore
it is not to be doubted, but that S. Paul was raised up by the special
providence of God, even for this purpose: who discoursing thoroughly upon the
whole law, and upon the effect, use, office and end of the law, does fully
describe unto us, how much we ought to attribute to our works, and how much we
ought to yield to the grace of God: and herein discovers the very
well-sprynges of sound doctrine: finally declares unto us, which is the
false, and which is the true righteousness in the sight of God: and wherein
the same does consist. Likewise whereunto it ought not be referred: Psalm. 142.
Not to works (says he) for no man living shall be Justified by works. Well
then: if not by works, how then? Galat. 3.
Through Faith (says he) in Jesus Christ. Yet is not this all that he speaks:
But adding thereunto a proof, he yeldeth this reason. Romans 4.
Because if through works (says he) then is it not now of promise. After this
manner teaches Paul both learnedly, and plainly. But our Osorius practizeth to
wype away this negative proposition of Paul with a trim shift, as though
Paul in all those places, where he discharges works from Justification, did
mean nothing else, but that no man should repose trust of assured sauetie in
the Ceremonial law only. Uery well: then is it reason that he teach us
whereupon we should ground our Aff^aunce. Verily in Faith, says the Apostle
Paul, and so in Faith, that if in works, then not in Faith at all. This is
truly spoken by the Apostle. But what says Osorius? in the Ceremonies of ye
old law? no, not so: for that were altogether Jewish: in Faith therefore?
neither yet so in any wise, for this is the very doctrine of Luther. Uouchsafe
therefore a good fellowship (Osorius) to escry out one safe Haven for us, wherein
we poor forlorn abiectes may cast Anchor, and save our selves from shipwreck.

Forsooth in works (says Osorius) and in keepyng the prescribed rules of
virtuous life. Osori. Judgment of Justification.
That is to say, in Innocence, in chastity, in modesty, in abstinence, in
uprightness of mind, in holiness of Religion, in feruentnesse of the
spirit, in abou^daunce of the love of God, in earnest endeavor of godliness,
in deeds of righteousness, duties of piety, in geuyng much almonesse, in
obedience, in keepyng peacible unity, and such like ornaments and treasures
whereof Osorius in many words makes a long rehearsal. Of all which virtues,
there is not so much as one croome, or sparckle in these Lutherans, and
Buceranes, and these new Gospellers: the^ which kind of people nothing can be
named more wicked, nothing thought upon more pestiferous, nothing more
troublesome in the common wealth, nothing more readyly armed to raise
maliciousness, to sow contentious quarelles, strife, and enemitie, nothing
more pernicious to procure the destruction of Princes, none more given to
bloudsuckyng and Treason, who being embrued with all wickedness,
licentiousness, liberty, lust, with all manner shamelessenesse, cruelty and
madness, outragiously rushe into all places, whereby they may thrust their
Gospel in place, and defile all things with filthy stenche: wheresoever they
make never so little abode, they corrupt the land with treacherous villainies:
finally they do poison the air, they do abandone chastity, give full scope
to voluptuousness, root out all fear of Gods law, and man's law: and in all
this outrage they promise unpunishable liberty. On the contrary part, The
fruit of good works betwixt the Papists and Protestates to be wayed
indifferently.
I mean in the Court of Rome, and in all that most sacred City florisheth a
far other manner of countenance and Majesty of severe discipline, and
virtuous life. And first of all in that most royal high and chief Prelate, and
most renowned Monarche of all Prelates, sittyng in Peter's own chair. In those
Reverend estates of the Tridentine Council, in the worshypfull Massemongers of
the Romish Church, in the great Doctors of that old Gospel, in Monasteries,
and Dorters, the very forgeshops of most pure doctrine, in ye most chaste Selles
of holy Nuns, finally in all that sacred Senate, and Catholic people, no
such Presidentes of wickedness, and abomination may be seen: no spotte so
much of corrupt infection reigns: no ambition, no lust, no insolency,
neither any kind of malice, no quarellyng, no cruelty, no foul or unseemly
thing sauoryng of any earthly contagion can be discernable amongst this
generation: But whole heaps yea huge mountains of godly and heauealy store
does florishe and abound: no unquietness or molestation of Empires, and
Princely government, no seed plottes of mortal wars, no show so much of
bloody battle, no Treason, no overthrow of Kings, and public authority,
nor any seditious pla^tes of co^tentious discord: finally no earthly thing in
the secret closettes of the Romish Court, in so much that if Diogenes would in
midday, with torche in hand, prye never so narrowly, he should no be able to
find in all the City of Rome, one Harlot, or strumpet so much: To conclude,
it is not possible to hear amongst that most sacred Catholic conuenticle,
any sound of cauillation at all, no mutteryng of outrageous slanders, no
blaste of cunnyngly forged lies, whereof as all others of that sect are clear,
so are these books of Osorius chiefly most purely purged: wherein appears no
smatche of brabling distempered affections, no lyeng slander, nor jar of
erroneous doctrine, no signification of a mind troubled and severed from the
Castle of Reason. But all things are debated and expounded with peaceble
gentleness, quiet tranquillity of mind, wonderful lenity and mildness,
not with rigorous and malicious words, not with slanderous and carterlike
reproaches, but with invincible Arguments, as forcible as the darts of
Achilles, or Hector, discharged (I think) out of the very guts of ye Trojan
horse, nothing uttered to ye vain ostentatio^ of wit, or reuengeme^t of
spightfull hatred, as it were in Triumph of victory (fie beware of that gentle
Reader) but of a very simple and earnest desire to advance virtue and piety,
for this especial cause forsooth, that those sparks and Embres of honesty,
and godliness, which Luther has raked up, buried and utterly quenched out,
might once again be quickened and florishe in that most sacred See of Rome.

These, even these same, The marks of true righteousness among the Papists.
be the works (if ye will needs know them Catholic Reader) and good deeds
of those men, wherewith they do prepare an entyre to true righteousness, and
furnish their journey to heaven, and wherewith, as it were with ladders, they
clymbe by step to the purchase of eternal inheritance. And how else? this
even this must be the right way to heaven. But in the mean space with how
many foggy, and thick clouds, has S. Paul the servant of God, and Apostle
of Jesus Christ, overwhelmed the Christian people? And into how deep, and
darkened doungeons has he drowned our senses? Who albeit was rapt into the
third heaven, had not as yet conceived this incomprehensible wisdom out of
the very forgeshops of mystical Philosophy? Belike he could not escry
throughout all the heavens, this hidden secret, that men are not Justified by
works, but are made righteous by the Faith of the son of God, and so by
faith, that in no respect by works: Finally that the especial means and
singular substance of our Justification, is in this sort to be wayed, as
that it may not be attained else where then in Christ only, nor by any other
means, then through Faith only in Christ. But if S. Paul had not received
this doctrine from heaven, or had not taught us the doctrine which he received
from thence, or if you for your part (Osorius) had disputed after this sort as
ye teach now, in any Paynyme common wealth, or before any Ethnicke
Philosophers, or amongst the Jews or Turks, it might happily have come to
pass (I suppose) that this your Aristotlelike Justice might have obtained at
the least some resemblaunce of truth, or perhaps crept into some credit: nay
rather it is not to be doubted, but if the Jews them selves, or Turks, were
now consederate with you in Portingall, in the same Argument, they could not
scarsely allege any other proofs then you bring forth unto us at this
present, neither would, I think, expou^de ye same in any other phrase of
words, then your self do use. But now, for as much as we contend not together
in Tullies Tusculane questions, nor in his Academycall probabilities, nor in
Platoes common wealth, nor in the Iewishe Thalmude, ne yet in the Turks
Alcaron, but in the Church of Jesus Christ: surely ye ought to have regarded
the place chiefly, where you were when ye wrate this: and to know how you ought
to have behaved your self, when you were there: what doctrine you ought have
published in so great an Auditorie, what personage ye do represent in your
country, not the person of a common Ruffian (I suppose) but of a Bishop: mary
now you have played so the part of a very rascal under the visor of a Bishop
(pardon me I pray you speaking the truth) that no common barrettor, nor Rogish
Ruffian could vomitte out more shameless scurrilitie. S. Paul does so little
esteem the credit of any other Gospel, That he holds him no better then
accursed, yea though an Angel from heaven do bring a contrary one to this
same. And shall we bear with this collouerthwarte Osorius like a vice in a
play, with a new found chau^gelyng, to make myngle mangle with the sacred
word of the Lord? and with such unsavory subtelties, to pervert the pure, and
undefiled sincerity of the Gospel of grace? and like a wild Boar, to moyle
up by the roots, the florishyng and most plentyfull Uynearde of our blessed
felicity planted by the Lord him self? If that blind bussardly Owl eyes of
your mind (Osorius) be as yet wrapped in so darkened a cloud, that this
clear light of the gracious mercy of God, shynyng from above, can not pearce
into those dull dazeled senses, to see the manifest light of the truth: it
should yet have been much more seemly for you to have comforted them, whom the
holy Ghost had enabled with better grace to teach the truth, and so simply to
have yielded to the same: Truly it behooved you to have quallified your rage,
and used more modesty at the least, toward them that did dissence from you.
And if your self were not willing to pursue the true pathe to heaven, ye
should not yet have foreclosed the entrye to others, that were willing to enter
in: And knowing your own disabilitie in teaching, ye should yet more,
shamefastly have bewrayed your unskillfulness, and made some end once at the
length, or at the least retained some reasonable order, from that rascallyke
raylyng, and immeasurable insolency: and not so wilfully have rushed into such
Tragical exclamations, before you had been better acquainted with the cause.
But as now you toss and turmoyle your self in these questions as though ye
were of some other profession, and a mere stranger to the matter: wherein you
scarcely savor any thing at all, surely understand so little, so coldly and
senselesly, as no man more brutishly, and with all use your self therein so
disorderly and outragiously, as the very furies of Hell could not more horribly.

You must pardon me (Osorius) if I spoke plainly, and franckly as I think,
wherein I will not speak as moved of malice, or of any melancholicke
affection, against your person: whom I wish well unto truly, and beseeke God
heartily, to grant a more sound Judgment. But I fear me (Osorius) least
within this Osorius dwells some other guest besides Osorius, and he not all
the best perhaps, whatsoever he be, that does continually teaze, and prick
foreward those busy brains of yours, to poisoned and pestiferous devises: of
whom I wish you to be well assured (Osorius) if you love your souls sauetie.
But if wholesome Counsel of a wellwiller shall little prevail with you. I
would aduertize the tender unskillful youth of the posterite in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, An exhortation to the Readers.
that they take diligent beedefulnesse to the readyng of Osorius his books,
left being allured with sweet poisoned bayte, as with Mermaydes melody (do use
the words of S. Jerome) they be hooked unawares, and carried away into
delusions and errors. I know how plausible, and easy a matter it is to the
Judgment of the flesh, learnedly and plentyfully to preach of the payse, and
comme^dation of virtue, or righteousness, of the rules and precepts of man's
life, of Civil government, of polliticque Statutes and ordinances, and of
the excellency of laws. And there happens not for the more part in any
other Theme, a more swifter readynesse of speech, a more sensible sharpness
of devise, or more usual admiration of worldlynges: The praise of Cicero and
other au^cie^t Philosophers discoursing upon virtue.
Wherein many notable Rhetoricians, and most subtle Philosophers heretofore
have thought best to employ their endeavors, and whole force for their
eloquence, not without great commendation of wit, and singular praise of
ingenious invention: whole laudable travail therein, I ought and can not choose
but account prayseworthy, as men that were desirous to emparte to the
posterity most worthy mo^umentes achieved through excellency of learning,
and nymblenesse of capacity, and severe pursuyng of virtue and virtuous
discipline, wherewith they were wouderfully beautified. But I return to
Osorius, whose diligence also in Imitation I do commend, for that he has
made his choice of such especially, after whom he may direct his Imitation. But
whereas he does nothing else but affect their Heathenishenesse, I do not only
not praise him, but utterly disallow and refuse his order of study herein.
These men having none other so commendable an exercize, wherein they might
bestow their time, as by all means possible to beautify the gifts and
ornaments of nature, and to allure men thereby to honest and seemly
Civility, did worthily deserve the praise of that, which they so earnestly
pursued. And therefore M. Tullius Cicero has of right obtained the garland of
an honest Citizen, and learned Philosopher: who bendyng all the powers of his
excellent understanding, in blazyng the duties and offices of men's life, and
defense of virtue against the beastly and swynish pleasures of Epicure,
esteemed that matter worthy his study and travail. Wherein he bestowed such
diligence and actiuitie of wit, as that him self did never better in any
other Theme, nor any man else could have handled the same more aboundauntly.
And even the same did he as then, according to the necessity of the present
time, with singular learning: for as yet, besides the orderly course of
natural doctrine, were not any other precepts of purer discipline, extaunt
amongst those Nations, wherein the fine and nymble wits might exercize them
selves. And therefore it was no marvel if he being a man endued with
wonderful instinct of nature, did embrace that thing, as the chiefest
felicity, worthy whereupon he might discourse, and which he saw to be most
notable, and had in greatest prize amongst all the works of Nature: neither
could raise his mind beyond the limits of Nature, nor stretche out the force
of his capicitie, further then to that outward righteousness, obtained by
special pursuit of virtue.

But now as the state of the time is altered from that which was then, so have
we now received an other Schoolemaister from heaven, whose Majesty, as
surmounteth in glory all worldly state and condition, so his doctrine being not
straighted within the bounds of Nature, does disclose unto us things far
passing the reach of all Nature, whose Scholar you ought to have been (Osorius)
especially sithence ye be aduau^ced to so high dignity in the Church: for we
have received now not a M. Cicero playeng the Rhetoricia^ in his Tusculane
walks, but the very son of God him self from out the bosom of the Father,
who being sent down into the earth may teach us, not the hidden secrets of
man's Philosophye, The difference between Moral and Christian Philosophy.
but make discernable the will of his Father unto us: not define by reason,
distinguish by Art, and propose in order the Moral principles of profane
Phisolophye, (albeit he does describe the same many times as occasion is
offered) but comes forth with far higher mysteries, instrustructing us of
the kingdom of God, of eternal life, and of true and everlasting felicity,
neither instructyng us only, but by his doctrine powryng also the same
blessedness into us: obtained it by his death, confirmed it with his rising
again, does dispose it by his daily reigning over us, does enseale it unto us
by his Sacraments, and promises it in his word. To conclude does give the same
felicity of his own liberatie without all respect of reward freely, to all
that believe upon his name. Now therefore, since the time is altered, and the
Schoolemaister changed, the order of doctrine must likewise needs be
changed: not because we reject those things in mean whiles as utterly false,
which the ancient Philosophers did in times past deliver unto us, teaching the
precepts of orderly living, whereof you debated erst concerning good manners
and godly actions: But because the Evangelical Philosophye does call us higher
to far deeper mysteries, the doctrine whereof consists in greater and
better rudiments: Our study therefore must have regard to an other mark: That
is to say. We must not only learn seriously to know, how to direct the course
of this transitory life, but also, The end of Christian Philosophy.
by what means we may attain everlasting life: not how much our
righteousness avails in the sight of men, but what thing does Justify us in
the sight of God. You being addicted altogether to the rules of your old
Master of Ethnicke Philosophy, heap together many good and commendable
precepts of perfect righteousness, wherein you are not so much to be
misliked: But in that ye do nothing else but the self same thing, whereof they
have treated much more cunnyngly and plentyfully before your time, Whom Osorius
does chiefly imitate.
as Cicero in his books of Offices, Aristotle in his Ethickes, Plato in his
books De Legibus, and many other learned men in their books likewise: herein
surely you ca^ not be excusable nor void of blame: not because you agree with
them in those good precepts, whereof they dispute well, but because you are so
fast tied to their opinions, that ye skippe away from Christ, and obstinately
resist his Gospel: not because you Imitate them whom we account to be learned,
the ensuyng of whole studious industry we do not neglect, but for that you do
so much Imitate the profane writers, as that ye seem to do nothing else then
Imitate the^, as though with Paganes you would become a professed Pagane: and
for that disputyng so carefully of righteousness and good works, ye make
stay, and rest your self wholly there, from whence you ought have stepped a
degree further, and pursued the better way to higher mysteries, and matters of
greater importance. Virtue to be embraced of all men.
And as though there were no difference betwixt Moral Philosophy and Christian
Divinity, ye so rack all things to the practice of virtue, and pursuyng the
perfect plotte of righteousness: and (with I know not how huge a heap or
words) blaze out unto us a certain absolute portraite of innocence (whereof
happily ye can painte some show or shadow in your books, better then
express in your conversation.) And yet are we not so much displeased with that
imaginatiue devise howsoever devised and engraven by you. For we know, and do
confess together with you (Osorius) and all the whole sect of ancient
Philosophers, that there is nothing more beautyfull amongst all the actions of
man's life, then virtue: and nothing of more estimation then righteousness: and
do withal as heartily, and earnestly, as you wish and desire, that this
integrity of life might be thoroughly emprinted in all men's manners, and
conversation, ] whereof you find so great a mayme, and want in these new
Gespellers. But will you hear again Osorius? True innocence in mankind
lost long sithence.
This integrity of innocent and undefiled life, which you require so
earnestly, yet perform nothing less, will we, will we, is lost long ago, not
in you or in me only, but in the whole nature of mankind generally also, and
so altogether lost that it can never by any means be restored with good life,
but by beleeuyng only.

But you will say. That this righteousness though altogether lost in us, may
be restored through the grace and bou^tie of Christ, and so many times is
restored in the faithful. Ueryly I would grant unto you as much as ye speak
(Osorius) if you would either aptly define that Grace, Osor. objection confuted.
whereof ye make mention, or rightly distinguish that rigthteousnesse. For it
is not to be doubted, but that the comfortable Grace of Christ does purchase
unto us perfect Righteousness. By what means we do recover true innocence.
But this Righteousness (if ye will know it good Sir) consists not in that
which we do procure by well doing, but in that which by only forgeuyng is not
Imputed. Wherefore all that Righteousness and blessedness whatsoever is in
us, is grounded rather upon the remission of sins, then upon any virtuous
works. Will you hear the sum of all your felicity described unto us, and
knit up in few words, in the mystical Psalm, and mentioned by the recital
of the Apostle? Psalm. 31. How the grace of God does give righteousness to men.
Blessed are they (says he) whose sins are forgeuen, and whose Iniquities
are covered, blessed is the man to whom the Lord has not Imputed his offenses.
Psalm. 31. Furthermore who^ that Mystical melodious Psalmiste does call
blessed, the same man only Bernarde does denounce to be blessed, meaning
thereby the same thing in deed, which is most true, that there is no mean nor
aid from whence man may hope for eternal felicity, besides this only and
alone. Why so? Ueryly because the whole Nature of mankind is so overwhelmed
with sin, that unless the continual mercy of God did prevent us, winkyng at
our wickedness, who (I pray you) could stand in Judgment? not I. No, nor yet
your self Osorius. For we have all sinned, and we all have need of the glory
of God. And yet notwithstanding through his only mercy pardoning us, our
offenses are in the case as though they never had been committed, wherein if
you, being an old raynebeaten soldier, dare not give credit to our new
Gospel: Let it not loathe you yet at the least to hear Bernarde him self, a
witness both of our Gospel, and of our Judgment herein: who albeit is
reported not to have seen all things, yet did discern this perfectly enough.
For thus he speaks. Whatsoever he has decreed not to Impute, Bern. in Sermo.
23. super Cant.
is as though it never were: and hereunto adds an other saying which I would
wish you to note advisedly. Not to sin is the Righteousness of God, but the
righteousness of man is the merciful indulgence of God. And the same sentence
he does reiterate again in an other place in the self same words, or at
least does confirm it with words not very much different from ye same. For
the sin (says he) that is committed can not be undone, and yet if God do
not Impute the same, it shall be as though it never were done. etc. Surely if the
sin shall not be accounted sin that has been committed, no more shall the
Sinner be taken for a Sinner that has committed the sin. And so it
follows necessaryly hereupon, that he must needs be righteous and blessed.
Whereby you do perceive (I suppose) from whence all this sap or juice of our
Righteousness and Salvation springs, not out of the works of our
righteousness, which is none at all, but from the only mere mercy of Gods
free pardon, as has been declared by the testimony of Bernarde.

Or if the authority of Bernarde ca^ not obtain so much credit with you, yet
let the Faith of Basile, Augustine, Origene and Jerome persuade you, or their
auncientie move you, for I perceive that you are much delighted with
antiquity. And first what ca^ be more notable then the words of Basile?
Basil. in Psalm. 32.
For he that trusts not to his own good words, neither looks to be
justified by the deseruyng of good deeds, all his hope of salvation he
reposeth only in the meet mercy of almighty God.

Orig. ad Romans Lib. 9. Cap. 12.
I will adioyne unto him a companion of the same judgment and auncientie, that
notable Clarcke Origene. Because all things (says he) are concluded under
sin, therefore man's salvation consists not in merits of works but in the
free mercy of God. Neither does S. Augustine differ from them, who treatyng
of ye end of the last Judgment seems to have settled all the hope of our
sauetie in the only mercy of God: Aug. Epi. 105. Ad Sixtum.
God will crown us (says he) in the end of the world with mercy and
compassions: Yeldyng the same in the Latin tongue almost, which Basile before
him did express most manifestly in the Greek tongue in this wise. Bau^l. in
Psalm. 32.
There is Judgment not without mercy because here is no such man to be found
pure and immaculate without some spotte of sin, yea though he be an Infant
dyeng the same day that he is borne. And again the same Augustine in his book
De Ciuitate Dei. 19. book and 27. Chapter, Aug. de Ciuit. Lib. 19. Cap. 27.
purposing to declare, what account may be made of our righteousness in this
transitory life, affirms it to be such, as ought, rather to be valued by the
forgiveness of sins, then by perfection of virtues. And again the same
Augustine in his first book of Retractations. 19. Chap. Aug. Retra. Lib. 1
Cap. 19.
All the Commandments (says he) are then reputed to be performed, when
that which is left undone is pardoned. And I know not whether Jerome have
declared ye same more evidently, Jerome. Our salvation consists not in our
own righteousness but in the free mercy of God.
who referryng all things to the free mercyfulnesse of God forgeuyng us,
speaks in this wise. In Christ Jesus our Lord in whom we have our hope,
access, and affiaunce by the faith of him, not by our righteousness, but by
him, through whose faith our sins are forgeuen us.

But why do I stand so long upon a matter that ought to be without all
controversy? when as the general consent and agreement of all learned
Authors and antiquity, can not be found more constaunt, nor for the more
part more consonaunt, in any one thing so much, as in this. The matter
therefore being so plain, it remains that of two mere contraries, we allow
the one, and utterly forsake ye other; that is to say: either that, which you
do cavil, touching righteousness or else that, which they do teach us
touching Gods gracious forbearyng. For these two are far different each from
other, and can not be admitted both: for it righteousness be obtained by
integrity of works, then what need have we of any further forgiveness? But
if this come unto us by the only free benignity of the forgeuer. I besee you
then for the love ye bear to your Myter, where is now that integrity of
works? that vprightenesse that may make our righteousness perfect? For as
far as I can guess, pardon is not given to well deservings, but reward
rather offered as of duty: Neither can it be truly said: That pardon must be
craved where no offense is committed. But ye will say paraduenture, that some
imperfections does lurcke secretly in our deeds, though they be wrought by the
grace of God, which yet wants the mercyfulnesse of God. It is well said
truly. And why then does your darkyng pen so cruelly rage against Luther?
Who franckely and of his own accord does profess the self same thing, though
in other words, which you are driven by force to yield unto, whether ye will or
no. That is to say: That our deeds are imperfect, lame, blind, naked and so
altogether barren and hungry, that unless they be clothed and vpholden by the
mercy of free pardon, no defense will be pleadeable before the Judgment seat of
God: and shall be accounted rather in place of sins, then seem to deserve any
reward of virtue. If ye be not satisfied with these testimonies, but will
obstinately persiste in this your opinion still: that our works may be so
absolutely perfect as to deserve: I beseech you make proof thereof by some
reasonable authority, either vouched out of holy Scriptures, or out of some
approved ancient Authors: And if ye can make no sound proof in that behalf,
deal yet somewhat more soberly with us. For these your reproaches, rebukes,
lies, scoldynges, outcries, spyttynges, cursinges, glorious and hauty speeches,
and triflyng words make nothing to the purpose. On the other part, if ye can
neither make proof unto us of this perfect Righteousness of works by any
demonstration of your own works: nor any man else besides you dare presume to
offer him self in judgment to tried by his works, what else do ye, in
chargyng Luther so sharply, when ye so condemn him for a frantic, and
braynesicke man: Then Tertullus did sometime, accusing Paul to be a seditous
person? saving that he accused Paul but at one time, once: and your pen
vomityng out nothing else besides furies, frensies, and madness of Luther, does
so continually crawle in ragyng by degrees, as will seem never to make any
end at all thereof, until ye bring your self amongst the Jews at the last,
and cry out as they did, Crucifige upon him, Crucifige upon him.

Job. Even the most perfect works of men of no value with God.
Job a most upright lyuear did stand in doubtful fear of all the works of his
life. Esaias the Prophet does compare all our righteousness to a foul
menstruous cloth. Christ him self does pronounce that all our endeavors and
works are unprofitable. Paul as it were loathyng the remembrance of his own
righteousness, Paul.
how glorious so ever his works appeared, yet did adiudge them so far
distaunt from true righteousness, that he esteemed them no better then doung.
David durst not presume to enter into Judgment with God. David.
Augustine fears that if God behold his works he shall find more offenses
then merits: August. in Psalm. 94.
and "if he shall deal with us according to our deserts, he shall find
nothing in us but damnable. Jerome does so call us back from all confidence in
our deeds, Ier. in Esaias Cap. 64.
that he boldly pronounces that, if we consider them in their own nature we
should utterly despair. What? and may it not be lawful for Luther to utter
his mind with Christ? with the godly Prophets? with the holy Apostles, with
the learned ancient Fathers? Are they commended in the old Gospel for that
they spoke well, and shall Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, and Caluin^ be reproched
in scoffyng wise, with a new found name of new Gospellers, because they
think, and speak the self same thing that they did? If Luther were such a
kind of fellow as would take part with Epicure, Luther defended against Osorius.
and would practice to let louse the reins to voluptuousnes, turning men's
minds vpsidowne, and carry them away quyte from virtuous endeavor, from love
of godliness, from their duty, and honest trade of godly life, to lust and
licentiousness, and would place all man's felicity in this corruptible body,
and the vain ticklyng delights thereof: it were not altogether from the
purpose that ye speak (Osorius) nor you should be much blamed for making him
companion with Epicure: neither would I refrain my pen (so Christ help me)
but would inueigh against him with all my power as sharply as your self. But
peruse now all Luthers books, search, sift, consider and ponder all Luthers
writings, all his exhortations, his doctrine, his Lessons, his Sermons, and
all his imaginations: yea prye narrowly into his life and conversation: if you
can show out of all these, I will not say one place, or example, but one word
or syllable so much, which does sound against the love, and practice of
virtue, which may seem to rende the sinowes of righteousness and holiness,
or breed dislikyng to the embracyng thereof: or which do bruyse the fruits of
good works, weaken serious travail, break of honest industry, or hinder
godly enterprises from doing well, or by any manner of means do extenuate the
fear due to the laws of God and man. Finally where he may seem to think
less then may be seen a perfect Divine: or behave him self more dissolutely
in his manners, the^ he resembles in honest judgment: Nay rather if he do not
employ all the care possible to raise up all men in every place, to the dew
fear of Gods law, to true obedience, and to all honest conversation, and
earnestly emprinte into the sight and minds of all men, the renown, dignity
and worthynesse of virtue, pic^e and godlynes, you shall have the Conquest.

Osori. page 141.
But even the same thing (say you) Epicurus did. I confess that to be true
Osorius, which ye report of Epicurus, and which you have very finely pyked out
of your M. Cicero. Cicer. Tuscul Lib. 3.
Who does deny in his third book of Tusculane questions. That Epicurus was
Author of any voluptuous sentences, and with all says, that he uttered many
and soudry notable sayings seemly enough for a true Philosopher: But what do
ye conclude hereof? Epicurus does commend virtue in some place. Luther does
also the like. Ergo, Luther is an Epicurean. Osori. accuses Luther to be an
Epicurean.
Why do ye not also conclude against S. Paul that he is an Epicurean,
because he does also the self same thing. O rare and singular sharp witted
Chrisippus: which if had not altogether been nooseled in his old Gospel,
could never have knitte such knots together of mere particular propositio^s:
neither would this wonderful Logician have ever coupled Luther with Epicurus.
But because Osorius has borrowed this Argument out of Cicero, we will open his
iugglyng box in few words: and first of all show what Cicero speaks, next
how west this Ciceronia^ does agree with Cicero. And first as concerning
Cicero. Whenas he makes mention of Epicurus sentences, he does not reprehend
the quickness and nymblenes of his wit: but rather prayseth him therefore:
only he notes the scope and end of his doctrine. Neither does he condemn
those sentences which Epicurus spoke well, but because he did so define chief
Felicity, as though it co^sisted only in voluptuousnes, herein he found
fault with him, and not without cause. For Epicurus amongst other his sayings
wrate in this manner. That man's life could not be pleasant if it were not
joined with virtue: he denied that fortune was of any such force, as to apall
the courage of a wise man: That the mean life of the poor, was better then
the rich. He denied also that there was any wise man, but the same was also
happy. Truly all those sayings are worthily spoken by him as Tully him self
reports. Now let us see what Argument our Ciceroes Ape will shape out of all
this.

Page 141.
And Luther (says he) does offer the same order perhaps exhort his
Auditory in his writyngs and Sermons to the same duties of life. etc. If
Luther do so (Osorius) he does very well. What then? will you find fault with
this? No, but as Epicurus disputyng sometimes gloriously of virtue, How
absurdely Osorius does compare Luther with Epicurus.
did notwithstanding with his precepts utterly wipe away virtue, even with
like crafty conueyaunce Luther does subuerte and overthrow all duties of
virtue and godliness. Speak out Parrotte, in what place does Luther subuerte
the duties of virtue? Where does he blotte out honesty and godly carfulness
of good men? May this be tolerable in you, with slau^ders, and lies, to deface
the good name of a man, that never deserved it, who is also dead? to condemn
his writings? and after you have given him a most cruel wound, to be so
void of all reason, as to be unable to allege one Title, one place, one
syllable so much of just accusation wherefore ye should so do? Nor make your
slanderous reproaches to carry any show of truth? let us thoroughly peruse the
begynnynges of Luthers doctrine, the proceedyng and daily increasinges thereof,
let us sift out the end, and the whole course and purporte of his proceedyng,
what? does he forth with pluck up the roots of virtue, which abateth the
Affiaunce of man's works? and ascribes all our salvation to the only bounty
and mercy of God? Which does likewise affirm that the works of the Saints in
this world, if they be examined to the uttermost prick, are not able to
counteruaile Gods wrath, nor satisfy his judgment? but preaches that of all
parts they need mercy, directyng us in the mean whiles to the true mark of
assured Confidence? is this man to be coupled with Epicurus, as though he
should be Author of the overthrow of all honesty? or rather shall he be
adjudged a good Physician of the Soul? as one that does minister wholesome
medicine against poisoned errors?

But you will inueigh to the contrary. That if that manner of doctrine be
admitted whereof Luther is Author, Osorius.
then will all studious care of piety decay, and havoc will be made of all
godly endeavor, and licentious liberty will be made free for all estates. In
deed this may happily chance amongst some persons: for what ca^ be so well
spoken at any time, or so circumsplectly handled, but that the malice of the
wicked will take thereof evil occasion to wrest to their filthy lust? So in
the time of Paul's preaching, there wanted not perverse people, which in like
manner took occasion to slander his doctrine with his own words: Romans 3.
videl. Let us do evil that good may come thereof. There were also some
which were not ashamed to say, that Paul did destroy the law, and did give to
much scope to liberty. Of that kind of people Peter does compain, which with
sinister devises practiced to wrest Paul's writyngs crookedly to their own
confusion. Shall not good men therefore frequent his Epistles? Even by the same
Reason (Osorius) let not flowers grow in the spryng tide, because the Spyder
does as well suck poison out of them, as the Bees matter to make their
honnycombe. But if so be that, when good men do give virtuous and necessary
exhortation of those things, which they do think worthy to be embraced,
according to their duty, and profession of their faith, wicked men in the
mean space starte up between, which will abuse the same good things to their
own destruction, is this the fault of the teacher, or rather the fallax of the
accident, as Logicians do term it?

Luther falsely accused to be the Author of wicked boldness.
Many persons (say you) do take occasion of wicked confidence and unpunishable
liberty through that new Gospel of Luther. But many on the contrary part do
receive from the same very comfortable consolation, and find them selves
thereby to be much more pricked foreward to pursue godliness with more
carfulness. If Luther teach the truth, shall not his doctrine therefore be
published because wicked men do abuse it? But if you think his Assertions to
be erroneous: Why do not you (O Thales I pray you) vouchsafe to prescribe, as
becomes the fullness of your wisdom, some pretty rules of sounder doctrine,
whereunto Luther might more safely have directed his opinions? The opinion of
Schooleme^ and Papists touching the way of righteousness is false and wicked.
I believe that he should by your advise, have associated him self with the
Schoolmen and Monckes, and with that sacred Inquisitio^ of Spain, and used
these kinds of speeches, videl. That the kingdom of heaven is a due reward
for our good works, if it were not, we should otherwise be uncertain thereof.
Because that which is of duty is most assured, but that proceeds from mercy
is uncertain. Or else ye will require perhaps that he should teach us as your
Hosius does preach, Hosius.
who does affirm that everlasting Salvation is obtained by deseruinges
proceedyng from the grace of God. Or else as our Osorius does: Osorius.
Who calls faith only, to be only rashness, and boldly pronounces that
all the means and worthynesse of our Salvation consists in righteousness,
not that righteousness which we receive by imputation from Christ through
faith: but that same, which every man makes peculiar to him self, by his own
purchase, through works. Or else as the Schoolmen of your old Gospel do
profess, who bablyng very much about Justification, have decreed at the
length, that it must be taken two manner of ways: one way which is obtained
before any works be done, through grace given freely as they say, Rosfenfi^
against Luther.
as in Infantes being Regenerated by Baptism. The other in elder years,
through great store and perfection of works: That is to say, through the
resistyng of the froath and enticementes of sin, and daily subduyng thereof:
which they call in their phrase of speech, Grace making acceptable, or
acceptyng Grace. And although good works do not bring to pass that first
Justification, yet they do give the second manner of Justifying, the grace of
God workyng together with the same: which does minister strength sufficient as
well to work stoutly, as to strive against the very stynges and pricks of the
flesh effectually: so that it may not only be possible to live clear from
deadly sin, but also to atteine to be Justified, pe^ Congruum and Condignum.
Congruum Co^dignum Conueniencie and worthynes.
You know well enough these fair flowers Osorius (if I be not deceived) and
glorious speculatio^s of your old Divinity: Which how agreably seem to
accord with your old Gospel I know not: Sure I am that Christ never knew this
Gospel: the Apostles never taught it, nor the Eua^gelistes, no, nor the
approved ancient Catholic Fathers had ever any smatche thereof. Nay rather
Christ, Paul, the Apostles and Eua^gelistes, and ancient Doctors of the
Church when soever they treated of Salvation, and of life everlasting, do
endeavor nothing more seriously, the^ that (seueryng our works from the cause
of Justification altogether) they might dispoyle us wholly of Confidence of our
own sauetie, and so refer us over to the only mercy of God, who only
gives the kingdom of heaven, not for any our deservings, but for his promise
sake only. But we have said enough herein. Let us now proceed to other
cauillatio^s of this troublesome trifler though it be somewhat grievous, and as
near as we may, if we ca^ not all, yet let us briefly and orderly cut of the
tops of them.

Page 141. ^
There is no man that will give him self to any good works if he have once
heard Luther for his Schoolemaister. etc. Whereas Luther does not take upon him
the person of a Schoolemaister, nor has challenged to him self the dignity
of high deske, nor ever taught any Schools of new factio^s, nor ever lead any
train of Scholars, but amongst other Christians followed always Christ the
common Schoolemaister: And was never known to have uttered any other doctrine,
the^ that which he received of Christ, what should move this quarellsome
Doc^or to reproach him with this envious title of master? Many good and
virtuous men have heard Luthers preaching, but no man (as I suppose)
acknowledged him for his Master. For that needed not, for through all
Christendom, in Uniuersities and common Schools, are whole droues of Masters
scattered abroad, as though they dropped out of the Troiane horse. Whom we do
hear also, when they teach, what they teach. I will not here stand to
discuss: nor I make any estimate thereof. The Christians did sometimes hear
the Scribes, and Pharisees teaching in Moses chair, neither does the Apostle
forbid us: ^. Thessalonians. 5.
But that may take a taste of all doctrines, but pet so taste them, as we hold
fast nothing but that which is good. If Luther teach any doctrine of his own
imagination, him self refuses to be believed therein: but if the teach ye
doctrine of Christ, and those things, which he has sucked out of the sweet
juice of Christ's Gospel: I beseech you Sir, does he therefore profess him
self a Master to Scholars? or a Scholar rather to his Master Christ? And
therefore this scornful title of schoolemaister wherewith ye reproach him, is
a scoff more fit for a common Ruf^ian, then a Divine: surely altogether
uncomely and unseemly for a Bishop.

Osori. ibid. O^or. cavil against the Lutherans works.
But whereas ye pronounce that Luthers Auditory have not given them selves to
any good works. How know you this to be true? For I am assured that in
Porting all and in Spain good prouiso is made, that no man be so hardy to
touch any of Luthers books: if you refer your Assertion to England or
Germany: I do not a little marvel how this monstrous Spynx can cast his eyes
over so many Seas, so many high mountains, and so great distauuce of
Countries, and so curiously behold the lives of men? and prye so precisely into
their manners? unless some Phoebus have cloured upon this Mydas head not the
ears of Osorius, but the ears of some lolleared Ass, in the truncke whereof
he may catch every blast whatsoever, any where blown abroad or devised in
secret, through the reports of whisperyng Talebearers: and like a credulous
soole believe the same forthwith. But howsoever those Lutheranes in England and
in Germany do exercise them selves in no good works, it goes very well in the
mean time with Porting all and Spain that men live there holy and Angellike.
For I do believe surely that men in those Countries do so glytter in sincerity
of life and brightenes of virtues, that their very shadows do shine in the
dark, and glyster more like Angels then men, that they are such men as plant
their feet no where, but that they leave behynd the^ a certain wonderful
fragrant savor of modesty, courtesy and singular chastity, and so make the
very heavens in love with their purity, and sweetenes of their virtues.

But go to Osorius tell us at the length a good fellowshyp what the cause
should be, that such as do give ear to Luther will not apply them selves to
do good works? Truly I suppose, that because he teaches, that me^ are
Justified in the sight of God by faith only and not by works, therefore it
must be an infallible consequent: That whosoever attend to Luthers doctrine
will forthwith abandone all thought to live virtuously, and yield him self
carelessly over to all idleness and filthynesse. As though with honest and well
disposed persons fatherly clemency shall cause the children to be sluggish to
do their duties? or as though the voice of mercy does at once utterly abolish
all Moral virtues? To what end therefore does Christ so much not commend
unto us that fatherly affection in the merciful father mentioned in the
Gospel toward his prodigal son: but also painte him out unto us for an
example? if that doctrine of the free mercyfulnesse of God be not true, or if
it be true, that it ought not therefore be published, because many unchaste and
corrupt persons will abuse the same? Nay rather why ought net ye truth of God
of greater reason be generally and openly preached, for the necessary comfort
of the godly? Neither behooves us to be inquisitiue how much this doctrine does
work in certain particular men, but rather to know, how true this doctrine is
of it self. And according as we do find the same to be true and constant, so
to preach the same, according to the capacity of the hearers.

A threefold lie of Osorius.
But Osorius does urge us again with three Arguments chiefly as it were with a
three square battle, and like a three headed Cerberus does rushe upon Luther
with three sundry assautes, attemptyng to prove by his Logic, that this
Luther of whom we speak, does ex^irpe and root out all virtue, honesty, and
godly endeavor. First by his disablyng of works, Disablyng of works.
secondly through desperation of honesty, Desperatio^.
thirdly, by Confidence of false righteousness. Confidence.
In three words as it were three lies. And first of all touching Desperation
and Confidence, I think we have spoken enough before: where we have so proved
both to be falsely imputed to Luther, as that we do yet acknowledge them both
in Luther. After what manner Luther teaches Confidence and Desperatio^ and how
not.
For Luther does describe Confidence, but the same which is the true
Confidence: he teaches also Desperation, I confess it: but the same very
comfortable: And therein teaches nothing else, but the same, that the
Eua^gelistes, and Apostles have always taught. For what can be more true, and
assure^ Confidence, or more comfortable Desperation, or more ^onson unt with
the Gospel of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, then that we being in full
despair of the righteousness of our own works, do shroude our selves wholly
under the mercy of Christ and in his free bounty and elemency? That is to say,
not in works, which the grace of Christ has wrought in us, but for us? As
touching the brablyng that he makes about the despising of good works, by
what Logic will he prove his cauillatio^? And now pause here a whiles (good
Reader) and note the passing pearcyng wit, nurtured not in ye School of
Stoicke Philosophy, but nooseled by rather I suppose in some swynesty.

Luther does strippe our merits and works naked from all Confidence.

Ergo, Luther rendeth in pieces the very sinews of all

godliness, sets at naught and utterly abolisheth all the efficacy and
dignity of good works.

And though Osorius have not placed his words after this order, yet the bent
of his conclusion tends to the same effect. For what did Luther else in all
his writings and Sermons, but cut of all hope of works, and so by that means
allure us to take ankerhold in the only aid and help of the Mediator? if
this be the way to choke up virtue, and to bury her under ground, I confess
that Luther was an abolisher of virtue, and S. Paul also as well as he.

But Osor. does many times deny this Assertion of the Lutherans to be true,
that our righteousness and hope of our salvation so depends upon Christ, as
that ye same should be Imputed to us of God, and accounted our own by
Imputatio^ through faith only. For he supposes this way to be over easy, and
that it will hereof come to pass, Page 141.
that no man will be careful, studious or desirous to accomplish any good work.
In deed I think Osorius is of the mind of many persons, which unless be
continually beaten, and pricked foreward, like dull Oxen with goades and
cudgels, will never yield their bodies to labor, but forced as it were with
threatenynges and stripes, are drawn to the yoke quyte against their wills.
But this never happens in natures of mylde and good disposition: but rather
the contrary: so as by le^^ie and remembrance of received benefits they are
rather encouraged chearefully to do their duties. The bountifulness of
almighty God is not to be measured after the proportion of man's imagination.
Neither ought we regard how the wicked do interpret thereof: but rather what
Christ does command to be preached: how much the will of God will permit:
and what things true discipline will allow of. I know that there has been
ever great store, and that we shall never want to great a number of that sort
of people, which will wickedly abuse all things, that otherwise of their own
nature ought chiefly be embraced. Neither is it reason to defraude virtuous
personages of their right, for the abuses of evil and perverse disposed
persons. Yet such is the manner of of Osorius disputation, as though no man
could be found that would amend his life, or embrace godlynes at the
preachyngs of the Gospel. And as though nothing ensued thereof else, but
unbridled licentiousness and outrageous boldness, to rushe and range
headlong into all unpunishable liberty and lust, the decay and overthrow of
all virtue, the subversion and drownyng of all godly discipline, finally the
very sink and receptacle of all abomination, which as is most falsely belyed
upon him, so I can not yet guess, to what end it is alleged, unless he mean
thereby to persuade us to abandone and banish the preaching of the free mercy
of the Gospel, and so to slide back again to old Iewishnesse with the
Scribes and Pharisees, The mark of Osorius accusation considered.
and that in steed of Christ and Paul, Moses may rule over our consciences
again, and Cicero may be preached in our Churches. Truly this is the mark
that Osorius, or rather in Osorius the ancient enemy of mankyng seems to
shoot at: who having now spent all his shot and powder, unable at the last to
enfeeble or resist the glory of Christ any longer, practizeth by subtle
engynes of crafty lyeng and slanderous cauillations to undermine, and batter
his doctrine, and to bring this devise to pass, finds none so fit an
instrument as Osorius chief champion of his guard. I have now set out unto thee
(gentle Reader) the substance of Osorius Divinity, the gravity of his
doctrine, and the form of his accusation. Whereby thou may perceive the
poisoned fistula, whereof he would empeache Luther. For this is his practice,
to enduce men to believe, that Luther does teach extreme Desperation, boldness
to sin, and contempt of good works. Now remains to discuss by the sequel
of his discourse, what force of Arguments and sleight of devise he is
furnished withal to maintain his challenge.

Page 145. Two lies uttered by Osorius.
And therefore Paul does not in any wise promise inheritance of the kingdom
of heaven to those persons who rest them selves upon the only faith of Luther,
but unto them which do exercize them selves in good works, and do direct all
their labor and travail, to set forth the glory of Christ through the whole
course of their life. etc. In one sentence two evident lies: the one imagined
against Luther, ye other deuilishly devised against S. Paul. First of all
whereas he burtheneth Luther to be the founder of this doctrine of Only Faith:
Only faith does Iust^tie.
it is as false, as there is no truth in Osori. mouth. In deed Luther wrate
much touching Faith only, but neither he alone, nor he the first: nor taught
he other doctrine, then many famous Doctors of ancient antiquity did teach
besides him: Who did not only excel him far in learning, but lived many
hundred years before he was borne. And namely amongst all other S. Paul: who
through all his whole Epistles, does with a wonderful vehemency harp (as it
were) always upon this one string, That true righteousness comes to no man by
the law, nor by the works of the law, but through the faith of Christ freely,
without works, and so without works (as it has often been spoken before)
that if any man will take hold of works, he is excludes forthwith from Faith.
The testimonies of most ancient writers touching Only Faith.


But Osorius will say. That no mention is made any where in S. Paul of this
exclusive word Only. Whereupon these Lutherans do stand so much. In Letters
perhaps, as you say Osorius or in sillables: But why prye we after sillables,
when we hold the substance of the word? or to what purpose strive we about
words, when we are assured of the matter? First of all I suppose no man will
deny, but that Paul does denounce men to be Justified by faith. Now he that
does tie righteousness so fast to faith, that he utterly abandoneth the law,
and all the works of the law from Justification, what does he mean else
thereby (though he profess it not in bare words) then that faith is the
chief, yea and only foundation and builder of Justification? using herein the
very same rule, that Logicians do use in their Schools, framyng a sound and
probable Argument from the proposition Exponent, An Argument from the
proposition exponent to the exclusive.
to the Exclusive. Even as if a man disputyng with you would prove by Argument.
That Christ is the known and assured head of the Church, would argue thus:
that besides Christ, is none other head of the whole Church upon earth. I
beseech you Sir, what means he else that argues so, then that Christ only
ought to be acknowledged the head of the whole Church?

If it be so: that this word Only, The vocable Only.
seem so heinous to you, and others of your fraternity, that it may not be
admitted, as in any respect tolerable, yet can ye not accuse Luther for the
same, but you must withal endite guilty of the same crime, the best and most
approved Doctors and interpretours of elder age, who to express the meaning
of ye Apostles doctrine more lively, have not only accustomed them selves
sundry times to this word Only in their Commentaries, but also delivered the
same to the posterity to be usually frequented: so that Luther now shall be
found to coin no new thing herein, but rather make report of the studious
carfulness, and careful travail of the ancient Father in this behalf.

And first of all we will begin with Ambrose, unto whom I pray you give ear
what he writes herein: who as it were one of the same number who^ Osorius does
reproach to be wholly bent to this doctrine of Luther, many hundred years before
the name of Luther was known, Ambr. in 1. Cor. 1.
has written in this manner. God has decreed from eternity (says he) that
the beleuyng man "shall be Justified by Faith Only. Whereby appears that this
word Only came not first from Luther but from Ambrose rather. But because the
truth shall not want substaunciall witness, and authority worthy the same
witnesses, we will adioyne to Ambrose the like testimony of Jerome, whose
words if may obtain any credit with Osorius will be of such force and
efficacy for our present purpose, as that they will seem to have been written
for none other intent, then to convince this Jewish opinion of Osorius.
Chrisost. in Epist. Paul. ad Galat. Cap. 3.
And these are his words. The Jews (says he) did affirm that he which
trusted to Faith Only was to be abhorred. But Paul on the contrary part does
auerre that whosoever trusts in Faith Only is blessed etc. I beseech "you
tell me for your Myters sake, what can be spoken against you more
substau^cially? Let us now confer your saying with Chrysostom. You do
adhorre them as Lutherans which do rest them selves upon Faith Only, because
Paul does promise the kingdom of heaven, as you say, to them that work good
deeds: on the contrary part Chrysostom does note them for Jews especially,
and accompteth them execrable which deny that men ought to trust to faith,
using this reason, because Paul (says he) does profess those men blessed
that trust to Faith Only. Now choose you therefore one of these two which ye
will, whether we shall adiudge Chrysostom a Lutheran because he trusts to
Faith Only: or your self an execrable Jew which set your Confidence upon
works. Again, the same Chrysostom in other place, making a Commentary upon
the Epistle to the Ephesians. uses the self same exclusive word. By Faith only
(says he) shall Christ save the offenders of the law. And because ye shall
know his meaning perfitely, not the offenders of the ceremonial law, but of
the same law namely, which was endited by the finger of God, in ye most sacred
Tables conteinyng the ten Commandments.

Add also hereunto the saying of the same Doctor in his fourth Homely upon
the Epistle to Timothe. Chrisosto. Homel. 4. in Timoth.
What thing is so hard to believe, as that such which are enemies, and sinners
not Justified by the law nor the works of ye law, obtained forthwith to be
placed in ye chiefest dignity of merit through Faith Only? etc. We have
recited a little before the words of Basile upon the Sermon De Humilit. Basil.
in Homel. De Humilit.
so that it needs no further rehearsal, where in express speech, excludyng
from man the glory of his own righteousness, he does testify that we are every
of us Justified by faith only in Christ Jesus. I might cite his own words
again upon the 32. Psalm, Basil. in Psalm. 32.
as effectual as the rest, where he describyng a perfect man, does describe
him to be not such a one as trusts to his own good deeds, but such a one as
reposeth all his whole confidence in the only mercy of God.

In like manner also Theophilact. Theophil. in Epist. ad Romans Cap. 3.
Now does ye Apostle (says he) declare evidently that very Faith Only is of
power to Justify. And by any by he cites the Prophet Abacuc as most credible
witness thereof. Briefly what shall we think that those ancient Fathers of
the purer age and primitive Church did determine thereof. Whenas Thomas Aquinas
him self chief champion of this Sinagogue of Schoolmen, being otherwise in
many things a very wrongful and false interpretour. Yet vanguished herein
with the manifest truth was enforced no longer to dissemble in this question of
Faith Only. For in his third lesson upon the first Epistle to Timothe the 3.
Chap. disputyng of the law, and concludyng at length that the words of Paul
did not apperteine to the ceremonial law but unto the Moral law. Thom. Aquin.
in. 1. Tim. 1. Lect. 3.
There is not (says he) any hope of Justification but in Faith Only, and
arguyng against Osorius of set purpose as it were, he cites to this effect the
testimony of S. Paul, We suppose (says the Apostle) that man is Justified by
Faith without the works of the law. Romans 3.
Romans 3. I am not yet come to this point^ to discuss, how true this doctrine
of Luther is touching Justification by Faith Only. But whether this doctrine
was erected first by Luther. And I trust I have sufficiently proved that it
began even from the first age of the primitive Church, and in the very dawnyng
of the Gospel, and has been so delivered over from the most ancient writers,
and continued unshaken, even until our age: so that no man needs hereafter
to give credit to Osorius: making so shameless a lie upon this doctrine, of
Faith Only Justifying. And this much hitherto concerning Luther.

I come now to that point wherein Osor. did likewise shameful belie Paul. And
what do I hear now Osorius? Does Paul (as you say) so promise the
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom to them which work good deeds? Page 145.
and not to them also which rest upon faith only? That is to say. Which have
reposed all their affiaunce in Jesus Christ only? How shall we conceive this?
where find you this? and how do ye enduce us to believe this? out of the
Epistle as I think to the Vtope^ses. Look there Reader at thy bestleysure:
for Osorius was at good leisure to lie, but had no time at all to confirm his
lie. But he alleges somewhat I suppose out of the Epistle to the Gallat. 5.
Chapt. Osori. his Objection framed out of the Epistle to the Galat. Cap. 5.
That is to say that the Apostle does threaten utter banishement from the
kingdom of God, to the wicked and heinous sinners, which yield them selves over
wholly to all filthynesse of sin. This truly is a true saying of the Apostle.
Who denies it? But what does Osorius in the mean space gather hereof?
Forsooth because the horrible wickedness of men does exclude those persons
from the kingdom of God, which are endued with a false faith only, or none at
all rather, hereof does he conclude his Argument by opposition of contraryes.
That life everlasting is promised to the good and virtuous works of men. The
Answer.
O clownishe Coridon. But we are taught by the rules of Logic that if a man
will frame a good Argument of co^traries, he must be first well advised, that
those propositions which are appointed for contraries, must dissent and
disagree each from other by equal and proportionable degrees. Whereby it is
clear, that this is not a good consequent.

The silthy life of the wicked does exclude men from the inheritance of
everlasting habitations.

Ergo, the honest and upright life does obtain everlasting habitations.

And why is this no good Argument? because the propositions ^oe not agree
together in proportionable quality. The offenses that are committed by us, are
of their own nature of all parts imperfect and evil, and purchase to them
selves most just da^natio^. But on the contrary part, our good and ver^uous
deeds (yea being most perfectly accomplished by us) want yet always somethyng
to absolute perfection, and of their own nature are such, as rather stand in
need of the mercy of God, then may deserve any praise in the sight of men.
Bernarde.
To the same end spoke Bernarde very fittely. Our righteousness is nothing
else then" the indulgence of God. But here commes yet an other place of S. Paul
out of the which this wild wiffler may rushe upon us with his leaden dagger
not altogether so blunte and rustye herhaps. The words of ye Apostle a Gods
name, in the second to the Romans. Romans 2.
Not the hearers of the law only, but they that perform the law in their life
and conversation, shall be accounted righteous before the Judgment seat of God.
etc. To answer briefly I will gladly allow that, which this enemy to Paul
does object out of Paul, so that he will not in like manner refuse the the
whole discourse of the Apostle, and join the first with the last. For the
whole Argument of the Apostle in those iij. Chap. is concluded in this one
Sillogisme.

All men shall be rewarded with the co^mendatio^ of true righteousness (God him
self witnessing the same) whosoever be able with their own works to
accomplish the whole law published in the ten Tables, The sum of Paul's
disputation comprehended in one Syllogism.
and commanded by God to be kept absolutely, as the law requires.

But there is no living creature whether he be a Jew, and is ruled by the law
of the ten Tables, or a Gentile and lives after the law of nature, that is
able to accomplish the law as he ought to do.

Ergo, No man linyng is able to attain the true commendatio^ of his
righteousness, but in respect of his works is of necessity subject to the
Judgment and curse of God.

In this Argument does the whole force and pithe of Paul's disputation
co^siste, if I be not deceived. In the Mayor and first proposition whereof, he
sets down before us the severity of Gods Judgment: In ye Minor or second
proposition, he condemns all men generally as guilty of sin. By the
conclusion he allureth and as it were drives all men to Christ necessaryly.

By this Argument you may plainly perceive unless you will be wilfully blind
like a want, how you have piked out not one scrappe so much of all that you
have hitherto raked together, to salve the credit of your cause. Finally to
make short with you. I refer you to note, mark, examine and search out all
whatsoever the Church does acknowledge of the said Apostles Letters, Epistles,
yea all his sentences. Ye shall find in them all, so nothing agreeable to this
your Assertion: That Paul should attribute righteousness to works, or promise
be means thereof possession of everlasting inheritance, as that his whole bent
and endeavor may seem to be in no one thing else so earnest as in this,
wherein he trauaileth earnestly to persuade, that the promise of God pours
out upon all them that believe in Jesus Christ most plentyfull and assured
freedom: yea such a freedom, as is clearly delivered from all entanglyng of
works. So that the same Apostle does infer his conclusion on this wise:
Gallat. 3.
If inheritance come by the law, then not of promise. And in an other place.
If we be made heirs through the law, then is our faith made frustrate, and
the promise of none effect. Rome. 4. Romans 4.
And again. If righteousness come by the law then did Christ suffer in
vain. Gal. 2. Galat. 2.
And least that your lying spirit should with sinister interpretation wrest
those sentences spoken of the law to the ceremonial law, you may hear the
Apostle there treating of that law, which was given for offenders until the
promised seed should come: which law should in steed of a Schoolemaister lead
us (as it were) by the hand directly to Christ: which law did shut up all under
sin, as well Jews as Gentiles, that the promise might be given unto the
beleuers through faith in Jesus Christ. All which titles of the law can not be
construed to have any apt agreement with the ceremonies of the Iewishe
Sinagogue. And where are now those works of the law (master Osorius) unto
whom Paul does promise possession of the kingdom, if you exclude those whereof
Luther preaches? Sitheace Paul him self does so wisely and carefully not
only exclude all presumption of man's righteousness, from the inheritance of
the kingdom, but also render a reason wherefore he does so. By what law (says
he) by the law of works. No ye may not believe so Osorius. And therefore that
ye may the better understand, how no matter of Confidence at all is left to the
consideration of the works of the law: But by the law of faith (says S.
Paul) the same law which consists in faith and not in works. That is to
say, if we believe the Paraphrast. The very same law which requires nothing but
faith.

Now therefore sithence these matters are so thoroughly debated in the holy
Scriptures, Right of inheritance is not promised to works, as Paul affirms.
and discovered manifestly by the holy Ghost: with what shameless face dare
Osorius thrust those works in the doctrine of free Justification, which the
Spirit of God does so openly reject? or with what impudency dare he affirm
that Paul does promise the right and title of inheritance to them which
work good deeds? Whereas the same Paul mainteynyng the challenge of faith,
and not of works, pronou^ceth so expressly, That God does accept his faith
for righteousness, which does not work but believes on him that does
Justify the wicked. Which two sentences being so merely opposite and contrary
each to other, I refer me to the Readers Judgment whether Paul shall be
accounted inconstant, Osori. taken tardy.
or Osorius a false Fabeler. But I hear a certain gruntyng of this Pigge
being no less an enemy to the Cross of Christ the^ to Paul: who as soon as
he hears good works to be banished from the effect of Justification, does
straightway cite us to the Consistory, as though we did utterly choke up all
care and studious endeavor to live virtuously, and destroy all precepts and
rules of godly conversation. And hereupon conceauyng a vain error in his idle
brains, he rages and foameth at the mouth outragiously, not much unlike to
Ajax Sometime: called (...). That is ^o say a scourger.
Who being swallowed up of extreme frenzy did most foolishly assail and
batter poor seely sheep in steed of Agamemnon and other noble Pieres of
Greece. But let us once again give ear to his gay Logic, which being
sometime esteemed the Schoolemystres of Inue^tion, and displaying the truth,
this Gentleman has made thereof an Art of lying and desceit: as thus.

Luther does exclude all good works from the cause of Justification.

Ergo, Luther does extinguishe all virtue, and abolishe all Moral and Civil
actions.

Again. Luther does make faith only being void of good works the cause of
Justification.

Ergo, Luther does require nothing in Christians but Faith Only.

I answer that this is a Fallax and a Sophisticallye derived from the
proposition that is termed in Schools Secundum quid, Fallacia a dicto
secundu^ quid ad Simpliciter.
to Simpliciter. Furthermore herein also he does bewray his Sophistical
iugglyng, whereas by his liedger de main, he conueyeth away the state of the
question which concerns the things only, to the circumstaunce of the
persons. For whereas we (agreeyng herein with Luther) do enquire ye thing
only, which is the isntrumental Cause of our Justification before God, he in
his answer does describe unto us, what manner of life they ought to lead that
are already Justified. And because it is most requisite, that those which are
Justified by the freemercy of God through faith, shall continually exercise
the^ selves in good works, hereupon he concludes. That Luthers proposition
wherein he affirms that faith only does knit up the knot of our
Justification without all aid of works, is utterly false. As though Luthers
disputation concerned the actions, and endeavors of them to whom righteousness
is given, and not rather of the cause of Justification only? or as though he
did not as carefully require all faithful persons to the daily and continual
practice of godly life, as any of all ye Bishops of Portingall do. But if you
be so unskillful Osorius as you seem to be, you must learn, that it is one
thing to treat of the persons, which are made righteous, and other thing of
the Cause that does make them righteous. And therefore this is a deceitful and
a frivolous Argument.

The possession of heavenly kingdom is promised to them which do good deeds.

Ergo, Only faith does not Justify.

This conclusion is altogether false, Fallacia a non Causa, vt Causa.
and the subteltie thereof transposed from that which is not the Cause, to y^e
which ought to be the Cause. In deed ye inheritance of heaven is given to
them which do good deeds, but not in respect of those good deeds which they
do. But there is a certain other thing, which does both Justify the
persons, and the good works of the persons also. That is to say, which does
make the persons and the works good also. Faith does justify both the persons
and the works.
And therefore you do confound those things very unskillfully, which ought of
necessity have been distinguished. If you will make this the ground of the
question, to enquire of what behavior those persons ought to be, which are
called to the inheritage of everlasting life. Luther will never deny, but that
they ought to be such, as must be conuersau^t in this world godly, holy, and
unblameable, as much as may be possible: But if the state of the question tend
to this end, to show, what manner of thing amongst all the good gifts of God,
that one thing is in us, which does procure our Justification in the sight of
God: Luther will boldly pronounce, that is Faith Only, yea and approve ye same
with invincible testimonies of Gods scriptures. Neither will Osorius deny it
without great reproach of error. Afterward he proceeds to his accustomed
trade of lyeng.

Works do follow faith (as the Lutherans say) not because they prepare a way
to salvation (for they shall not of them selves be cyted to judgment) but
because they are derived from faith as by a certain way of procreation: Page
141. 146.
for as the tree brings forth fruit by force of nature, so does faith of
necessity engender good works which both propositions are false. Or else
Osorius does lie for that wanted to make up the periode. But go to, let us see
what those two false propositions be, which the Lutheranes do teach: The first
is, A double lie made by Osorius.
that works do prepare no way for us to obtain Salvation, because of them
selves they shall never be cited to Judgment. The second is: That works do
follow faith of necessity none otherwise, then as fruit by force of nature is
engendered of the tree: Upon these he has given sentence that they are both
false. But what reason alleges he thereto? Forsooth because works (says
he) do either procure unto us Salvation, or Damnation undoubtedly. And yet
Osorius cease not to keep his old wo^t to lie. Page 146.
And hereof no man ought to be in doubt, but that our deeds shall be thoroughly
examined apart by the^ selves by Gods sharp Judgment. Yea? say you so
Osorius? What shall they stand apart by the^ selves? what? naked and unclothed
of all succor of Christ? of the promise? and of mercy? Go to, and what shall be
come of faith the^? Shall she stand ^ the means whiles with her finger in a
hole, Works are not examined a part by the^ selves in gods Judgment. Tit. 3.
like a Mome in a corner vnprofitablye? whiles (mercy being banished) men's
deeds shall by the^ selves be arrained before gods judgment seat? If this be
true, why do we not raze and scrape clean out of all books yt saying of S.
Paul? Not thorough the works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to the greatness of his mercy has he saved us: For if salvation be
yet to be measured by the law of works, and to be wayed after yt Standard of
Judgment, what place the^ remains for faith, or for mercy? Collos. 2.
And by what means is that ha^dwrityng of the law blotted out by the Cross
and bloudsheadyng of Jesus Christ, if as yet we be holden fast yoaked under the
curse of the law, and not delivered by grace? for what does the law else (if
we dare believe S. Paul) Romans 3.
but enge^der wrath, and procure to be accursed? not because the law is of it
self vneffectual, if it might be accomplished: but because we are all
unprofitable servants unable to perform the law. And for your part, do ye
think any man's works to be of such value, as being thoroughly examined after
the uttermost exaction of Gods Justice, can either endure the immeasurable
horror of Gods wrathful indignation, or by any means escape it? David
terrified with the terror of the law.
Surely David that godly King and great Prophet perceauyng that there was no
mortal creature but was ouerpaised, and pressed down with this heavy burden,
and weight of Judgment, beseeches of God nothing more earnestly, then that he
would not way his servant in the ballau^ce of his Judgment. And therefore in
an other place he adds: If thou examine our iniquities Lord, who abide it? Of
this mind was he even then, when he was a most trusty servant of God. As for
Osorius I know not whose servant he is, neither am I hereof any thing
Inquisitiue: but what Lord soever he serve, I do not a little marvel at this,
in what place of heaven this Gentleman shall stand, whenas his words, deeds,
yea all his thoughts, when so many his lies, slau^ders, errors, blasphemies
reproachful speeches, furies, impieties (which as it were to discharge his
gorge he has belched out in his books without measure or end) shall come
forth into brightness of Judgment: and shall be severely measured by the plain
and straight squire of Gods exact Justice?

But let us now ponder by the rules of the Scriptures the pretty reasons taken
out of the same whereupon he builds his defense. Page 146. Osor. objection
in the behalf of righteousness by works against righteousness of faith.
And first of all that sentence offers it self vouched out of the mystical
Psalms, where the holy Ghost does witness, that God will render to every man
according to his works. This sentence I suppose is to be found in the 62.
Psalm, for Osorius had no leisure to note the place. And I know not whether
him self ever cited the same out of the very founteines them selves, or rather
scraped it out of the mustie Ambry of Hosius, sinisterly applied by him there,
and so this Merchant would wrest the same crookedly to fit his own drift.
After this S. Paul is vouched of a witness but no place noted, Romans 2.
where the Apostle does affirm that all men generally and every of us
particularely shall be summoned to Judgment: where every one shall render
account of the life that he has lead, and receive reward accordyngly. You
shall find this in the second Chap. to the Romans. Hereunto is annexed an
other testimony of the same Paul: All shall appear and be arraygned before
the Judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive reward according to
the deserte of his life, and every man's peculiar work may bewayed and measured
in the just and upright ballau^ce of severe Judgment. Where is this Osorius?
2. Cor. 5.
Thou must seek for it Reader. The place is extau^t in the second to the
Corinth. the v. Chap. Here withal is also coupled that faying of Christ with
like vncited place. John. 5.
They that have done well (says he) shall come forth into resurrection of
life, but they that have done evil to the resurrection of death. He had many
other places to this effect besides these (says he) if he lifted to prosecute
every of the^, but because they were beyond number, the man being otherwise
occupied in other studies pardy, seems well enough furnished with these few,
which he has piked out of Hosius (if I be not deceived) and so thought good
to rehearse no more.

Well now. Let us see what piece of work he means to frame out of these
places of Scriptures so raked together, and whereunto to he bends his force.
We shall all be summoned before the Judgment seat of Christ. This is true.
Every person shall be clothed again with his own body. Those that have done well
shall be crowned with immortal felicity, and those that have done evil shall be
thrown into everlasting torments. This is also undoubtedly true. Again, the
most just and upright Judge shall be present, which shall reward every one
according to his works and deservings. I hear it and confesse^t to be true.
For who is ignorant hereof? But what hereof at length? what will Osorius
Logic conclude upon this?

Page 146.
Ergo, not faith but works (says he) do justify, which shall purchase for
us Salvation or Damnation. But this ilfauored shapen consequent which you have
most falsely derived from true things and confessed, we do utterly deny unto
you: and not we only, but the holy Scripture does deny and condemn: all holy
write does reject, the whole faith of the Evangelists, and doctrine of the
Apostle, and all the promises of God with general consent do cry out against
and hiss at it. If out of these places of Scripture you would have framed an
Argument a right, and according to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, ye
should more aptly have concluded in this wise. For as much therefore as there
remains for every of us such a Judgment, wherein every one must yield an
accoumpt of his life spent, there is no cause why any man should flatter and
beguile him self with a vain promise, that his wicked deeds or words shall
escape unpunished after this life, but rather that every man so behave him
self in this transitory world, that neither his good works may appear
without faith, nor his faith want testimony of good works. Truly this
conclusion, would have been preached to them (the number of whom is infinite,
not only amongst the Papists) but also even amongst the professors of the
Gospel, who professing the name and faith of Christ, live notwithstanding so
dissolutely as they bring the name and doctrine of Christ into open obloquy.
And as though it sufficed them to profess Christ's most sacred Religion in
words only, or as though there should be no Judgment at all to come, make no
account of their calling, but are carried headlong against equity and
conscience into the gulf of all licentious filthyues, to the great dishonor
of almightye God, and the manifest ruin of their own Salvation. Surely I am
of opinion if you had directed your conclusion in this manner against those
persons, and others like unto them, which do so wilfully rash and throw them
selves carelessely into manifest abominations without all respect of equity
and conscience, the consequent would more aptly have been applied and of more
force.

We shall all be summoned before the Judgment seat of the high Judge, where
accoumpt shall be made of the whole course of our life.

Ergo, who that will be careful for his Salvation, let him have especial regard
to the uttermost of his ability that his life be agreeable to his profession,
and stand assured (as much as in him lies) in the testimony of a good
conscience knit together with a true faith void of all hypocrisy.

For otherwise we do hear what the truth it self speaks. And those that
have done evil shall go into the resurrection of Judgment. We shall likewise
hear what Paul says, Collos. 3.
Even for these things (says he) the wrath of God does come upon the children
of disobedience.

But to what purpose Osorius is this alleged against the Justification of
faith in them, who having received the faith of Christ, do join withal
fruits of obedience as companions if not altogether pure and absolutely
perfect, yet do yield their endeavor and ability at the least such as it is,
after the small proportion and measure of their weakness. This travail and
endeavor though it be far distaunt from that exact requires perfection of
the law, is yet nevertheless accepted in place of most full and absolute
Justification in the sight of God, who does supply the want of our works with
his own free Imputation, for the faith sake in his son only, which is not
Imputed for righteousness to them that do work, but to them that do believe in
him: For what although the horrible rebellion of the ungodly which walk not
after the spirit but after the flesh, do procure unto them selves most just
Judgment of comdemnation, yet shall this saying stand always inviolable
notwithstanding, and remain assured for ever, The righteous shall live by
faith: And he that believes in me shall not dye for ever. John. 11. John. 11.
But yet that promise (say you) does abide most evident and unvanquishable,
which does promise resurrection of life to them, that do live godly and good
deeds. Go to, and what conclude ye hereof? Ergo, Faith only does not
justify us (say you). The Objection confuted.
Nay rather neither Faith Only, nor faith any way else taken does Justify a
man, or avail any thing at all to Justification, if works according to your
interpretation be examined by them selves, by the waightes and ballau^ces of
Gods Judgment, shall make full satisfaction. But ye conceive amiss of the
matter Osorius, and therefore your conclusion is as ilfauoredly shapen. Do ye
expect a reason? Forsooth because you fail in the rule Topicke: whereby we are
taught to apply true proper Causes, Fallacia a no^ causa, vt causa
to true effects. And therefore your consequent is faulty, and a Sophistical
cautell derived from that which is not the cause, to that which is the proper
cause. Let us discuss the very order of your words. And they which have done
well: What they? shall come, (says he) into the resurrection of life. etc.
First of all, ye perceive that the works alone are not treated of simply, but
the persons that do the works. Surely in Judicial Courts is no small
observation used chiefly of the difference betwixt the circumstaunces of the
Causes, and circumstaunces of the persons. As when a Servant shall commit the
very same which a Son shall do, although the factes be of all parts equal,
yet I suppose that the Son shall find more mercy in his cause, of his Father
being Judge, then the servant of his Master being Judge, especially where the
Judge is not constreined to yield Judgment by any coaction, or express rigor
of Statute and Law, but is at liberty to use consideration of the trespass,
according to his own discretion. Eue^ so, neither do I think it all one, if a
Christian man (I say a true Christian man) shall maintain his cause before
Christ his Redeemer, as if a Turk or Infidel should plead before the same
Christ his Judge. And why? because the one is very much helped by yeldyng his
faith to the promise, the other has none other aid to trust unto, but ye
rigor of the law. But let us proceed, that we may come at the last to the
prick that is shot at. I understand therefore by these words of Christ, what
shall be betyed of the^ at ye last that have lived well, that unto those that are
found such in the Judgment shall given possession of eternal life. The words
of Christ expounded.
I hear this well. But I would feign know at the length, what the Cause should
be, why this merciful Judge will vouchsafe to reward those workmen so highly?
For our controversy consists not in this point, that reward is given, but in
this, for what Cause reward is given: The person accepted not for the works
sake but the works for the persons sake.
Whether of any desert, or without all desert? whether for the proper
worthynesse of the works them selves which you call good, or rather for the
Faith of the person, from whence those works do obtain both to be called
good, and to be esteemed for good?

You will say that the spring of this together working grace flows unto us
out of the founteine of Faith, An Objection.
from whence all ability to do good deeds is so abundant within us, which
being received: afterward through the bountifulness of Christ, fruits of
holy works do issue out from us, which do make us worthy to be Justified, and
to place us in the possession of everlasting kingdom. I do answer, The
Answer.
that ye do neither speak as much as ye ought, nor that altogether true, that
ye do speak. For albeit we confess, that all the good whatsoever we do,
proceeds from the bountyfull gift of God: yet this is far wide from the
mark of our controversy now in hand, neither is this matter in handlyng now,
to know from whence the fruits of good works do spryng: but after they are
come unto us, ye question is, how much they do avail unto us: whether they
them selves through their own worthynesse do work our Justification before
God? or whether they stand destitute of any other aid, whereby they may be
Justified them selves? whether do ye think works of their own nature so
effectual, as to be able alone to endure the heavy burden of Gods Judgment,
or that the operation of the Faith of the beleuer, rather the^ of the work,
does present the persons together with their works, to Gods free Imputation,
and so accomplish Justification?

But I do hear a continual ianglyng of this Portingall Coockoe chatteryng
always one manner of lay in mine ears, Page 146. The words of Christ not well
understood but crookedly wrested by Osorius.
Not faith but works (says he) wayed in the ballau^ce of Gods Judgment do
purchase either Salvation or Damnation unto us. Where find you this? Out of
the words of Christ: And those that have done well, shall go into everlasting
life: but those that have done evil into everlasting destruction. I answer,
it is most true that the Lord speaks, but most untrue that Osorius concludes
hereof. Christ comprehendyng the fruits of works together with the whole
tree, and ioynyng the Causes together with the persons, does encourage them
with the hope of eternal life, which do yield their endeavor manfully to their
vtterest ability to perform ye rule of the Gospel, not defiuyng what the
proportion of their works do deserve, but declaryng how bountyfully and
manifoldly he will require their labors, which have suffered any kind of
affliction for his names sake. Osorius framyng hereof merely false
propositions does with his crafty conueyaunce wrest and force those things to
the works them selves only, which the Lord does apply to his faithful that
live virtuously, and so at length turnyng awry, that is to say: Osor. fallax a
Concreto ad Abstractum.
From the Concreto to the Abstractum (to use here the terms of Sophistry) and
seueryng the persons from the things does conclude disorderly after this manner
of false conclusion.

Faithful and godly Christians living virtuously shall be rewarded with eternal
life.

Ergo, Good works by them selves wayed in the ballaunce of Gods Judgment do
deserve eternal life.

What ca^ be more falsely imagined or more foolishly concluded the^ this lie?
In deed works are the fruits of Christian faith, and tokens, not causes of
Salvation. Even as a tree that brings forth fruits, if the tree be good, it
appears by the fruits, not because the fruit makes the tree good, but
because the tree makes the fruit good. In like manner the deeds of the godly,
have nothing in them selves that may enable them to stand upright in Judgment.
But if they find any grace or reward, the same may not be ascribed to their
own merit, Mercy forgeueth our ill deeds. Imputation acknowledges our well
doings for good.
but partly to Mercy, partly to Imputatio^, through the son that is the
Redeemer: to Mercy, I say, which does forgive our evil deeds, to Imputation
which accepts our good works though they be of them selves never so
imperfect, as though they were perfect, and does reward them with a crown of
glory: so that the glory hereof is not now to be ascribed to men but to God,
not to righteousness but to grace, not to works, but to faith, not to
Judgment but to mercy. For confirmation whereof, if we seek for authority,
who may require any one a more faithful witness, or of more approved
authority then the Apostle? who being sent unto the Gentiles as to his proper
and peculiar charge, what does he preach unto the^? Not by the works which we
have done (says he) but for his mercy sake he has saved us: If words may
obtain any credit with you, what can be spoken more plainly? if the
authority of the witness may prevail, what more assured testimony can be
sought for, then Paul, that speaks him self?

But Osorius lacks not a shift of descante here, An other Objection of
Osorius.
thinkyng thereby to craze the force of verity. For whereas Paul affirms
that we are saved for his mercyes sake, he does interpret this saying to be
verified after this sort. Because mercy does endue us with ability and power
to work, that hereof those godly deeds of piety do ensue, In what wise
Osori. does ascribe Salvation of Gods mercy.
which may make us us righteous before God, and that hereof likewise it comes
to pass, that all whatsoever true righteousness appears in us, does
proceed from the mercy and bounty of God, and not from our own nature. Such
is the doctrine that he scatters abroad every where in these books, and in
those other also, which he has entitled De Iustitia, followyng herein (as it
seems) his forerunner Hosius, Hosius.
who maskyng in the like maze, does affirm that life everlasting is given to
men so farreforth through the grace of God, as it is delivered to men's merits,
which do issue out of the mercy and grace of God. But Augustine will help to
unloose this knot easily: so will also all ye most famous and ancient
interpretours of the Greek and Latin Church, who altogether with one voice
do so ascribe all our salvation to the mercy of God, not that which is
obtained by doing good deeds in this corruptible body, but which consists
rather in remission of sins, and which after this life will supporte the
needy and naked weakness of our works (be they never so feeble) against the
importable burden of the rigor of the law. Of which mercy Augustine makes
mention in this wise. August. de temp. 49.
Stand not in Judgment with me O Lord, exactyng all things which thou have
commanded me: For if thou enter into Judgment with me thou shall find me
guilty. Therefore I have more need of thy mercy then thy manifest Judgment.
Again in an other place treatyng of the last Judgment. He shall crown thee
(says he) in mercy and compassio^s. This shall come to pass at that dreadful
day, whenas the righteous king shall sit upon his throne, to render to every
man according to his works, who then can glory that he has a pure and
undefiled heart? or dare boast that he is without sin? And therefore it was
necessary to make mention there of the compassions and mercy of the Lord. etc.
August. de Spirit. and Liter. Cap. 33.
And again somewhat more plainly, where he describes what manner of mercy
shall be in the day of Judgment, he does set it forth in this wise. This is
called mercy (says he) because God does not regard our deservings, but his
own goodness that thereby forgeuyng us all our sins, he might promise us
everlasting life. Hereunto also may be annexed the testimony of Basile no
less worthy to be noted, touching the merciful Judgment of God toward his
chosen people, you shall hear his own words as they are. For if the Judgment
of GOD were so rigorous and precise in it self, Basil. in Psalm. 32.
to render unto us after our worthynesse according to the works that we have
done, what hope were then, or what man should be saved? But now he loves both
mercy and Judgment, that is matchyng mercy equal with him self, to bear
chief rule in the regal seat of Judgment, and so brings forth every man to
Judgment. That is to say, if Gods Judgment should proceed of it self
precisely and exactly, requityng every of us according to the deservings of
our deeds that we have done, what hope should remain for us? or what one
person of mankind should be saved? But now God loves mercy and Judgment: And
reseruyng mercy for him self, he has placed her before the Royal Throne of
Justice, as chief gouernesse and so cites every man unto Judgment. You see
here mention made of mercy and the grace of God, not that grace only that does
engender in us good works, but the same rather which does forgive sins and
Sinners through the blood of his son, Ephesians. 1. In what thing our redemption
chiefly consists.
in which forgiveness consists our whole redemption, according to the
testimony of Paul the Apostle: In whom (says he) we obtain redemption
through his blood, and remission of sins through the riches of his grace. etc.

If I needed in this matter to use a multitude of witnesses, rather the^
substance of authority, it were no hard matter for me to cite for defense of
ye Cause, infinite testimonies out of Ambrose, Jerome, Gregory, Bernarde, and
others. But what need I protract the time of the Reader, in vouching a number,
whenas it is evident enough already (I suppose) by those sayings spoken
before: that our salvation can by no means obtain place, in Judgment without
the mercy of God, and his free Imputation. The first whereof our Sins need to
be covered withal, the next even our best works shall want of necessity.
Whereupon that saying of Bernarde, whereof we made mention before, as diverse
other Sentences of his to the same effect, be very pitthye: Not to sin
(says he) is the righteousness of God, Remission.
the righteousness of man is the free pardon of God. Bernard. Sermon. 23. in
Cant.
Of which pardon Augustine very little differring from Bernarde makes
rehearsal in these words. Thou have done no good thing (says he) yet thy
sins are forgeuen thee: August. in prima quinquagena in Prolog.
hitherto thou hear the work of mercy: Mark now for Imputation. Thy works
are examined, and they are found all faulty: and forthwith concluding adds.
Psalm. 31. Imputatio^.
If God should require these works after their deservings, he should surely
condemn thee. But God does not give thee due punishment, but grants
undeserved mercy. Thus much Augustine. Even as though he would say. Our best
deeds seem in none other respect good, then as farreforth as they be vpholden
by his pardon and free Imputation: who if otherwise should search all our
works even to the quick, after the most precise rule of his severe Justice,
he should surely find nothing sound in our best deeds, many things
loathsome, The defeeco of mercy does not abolish Justice.
and wicked in our works, all things in us altogether corrupt and defiled.
Wherein we do not so advance the mercy of God in his Judgment, as though we
would have all the parts of his Justice excluded from thence. But we do
mitigate rather ye frettyng wound of his Justice (which you do so stiffely
mainteyne with your speech) applyeng thereunto the sweet and wholesome
plaster of his merciful Imputatio^. For who ca^ be ignorant hereof, that God
shall Judge the quick and the dead with Justice and equity? And who on the
other part is so blind, that can not discern this to be most false, that
Osorius mainteineth? who rakyng all things to amplify the estimation of pure
righteousness, does so stoutly defend this point: That all our words and
works are of such force and value in this Judgment, that of their own nature
they are auaylable toward ye purchase of the everlasting inheritance, or else
do procure us a ready downfall to everlasting destruction: In deed he
speaks truly in respect of the condemnation of the unfaithful, and unbelieving
persons: and of them which being estraunged from faith, have not acknowledged
Christ in this world: and of such as abusing their faith, have despised Christ:
and of them also, which seeking to establish their own righteousness, would
not submit the^ selves to the righteousness of Christ. Neither is it any
marvel, if God do execute his Justice somewhat more sharply against those
persons, whenas their deeds being found guilty, have no aid to plead for
them, that may stand them in steed besides Christ. Ill works whom they do
condemn and whom not. John. 3.
For Christ is nothing else but a severe Judge to them that are not within the
fortress of Faith, as in effect the Gospel does denounce unto us. Who so has
not believed the Son, the wrath of God dwells upon him. John. 3. But the
matter goes far otherwise with them that are engraffed in Christ by faith,
of whom we read in John the same Chap. He that believes the son has
everlasting life. How christ is called a Judge, how a Redemer.
Wherefore as Christ appears not a Redeemer, but rather a Judge to them, which
without the Castle of Faith, seek to be rescued by the law: so on the contrary
part: Those that shrowde them selves wholly under the assured Target of faith,
and protection of the Son of God, shall not find Christ a rigorous Judge,
but a merciful Redeemer. The which sentence he does verify him self by his
own testimony and promise, where prophecyeng of the time of his coming of
Judgment. Luce. 21.
When you shall see the beginning of those things (says Christ) look up, and
lift up your heads: and so proceedyng yeldeth thereof this Reason: Because then
your redemption draws nigh: Mark well Osorius he does not say your Judgment,
but your redemption draws nigh. And why did he choose to put his Disciples in
remembrance of their redemption rather, keepyng the name of Judgment in
silence? Ueryly because there is so no Judgment of comdemnation to them, which
are of the faith of Christ Jesus, as thereis no rede^ptio^ for them, who without
the faith of Christ Jesus, do wholly yield their service to the world and to the
flesh. Whereupon we may hear him again debatyng the same matter touching the
freedom of Judgment in the v. of John. John. 5.
Whosoever hears my voice, and believes on him which has sent me, shall
not come into Judgment, but has already passed from death to life. And in an
other place turnyng his speech to his Disciples, whenas he could promise them
no reward of more excellency: Luke. 22.
And you (says he) shall sit together upon seats Judging the xy tribes of
Israel. Luke. 22. What need I rehearse Paul writing to the Corinthians? 1.
Cor. 1.
Do ye not know (says he) that the Saints shall Judge the world? And raising
us up beyond the reach of earthly things to the excellency of Angels. Do
ye not know that we shall Judge the Angels? 1. Cor. 1. What then (will you
say) shall we not all come into Judgment? shall we not all be arraigned before
the Royal seat of the Maistie? Gods judgment two fold according to August.
De Consens. Euang. Lib. 2. Cap. 30.
Yes Osori. we shall all come to Judgment: But Augustine will discover unto
you a Distinction of this Judgment. That the one part thereof shall concern
Damnation, the other sequestration, whereby the Goats shall be severed from the
Lambs, but the Lambs not condemned with the Goats. And therefore I do firmly
believe, that we shall come all unto Judgment: but my assured hope and
Affiaunce is, that the elect shall not come into Judgment of comdemnation. I
know that all shall yield accoumpt, but this Awdite shall be so easy, and so
void of all fear unto them which are engraffed into Christ, as on ye other
side it will be most rigorous and dreadful to them, which shall come forth
into Judgment with out Christ, and the weddyng Garment. And why so? verily,
because whom Faith does clothe with her Roabes, the same does Christ so shield,
defend, and save harmless with his innocentie, against all bytternes of
tempestuous Judgment, as though they should never appear before any Judge at
all, but pass presently from death to life.

And this truly, even this same innocence of Christ is that pure
righteousness of Christians, The Innocence of Christ is the righteousness of
Christians.
which the Father does none otherwise Impute unto us that believe in his Son,
then he did once Impute to the same his Son all our sins, when he suffered
his Passion for sinners. And he (says the Prophet) did bear upon his back
all our Iniquities. Gods Imputation in respect of Christ, and in respect of us.
Esaias. 53. On the contrary part such as refusing this ankerhold of Christ, and
trustyng to their own tackle, will hazard the sauetie of their souls before
the severe Justice of God, otherwise then clothed with this weddyng Garment,
must needs suffer shipwreck of their souls, void of all hope to recover the
haven of perfect felicity: and so being turned over to the furniture of their
own store, must needs be bulged through, and ouerpa^sed at ^ast with the
buroe^ of Justice, which they could never reach unto in this life. And hereof
arises all that difference betwixt them which are joined to Christ, and the
rascal rabble of Infidels. For although in this just Judgment, a reckonyng
shall be made of all the deeds of all men before God, and likewise reward
decreede undoubtedly according to every ma^s deservings: yet the order of this
Judgment shall far otherwise proceed with the faithful, the^ with the
Reprobate. Of the reckonyng to be made in the last Judgment.
For such as will challenge their Salvation as due unto them, for obseruyng the
righteousness of the law, thorough their own works, and not through faith
and Imputatio^ of Christ: Those me^ surely shall be rewarded according to the
deserte of their own works, under this condition: That whosoever have
accomplished the rule of the law, with that absolute perfection that he ought
to have done, shall live according to the decree of the law. But if he have
failed one tittle in performaance, less then the law required: what may he
hope for else, then according to the sentence of the law (which holds all men
fast chayned under everlasting malediction, that have not continually in all
the course of their life perseuered upright and unblameable of all parts
thereof) That no blemish, be it never so little, may be found in the breach of
any one jot of the law, which may procure most heavy matter of utter
comdemnation unto him. And even here most manifestly appears the Justice of
God: for he that of him self is altogether unable to atteyne perfect
righteousness, and will likewise wilfully refuse ye same, being offered unto
him by another: The diversity of the^ which shall render an account is
distinguished
if he suffer punishment for his own unrighteousness, has no cause to accuse
ye law of injustice, but must refer his plague to his own infidelity. On
the other part. Those that departing hence with faith and repentance (I speak
here of sinners which are truly penitent in Christ) do so prepare them selves,
as men reposing all their whole righteousness in the only innocence of
Christ, and not in their works, shall neither be impeached for their sins,
which Christ has healed with his wounds: And yet if they have done any good
work, they shall be rewarded with ye inheritance of eternal life, not for the
worthynesse of the works, but because of his free Imputation, he does
vouchsafe those weak works, be they never so barren and naked, worthy to
obtain the promised inheritance: not because they have deserved it, but
because him self has promised it.

I suppose these manifold and manifest sayings hitherto are sufficient enough
to declare the truth, In Osorius writings order wants, and in distinguishyng
things Method.
and discover the falshoode of all this quarrel of Osorius: nay rather to show
how many sundry faults he has couched up into one conclusion: how many
errors he has clouted together, and into how many absurdities he has
tombled him self headlong. For endeuouryng to prove against the Lutheranes:
That there is none other way to attain true righteousness, then by living
virtuously: he seems to pretend a color of a certain few sentences pyked
out of the Scripture, such, as him self scarsely understands, or has
ilfauouredly disguised to make a show in his mask: and making no distinction
mean whiles betwixt the persons and the things, disposing nothing in his due
place and order, but choppyng and shufflyng all things together in a certain
confused hotchpotte (as it were in the old unformed Chaos) though they be as
far distau^t as heaven and earth, iumbleth them together without all
discretion, confoundyng the law with the Gospel: the persons with the things
them selves: righteousness of faith with righteousness of works: neither
notes which are the natural causes of the things, nor which are the proper
effects of the causes: but disguiseth the causes under title of effects, and
effects likewise misturneth into causes. For where as works are properly the
effects of faith, neither are of their own nature good, nor can be esteemed
for good, but through Justification going before, yet our Osorius frames his
discourse, as though the chief and especial bullwarke of all our
righteousness were built wholly upon works. According to works. For the works
sake.
And that which he reads in Scriptures shall come to pass according to
works, ye same forthwith he concludes to be done for the works sake, as
though heaven were now a due reward for our travail and labors: and not the
gift of grace: and as though they do work, might claim it as due debt for
their works sake, and were not rather promised to them that believe for ye
Son the Redeemer his sake. But we have discoursed enough upon this matter: it
remains that we pursue the tracke of the rest of his disputation. And because
we have spoken sufficiently (as I suppose) of the one of those two
propositions, which he calls false, and whereof he has accused Luther to be
the Author: Let us now fyritte out the other, and see what vermin it is, and
how it is able to defend it self.

First of all, whereas Luther has noted this saying, to be ye chief pillar and
foundation of Christian doctrine: That no man ought to ascribe the mean of his
Salvation, in any thing else then in the only faith of Jesus Christ:
afterward he proceeds to the other point: That ye fruits of good works
are engendered, and do issue from this faith, even as the fruit is engendered
of the root of a good tree: and that works do follow faith of necessity,
none otherwise, then as a fertile tree budding out first his green leaf, and
beautiful blossom, does at the last by course and force of nature, bring
forth fruit. The sentence Osorius judges to be heinous and in no wise
sufferable: and yet in the mean time denies not, but that good works do
follow faith. Osori. does deny that good works to follow Luthers faith.
But he cries out with an open mouth this to be false that good works do
follow Luthers faith. But it is well yet that we hear in the mean whiles,
that good works are engendered out of Faith, but in no wise out of Luthers
faith. I would therefore learn of you Osorius out of whose Faith good works
do proceed.

Page 146.
Forsooth my faith (says he) is not Luthers nor Haddones faith if he be
Luther Scholar herein. Come hither Osorius a good fellowshyp that I may stroke
ye smoath shauelyng of yours a whiles. Truly I can not choose but all to
beloue you, and believe you also when you speak the truth, for I I suppose that
the Oracle of Apollo can be no more true then this Oracle is, that works do
follow your faith as you say. They follow in deed apasse in great clusters.
And because ye vouchsafe not your self to express unto us what kind of
works those are, What manner of works do follow Osori. faith.
it shall not grieve me to do so much in your behalf. And yet what need I make
proclamation of them? whenas your own books do so aboundauntly and manifestly
utter the same, as that no man can be so blind or deaf, but he must needs see
and hear them. What? art thou desirous (Reader) to have described unto thee as
it were in a painted Table, what blossoms this pregnaunt faith of Osorius does
show forth? Peruse his writings and his books, especially those Inuectiues
compiled against Luther, and Haddon. Was ever man in this world, that has
heaped together so many lies upon lies: has compacted so many blasphemies and
slanders? has uttered so many errors? has ever by writing or practice
imagined, expressed, and vomited out so many tauntes, reproaches, mad words,
vanities, cursinges, bragges, follies, and Thrasonicall crakes? so much
rascallike scoldyng mockes doggishe snarllyng as this beast has brayed out in
this one book? wherein you shall never find Luther once named, but coupled
together with some title of reproach, as outrageous, fra^ticke, or mad: If
those trim monuments of your gay works, do cleave as fast to your daily
conversation, as they are ryfe to be found every where in your books, and the
testimonies of your wit: I Appeal to the judgment of the indifferent
Reader, what consideration may be had of that your faith, which whelpeth out
unto us such a monstrous lytter. For if a good ^^^^growyng upon a sound
root, do not commonly bring forth fruits unlike to the stock: And if
children do usually represent their progenitors in birth, in some lineamentes
of personage, resemblaunce of manners, or other applyable feature of Nature (for
the Gleade, as the Proverb is, does not hatche forth Piggeons) it must surely
follow of necessity, that either your works whereof you vaunt your crest, do
by no means follow your faith: or else we must needs adiudge you a man scarce
of any faith at all. And therefore to answer briefly to those glorious
vauntes, which you make touching works that follow your faith, and not
Luthers faith: if you mean those works which I have rehearsed, I will gladly
agree with you: but if your meaning tend to good works, truly your own
writings will without any other witness condemn you for a great liar. But go
ye to. Let us allow this unto you, which you require to be granted, that is to
say. That your Faith does necessaryly draw after it good deeds, as the
Southeast wind does draw along the clouds: yet what should be thestoppell in
the mean space, to bar good deeds from Luthers or Haddones faith more then
from yours?

Page 146.
Because (say you) faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. I
do acknowledge this a very Catholic maxim, and a sentence meet for a true
Christian. But I wonder what monster these mountains will bring forth at the
last. But Luthers faith comes not of hearing, for he does not hear the
words of Christ. What words I pray you? and where are they written? Forsooth
where Christ (as he says) does promise everlasting life to them that Repent:
and does man ace hell and destruction to them that are impenitent. Where is
this? Seek it Reader.

Luthers faith yeldeth no good works according to Osorius. Page 146.
And because Luther does not hear those words of Christ.

Ergo, his faith comes not by hearing, and therefore yeldeth no fruits of
good works, but stark briars and brambles only.

Go to. And what does your faith in ye mean space Osorius? Let us hear what
grapes it produces. But my faith (says he) that is to say, the faith of holy
Church, whenas it co^senteth to the words of Christ: And whenas also Christ
him self does threaten destruction to the impenitent sinners, this faith
therefore wherewith I do believe these words of Christ causes me to be
repentaunt. What do I hear Osorus? why? what needs repentance at all, where
so manifold, and so great treasures of good works do flow so ple^tyfully out
of that river of faith, which works do prepare an assured way to perfect
righteousness? For what man is he that dare presume to challenge ye name of a
righteous man, in respect of his unrighteous dealyng? or who is he yt repents
him of his good deeds? But let us mark the sequel of this tale.

Ibidem.
Again whenas the same Lord does say: you shall be my friends if ye do the
things that I command you. If I do give credit to Christ's words, The
faith and works of Osorius.
and do earnestly desire to be received unto his fre^dshyp. I will employ all
the power of my soul to fulfill all his Commandments. etc. Truly I do
comme^de you Osorius, and account you an happy man also, if you perform in
deeds, that ye protest in words. But what needs then to make any plaster
of Repentance, for as much as you do accomplish all Gods commandments as
you say? No, but I do apply all the power of my soul that I may accomplish
them. How so (I pray you) Because I do believe Christ's words, and therefore
yield my careful endeavor that if I do any thing amiss, I may purge the same
with Repentance, and that I may observe all his good precepts to the vtterest
of my ability. Behold now Reader the platform of Osorius his faith: Which by
succeedyng encreasinges of daily buddyng blossoms yeldeth continual fruits
of most beautiful and holy works, contained in the sap, branches, and
bark of that pleasant stock. How comes this to pass? First of all:
because he is endued with that faith, which faith is proper and peculiar to
holy Church: The^ because he does believe the words of Christ: Furthermore
because he does prepare him self through this faith, that he may cleanse his
sins with Repentance (and what shall become in the mean space of
righteousness of works in the Confession of sins) Lastly because he does
address the conversation of his life, as near as he can, after the line and
level of Christ's rules. Go to. Let us compare this platform of his faith,
and the faith of Luther and Haddon together. Osorius a Gods name does credit
Christ's words: Luther and Haddon distrusting Christ, has given no credit at
all to the words of Christ. Osorius beleuyng Christ, and esteemyng aright of
his words, gave him self to Repentance, as became a good Christian man, and
so enured him self thereunto, that he abhors his own wickedness, and is
become obedient to Christ's Commandments. These iollyfellowes have raunged
all their life long in such careless security, as men never touched with any
remorse of Repentance, or regard of amendeme^t of life after the doctrine of
Christ. Auaunte therefore cursed Luther and his companion Haddon both birds of
an ill feather, with this your unbelief, which could never be enduced to have a
will neither to believe Christ, nor to come to Repentance, nor yet to
accomplish Christ's precepts. You might at least have taken example by Osorius
pattern, and thereby have learned faith, and bytternesse of Repentance.

A show of Osorius faith.
But go to now. Because Osorius does triumph so gloriously of the credit that
he gives to Christ's words: Let us discuss the truth of his speech: and
search out the difference betwixt this his faith, whereof he makes such
bragges, and Luthers Faith. Take an example. The words of Christ in the
Gospel are these: John. 6.
This is the will of my Father that has sent me, that every one that sees the
Son, and believes in him shall have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up in the last day. John. 6. And immediately after ye same Christ redoubleth ye
same words again, and again, thereby to emprinte the^ more deeply, into
their minds. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in me, has
everlasting life. John. 1. 3.
Again John the first. To as many as believed in him, he gave power to be made
the Sons of God. And by and by in the 3. Chapter. He that believes in the
Son, has life everlasting. And how often do you hear in the Gospel, the
sundry sentences, and the notable titles, and Testimonies, wherewith the Lord
does aduau^ce the faith of his Elect, and the wonderful comme^dation,
wherewith he does amplify the force, and efficacy thereof? Thy faith (says
he) has saved thee: Be it unto you according to your faith. Math. 9. Math. 9.
Be it unto thee as thou have believed. Math. 8. Math. 8.
Fear not believe only: Mar. 5. Mar. 5.
Believe only and thy daughter shall be made whole. Luc. 8. If thou can
believe all things be possible to the believing man. Math. 9. And he that
believes in me shall do the works which I do, and greater works the^ I do,
shall he do. John. 14. You do acknowledge these words of Christ (I suppose)
which you can not deny: A comparison betwixt the faith of Osorius and Luthers
Faith.
I demand of you now whether your faith, or Luthers faith do agree better with
the words of Christ? Luthers, that does call back all things unto faith? Or
yours, that does yield over all to ye works of righteousness. Whenas the Lord
being daily conuersaunt: with the Publicanes (as the Gospel reports) does
prefer the Publicane before the Pharisee: Mary Magdalene before Simo^:
Banqueteth his prodigal Son more sumptuously, then his obedient brother:
whenas he carries upon his shoulders his scattered and lost sheep: looks
narrowly for his lost groate: binds up the wounds of him that fell among
thieves: offers him self a Physician to the sick more gladly, The
righteousness of says according to the Scriptures.
then to them that were sound and whole: whenas he places Harlottes and
Sinners in the kingdom of God, before the Pharisees: when he requiteth their
travail with equal wages, that came to work the last hour of the day, with
them, that bare the brunte, and heat of the whole day in the Vynearde: when
he compares, and sets the last, before the first: when he promises
Paradise to the thief, for his faithes sake only: when he fashioneth Paul,
of a deadly Enemy, to be an Apostle: whenas he does not only receive to mercy
the Gentiles castawayes by nature, excluded from the promise, void of all
hope, Reprobates for their Idolatry, but has them in greater estimation, then
his natural Sons: What did he mean else by all these examples, then to
disclose unto us the secret mystery of our Justification? Which consists
rather in forgiveness of Sins, then in doing good deeds: which is to be
esteemed by the only mercy and promise of God: whereof we take hold fast
through faith, and is not to be wayed by ye value of righteousness, nor any
merits of works. Therefore sithence all you opinion does so wholly discene from
this kind of Doctrine, with what face can you affirm, that your Faith is
consonaunt with the words of Christ? and Luthers discrepaunt?

The Apostle does in so many places throughout his whole Epistles thunder out
(as it were) that there is no righteousness but through the faith of Jesus
Christ: Osori. does never name in his book this word, Imputatio^.
that no salvation is to be obtained, but by the Mediator the Son, through
whom righteousness is Imputed, not purchased by works, neither to him that
works (says he) but to him that believes in Christ, that Justifies the
wicked: And yet you seemyng not to be so much as acquainted with this
righteousness by Imputation, as that ye dare not once name this word
Imputation, do notwithstanding stand so much in your own conceit, as though
Christ at his coming should find all faith in Osorius, A plain demonstration
that Osori. gives small credit to the words of Christ.
but no faith at all in Luther. If a man might be so bold with you, it were no
uneasy matter to pike out diverse other sentences out of Scripture, which
would quickly crack the credit of your faith. As where the Apostle writing
unto Timothe does so manifestly Prophecy: That it should come come to pass
before the end of the world. That many should depart from the faith, believing
lyeng Spirits and doctrines of Deuilles, forbidding Marriadge, and the eating
of meats, which the Lord has prepared to be received with thanks giving.
These doctrines of Devils for as much as the lying spirit of Osorius does so
stoutely maintain, and bend all his force to uphold in this latter age of the
world, as besides him no man more obstinately: what may be though else, but
that either he is departed from the faith? or that the Apostle is an open liar?
Again: Where the same Apostle writes touching Antichrist, paintyng him out in
his colors (as it were) and so lively expressing him to the apparasit view of
ye world his Throne, his wickedness, his iuggling, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
his lies, his pride, his immesurable arrogancy vauntyng him self beyond all
hautynesse of man's Nature. What may a man Judge of these sentences? the meaning
of the which can by no means possible be applied to any thing else the^ to the
Romish See. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Again in the Revelation of S. John: where the same
Antichrist is set in open stage, having the shape and countenance of a meek
Lamb, which under the visour of false horns, Apoc. 13.
should resemble the true Lamb, and restore the Image of the wounded beast to
life and speech. Which place of Scripture because can not be wrested any
other ways, then to that Romish Ierarchie (which bendyng to ruin at the
first, was restored by that great Archeprelate of Rome) yet in this most
apparaunt Text of Scripture, if Osorius faith he demanded, whether it may be
applyable to ye Bishop of Rome, we shall find him as far dissentyng from the
purpose of this Prophecy, as if he were demanded the way to Canterbury, he
might answer, a poake full of Plummes. We have hitherto sufficiently enough
declared (I suppose) that Osorius for all his bragges is void of all aid to
defend his Faith: And so for this time I will commit the ce^fure of those gay
works, which flow so plentyfully out of that glorious Faith, to that Judge
which shall display the hidden corners of darkness: and to the consideration
of them, who by the view of his books, have skill to discern a Lion by his
paws, or rather an Ass by his lolieeares. Now remains at length to discover
briefly that, which he barketh against Luthers faith.

Page 146.
Now let us see Luthers faith (says he) whether it can bring forth any lively
fruit. Osori. does discuss the says of Luther.
It ca^ not by any means. etc. Lie on yet more a Gods name. First of all,
because he teaches that all works appear they never so godly are desiled
with sin. Nay rather: but yt you were by nature of so corrupt a Judgment, yt
ye can not frame your self so much as to speak ye truth, you would never have
patched this lie amongst ye rags of your leasings. Luthers disputation
concerning faith and good works, tends to nothing else, but that which ye
Scriptures every where, the sacred spirit of truth, and S. Paul inspired with
the holy Ghost do by all means, and reasons confirm, and which we all ought
of very duty to embrace. For Luther endeuouryng to make evident the doctrine
of Justification, and comparyng our good works with the law of God, is
enforced to confess the very truth of the matter: that is to say, That there
is nothing so holy in works, but being of it own nature, in some respect
unclean and defiled, must needs be unsavory in the sight of God, if without
Christ it be racked with exact scrutyne of Gods severe Judgment. And hereof
quarrel is pyked forthwith against Luther, Note here the cavil of Osorius.
as though he should affirm that whatsoever works the very regenerated, and
engraffed in Christ them selves did work, were nothing else, but mere sins,
and wickedness. And because he does abridge good works in that part only,
wherein they be falsely adjudged to be of value, to Justify before God:
Osorius does argue against him in this wise, as though he did utterly root out
of man's life, all Civil and Moral virtues and virtuous conversation. Wherein
a man can not easilye determine, whether he does show him self more injurious
to Luther, or bewray rather his own blockish grosenesse. No man ever taught
more soundly, The doctrine of Luther touching good works.
no man more highly commended good works, then Luther did, being separated a
part from the doctrine of Justification. And whereas he does extenuate the
force of works in the treatize of Justification, he does not therein so
altogether derogate from works, as rather friendly aduertize them, which
through vain Confidence of works, do challenge to them selves righteousness
in the sight of God, and do depend so much upon the deservings of works, as
though there were none other fou^teine from whence our Salvation might be
derived. Luther therefore using Argument against those persons, does boldly
auow, that all our works are defiled, yet not simply, but in respect of their
application, being considered without the faith of the Mediator. Which being
most truly spoken by Luther, is as sinisterly wrested by Osorius as though he
had spoken it simply, that there is no good or commendable thing in works,
nothing in them acceptable to God, though never so duetyfully, or virtuously
performed. And for this cause he concludes at last, as with an unvanquishable
Argument. That by no means possible, Luthers faith could bring forth any
fruitful works, like as that barren fig tree, growyng near unto the high
way, whereupon grew nothing but leaves. But this is Osorius his own
conclusion not Luthers, a Sophistical cavil concludyng falsely. If S. Paul
doubted nothing at all to esteem all things sinful which were done without
faith. Romans 4. Romans 14. Aug. in prima quinqua gena ex Prologo Psalm. 31.
If it were lawful for Augustine to write in this wise. Thy works are
examined (says he) and are found all defiled. Why does he rage so furiously
against Luther, because he does profess, that the deeds which we call good,
are in none other respect to be daemed for good, the^ as they be valued by the
faith of the Mediator? The consideration of this doctrine as is of it self
most assured, so does it not tend to that end, that Osorius imagines, to
discourage godly minds from virtuous endeavor. Rather well disposed persons
are so much the more enflamed to embrace virtue, by how much they find them
selves more bound to Gods bountyfull mercy: for as I understand, nature has
so provided, that faith workyng by love, should always be more effectual,
the^ the law constrainyng through fear.

If this rule of Paul can not yet be beaten into that bussardly brains, how
that our deeds be void of all praise, and estimation, teaching you that all
thing is Sin, that is wrought without faith. August.
Let Augustine yet prevail somewhat with you. Believe (says he) in him that
does Justify the wicked, that thy good works may prove good works: For I
will not vouchsafe to call them good, as long as they do issue from an evil
tree. And therefore our Savior him self recityng and rewardyng the good
deeds of his faithful, Works are not in any other respect accounted for good
in the sight of god then in respect of Christ thorough faith.
does not speak in this manner as though he spoke generally. Thou have fed
the hungry. Thou have lodged the harbourlesse: Thou have refreshed the needy,
and clothed the nacked, but restrainyng all these things to ye faith, which
ought to be toward him. I was hungry (says he) and ye fed me, and I was
naked, and ye clothed me: I was in misery, in chains, and emprisoned, and you
visited me and ge^tly refreshed me: I was harbourlesse and ye refreshed me.
etc. So that he regarded not so much the deeds them selves, which are
indifferently employed upon the relief of the needy, as he esteemed the faith
which works those deeds for Gods sons sake and his names sake. Wherefore
forasmuch as upon this faith depends not only the Justification of all
mankind, Good works are Justified by faith.
but of all the actions of man's life, in the sight of God, as upon this only
root, and foundation, what absurdity ensues hereof to say. That all our
works as of them selves, and their own nature, are filthy in the sight of
God, unless they be sprinkled with ye faith, and blood of the Mediator? Now
these things being agreed upon. Let us return to the Argument of Osorius. Page
146.
The faith of Luther (says Osorius) can by no means yield any good fruit. Why
so? Because he does say that all our works seem they never so holy, are
infected, and wholly defiled. Go to, and what more? Ergo. No lively fruits of
good works (says he) can ensue from Luthers faith: for as much as all our
doyngs are corrupt and sinful, as Luther him self witnesses. I do hear you
and answer you. That the Antecedent is true, but the consequent most salfe.
For to confess that to be true, which Luther has most truly alleged, that
all our good deeds being viewed with the eyes of Gods Justice, without faith,
and without the Mediator, are of them selves no less abhorred in the sight of
God, then wicked sinners: yet is not Osorius conclusion therefore true, that
Luthers faith is the wellspryng and seedeplot of all ungodliness. The reason
thereof is evident. For whatsoever actions, or endeavors of ma^s life are of
their own nature blameworthy, the fault of the same proceeds not from faith,
but from the poisoned corruption of our weak flesh. And therefore Luther
agreeing very well with Augustine, commands to take holdfast of faith. That
our works may thereby be made good works, For as much as whatsoever is not of
faith, and is not only not shielded under her protection, deserves not to be
accounted for good, but also after the testimony of Paul, is esteemed in the
sight of God no better then very sin and offense.

The Argument recoyleth back upon Osor. him self.
This matter being confessed, a man may frame an Argument against Osorius much
more fitly after this manner.

For as much as the law in her proper effect ca^ do nothing, but engender
wrath, and was for this purpose published, that sin should appear much more
sinful.

It follows rather by Osor. doctrine (who seems to maintain with the whole
bent of his skill ye glory of the law) that no good works are engendered of ye
law, but sin rather as from whence more plentyfull matter of wrath is raised
to our destruction.

But Luther handles the matter far otherwise, all whose Divinity how much
the more carefully does enseale unto us the faith of Christ, which is the only
mother, and nourse of all virtuous deeds, so much the greater increase of good
works must of necessity spryng by his doctrine. And therefore (as I suppose)
we have handsomely enough, for this time, wrong out of Osorius his fingers,
this choakyng bone, wherewith he has kept all this stir against Luther, and
thrust it into his own throat: That Luthers faith is the well spring and
seed plot of all wickedness, but his faith the founteine of all virtue. But
here comes an other bolt, out of the same quiver, as well made, and as wisely
shot. Let us behold how near the mark he shootes withal.

Page 146.
Again because Luther does affirm that the force of lust is so strong, that
he believes no man able to resist it. It is a common custom (I perceive)
amongst many persons to extenuate and despise boldly Original sin, and that
decay of nature in words: but I could never find any one, that was able to
suppress and utterly subdue the strength thereof in deed in this mortal life:
except that only man of whom it is written: Which of you does accuse me of
sin? unless we will couple this our Osorius next unto him, and make him his
equal: who with singular and unspeakable courage, does fight against nature,
so stoutely (I think) that no force of natural corruption, no entycementes of
ticklyng lust can drive him from his state of innocence. But I will no more
rippevp the life and manners of Osorius I will examine the force and vigor of
his Arguments and the unjointed joints, and shiuered sinews thereof.

Luther does deny that man in this life, is able to vanquishe the strength of
sin utterly, reigning in the flesh.

Ergo, No good works do proceed from Luthers Faith.

Why do ye not by the same Logic conclude likewise.

Ergo, There is nothing in the world besides the Crow that is black.

Nor any skill in the learned that is not in Osor. pack.

But go to let us change the names of men and let the matter remain. And in
place of Luther let us use the name of Paul. Mark now as wise a reason, or
rather the very same, only the names of persons being changed.

Paul complainyng of the sin, which does accosiber his flesh, does protest,
yt in his flesh, dwells no good thing.

Ergo, No good works are engendered out of Paul's faith.

For what difference is there I pray you betwixt the words of Paul, and
Luthers positio^, if ye compare them together rightly? whenas each of them with
vnelagreable assent, have relation to the self same unvanquishable tyranny of
Original Sin. But now let us hear how necessarily this consequent must
follow of this wonderful reason, wherewith he would seem to prove that
Luthers faith is ye utter subuertour of all good works: for in this wise
crawleth forward that lyeng spirit out of his mouth.

But for as much as no man can enterprise any good action, unless he do first
utterly cut of the kingdom of Sin. Page 147.


But the kingdom of sin can not be utterly cut of, if it be true that Luther
teaches.

It remains therefore that no man is able to work any good deed.

As touching the form of this Argument, Osori. Argument faulty in the form.
perhaps the punyes in Sophistey may somewhat allow: but if ye behold the
matter thereof. Certes the Doctors of Divinity will reject the same as
faulty. Unless (says he) the kingdom of sin be first utterly cut of. etc.
Truly I would not much stand with you here Osorius. If you will first express
unto us apely and distinctly, A twosold kingdom of Sin.
what you mean by this word kingdom. For whereas Deuines do agree, that
there are two sorts of sin, which we call actual sin: which also they
do distinguish two manners of ways, into Sin reigning, and Sin rebelling,
you must teach us, whether of those two you mean. For it is not all one thing
to suffer thy self to be carried away with sin, and to yield thy self
willingly captive into his Tyranny, as to be vanquished of sin through
weakness: For the first comes of will: the next of Infirmity: We are all
many times overcome of sin, neither lives any in this flesh, but offends
sometimes sundry ways. Yet are we notwithstanding overcome against our wills,
and drawyng back as it were. The most chosen servant of God are sundry times
cast down through Sin reigning in their members: But never yield over wholly as
subjects to his kingdom. Uery well therefore does S. Paul counsel us: Let
not Sin reign in your fleshly bodies. Romans 6.
Romans 6. And yet the same Paul did not always bring to pass the good yt he
would. But did work many times the evil that he would not: Not he now but
Sin dwelling within him.

These things being thus opened: Let us search out the pythe of the Argument.
The substance of the Argument is discussed.
He denies that virtue has any place there, where the kingdom of Sin is
not utterly rooted out. If Osorius do mean the kingdom of Sin, as a king or
a tyrant does reign over his subjects. The Mayor proposition is true, but
the Minor most false. For Luther did never teach, no not so much as dream
otherwise, then that Sin should be suppressed as much as were possible. But
if his meaning tend to this end. That no man can enterprise any good work,
unless the tyranny of Sin being first brought under yoke, he have so tamed
the flesh, that no motion so much may be felt to rebel within, that may
wound or infect the conscience: how can Osorius make proof of that which he
verifieth in his Mayor? or confute that which he does object against Luther in
his Minor? Or where shall he find that conqueror of Sin, who having
thoroughly mortified Sin, and utterly vanquished the ragyng Rebellion of
natural corruption, dare promise reward of perfect righteousness unto him
self? Job a man of all other famous for his vprightenesse of life, Job,
was yet so displeasaunt with him self, that he seemed to stand in doubt of
all his works. Esaias,
Esaias does condemn all his righteousness, to be more loathsome then a
menstruous cloute. Who was more holy, or more acceptable to God then David?
David,
And yet besides that he dare not presume to offer him self to Judgment, as
being dismayed with fear of his secret conscience, he does not spare franckely
to pronounce, That no flesh living can be found righteous in the sight of
God. The great Prophet Daniell doubted not to make his humble Confession
together with the people, saying, Daniell.
That he had Sinned with his forefathers. What shall I speak of Jonas, Jonas.
and the other Prophets? And to let pass the other Apostles, what shall I say
of Paul and Peter? S. John declaryng That we all are Trespassours in many
things, John.
does not exempt him self out of the same number.

Next to the Apostles, ensued the Age of ancient Antiquity and learned
Fathers, who although with all their power and might, did valiauntly mainteyne
continual battle against ye assaults of sin, yet could they never so
surely encampe, and guard them selves in so firm a ground, but they should be
undermined with the countermoyling of her outrageous Pyoners: that like
dastardes mistrustyng their own strength, they should feel them selves
enforced sometimes to forsake their standing, and flee for rescue to the only
mercy and forgiveness of God, as to the only vnpenetrable rock of their
Salvation. And therefore S. Jerome in plain words does note truly, Iero. in
Ezec. Lect. 14. Cap. 46.
that though man did atteine to perfection, he should yet stand in need of
Gods mercy: and that man's full and perfect perfection did depend upon grace,
and not upon deservings. etc. No less effectually Augustine writing to
Boniface touching perfect righteousness, or rather of the imperfection of our
righteousness. August. ad. Bonif. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
Virtue (says he) which is now in a righteous man, is said to be so
farreforth righteous, as unfeigned acknowledgement, and humble Confession of his
own imperfection does admit the same to be perfect. Again the same
Augustine in an other place does account that man to have profited much in this
life, August. de Spirit. and Lit. Cap. ^.
who by profityng does feel in him self, how far he is distaunt from true
perfection. And because the Latin Church shall not seem to want the
testimonies of the Greeks. Let us hear the words of Basile treatyng of man's
righteousness. Basil. in conc. de humilit.
This is full and perfect rejoicing in God, when as a man is lifted up not with
any righteousness of his own, but knows him self empty and naked of true
righteousness, and so to be justified by Faith Only in Christ Jesus. Whereby
Osorius may perceive, what estimate is to be made of our own righteousness,
though it seem never so beautyfull: which Augustine him self adiudgeth worthy
of execrable curse, if it be examined besides the mercy of God. Aug. Lib.
cont. 9. Cap. ^^.
But because (says he) thou do not narrowly and sharply search our
offenses, we do hope assuredly, that we shall obtain some place for pardon in
thy sight. It is not needful to "make a Register of all ye testimonies of
writers (ye matter especially being so evident, and so strongly fenced with
multitude of authorities) whenas the consent and agreement of all writers, is
in no one thing more general, and steadfast, then in the abacyng of perfection
of works, and humbly crauyng pardon of our own imperfection. Aug. Sermon. de
temp. 49
Whereupon Augustine, stand not in Judgment (says he) against thy servant,
requiryng of me all things that thou have taught and commanded. For if thou
enter into Judgment with me, thou shall find me guilty. I had need therefore
of thy mercyes, rather the^ thy severe Judgment. I demand now what you
conceive of the words of Augustine? Surely although I do not think, that the
man was void of wonderful willing endeavor, yet if he had been of all parts
endued with that integrity of undefiled life, and had utterly rooted out the
whole kingdom of Sin, with the concupiscence thereof: and had obtained to be
deemed praise worthy, in respect of absolute accomplishyng the Commandments
of God: his soul would never so humbly have disclaymed from Gods Judgment,
and submitted all comfort of pardon to the only free mercy of God.

Let us annexe hereunto the same Aurel. August. altogether disagreeyng from
Osorius where he sets down the same much more plainly in his book De
Spirit. and Liter. August. de Spirit. and Liter. Cap. 11
I said (quoth he) that it was possible for a man to be without Sin, if he
have a will thereunto, and Gods assistaunce withal: but I never said, that
ever was, or ever should be, any one, who in this life could be so perfect,
except that one only, in whom all creatures shall be quickened. etc. Of what
force therefore can this your wyndeshaken crooche be, more then Catholic,
which you have scraped out of Hosius, Roffensis, or Cicero (as I suppose) where
upon your lame cripled works do rest so boldly? namely: that a man may so
order his life in this rotten Tabernacle of the flesh, after the right squarier
of righteousness, by the assistaunce of God: as having thoroughly conquered the
kingdom of Sin, he may easily accomplish all the Commandments of the law?
And therefore to answer at a word for all, what shall I speak else, then as
Jerome reported to Ctesiphon, when he wrate against the heresy of Pelagians.
So shall I set Augustine against Osorius, and S. Jerome against Sir Jerome.
Ierom. ad Ctesiphon. co^tr. Pelag. Tomo. 3.
Thou do say, that the Commandments of God are easy (says S. Jerome) and
yet thou can name no one man, which has performed them all. etc. And so the
same S. Jerome proceedyng foreward: Utter no such blasphemy against the
heavens, whereby thou may delude ye minds of simple folk with these words.
It is, and it may be: for who will grant unto thee, that a man may do that,
which never man could do? And again the same Jerome, what is our wisdom?
nay rather what ought our wisdom to be, which are not perfect? Our simple
Confession, that we are imperfect: and that we have not yet achieved or
attained full perfection. Ierom. co^tr. Pelag. Lib. 1.
This is the true wisdom of man, to know him self to be imperfect. And I
willbe bold to speak it, that the perfection of the best and most righteous,
whiles he dwells in this fleshely doughill is altogether imperfect. etc.
What need I allege any more in a matter so manifest of it self? so thoroughly
confirmed with Testimonies, and so plainly and notably discernable by the daily
examples of man's life?

But amongst the rest of this innumerable ouerflowyng multitude of Sinners,
here shall be a Reply made (I believe) of the Divine integrity of this one
Gentleman Osorius, of his wonderful conversation, absolute holiness, Angelike
chastity, culuerlike simplicity, linked together with a more then Seraphicall
humility, and incomprehensible innocence, who alone amongst the children of
women, has beautified the whole world with such brightness of righteousness,
who carries about him all virtues fast locked in the sacred cheeste of his
breast, and daily numbered them: who has so quenched the boylyng froathe of
Original Sin: has so utterly subdued, and brought into bondage, the whole
empire thereof even at one pushe: has of all parts so absolutely fulfilled
each tittle of the Co^maundeme^ts: has tamed the flesh and all the
concupiscence thereof: has supressed his affections: has with so well
disposed order, addressed the whole course of his life: and even now haled up
on high, The holy and and perfect life of Oso. compared with S. Fra^cise.
with a certain out stretched reach of mind beyond the heavens, and rapted
now into the fraternity of S. Frauncisce him self, is enflamed with
unquenchable desire of Divine zeal, that he will not once tread awrye so
much, nor will be blotted with one spotte of crime, or suspicion of crime, be it
never so little: will not yield to any temptations of Satan, or infirmity of
the flesh: will not be seen with blemish or suspicion of Sin, no not one
Solecisme or Incongruitie: no nor yet idle speech in all his words, no
disorder in his whole life and conversation: out of whose mouth shall issue no
idle word, nor lie no (I dare boldly say) not one no erroneous doctrine, no
co^tumelious cavil in his books: no rascallike slander: no Sycopha^ticall
outrage: but all things shall be found within him so attempered, and quallified
with a certain marvelous peacible modesty, and lenity, that no defect may
be found needful to be added to fill up a full Bushel of perfect
righteousness. And because thou shall not wonder (Reader) by what means, this
our most Reverend Prelate has climbed to this immesurable excellency of
general righteousness, and with what Pillars he vnderproppeth the same, and
learn withal, how auayleable and effectual, this most sacred Sacrament of
Confession is: vouchsafe I pray thee to hear Osori. him self telling his own
tale. Osor. Lib. 2 Cap. 100.
I do call to witness (says) he Jesus Christ my Lord and my God, that by the
means of this comfortable Confession sundry times frequented, How great the
force of Popish confession is.
I have escaped from infinite wickedness: wherefore if I have at any time
subdued lust, if I have forsaken voluptuous filthynesse, if I have been
desirous to embrace Chastity: If I have been enlightened with any sparckle of
godly zeal: I do wholly ascribe the effectual operation thereof to the same
Sacrament: through the which the holy Ghost has emparted unto me great store
of his grace. etc. What a test is this? If being first overwhelmed with
innumerable iniquities, he have attained that righteousness at the length
through the virtue of that most sacred Sacrament, in so much as he has shaken
of the yoke of all concupiscence, has cut the throat and cut of the head of
the kingdom of Sin: what need has he then to repeat his co^fessio^s so
often? when the wound is whoale, what need any plaster or further Surgery? If
all Sin be abolished, to what purpose serves daily custom of Confession,
and to what end is absolution craved? But if he feel yet somewhat lurkyng
within him, that forces him betwixt whiles, to run again so often to
Confession, and to ye drugges of absolution: how is it, that he affirms so
boldly, that ye kingdom of Sin is wholly conquered in us, so courageously
fightyng against Luthers doctrine in words, whereas in very life he agrees
altogether with Luther.

Finally if Osorius dare presume to stoutely upon his own conscience, as
having utterly crushed in pieces the kingdom of Sin, that he is now no more
acquainted therewith: what may prejudice him, but he may forthwith frankely
Justify him self with the Pharisee and say, I thank thee, O Lord Heavenly
Father, that I am not as other men are, nor like unto this Publican Luther, and
those seely sheepish Bucerans. I do fast twice in the Week: I give the tenth
of all that I possess: yea besides all this I do also daily enure my self to
holy Confession. etc. But hereof enough: Let us proceed to the remnau^t rabble
of his raked lies as they follow.

Furthermore who be holy and unblameable before God? Page 148.
Even those truly which are void of all crime, but according to Luthers
doctrine, you can not be void of crime: for he denies that sin is
extinguished, and affirms that the flames of all abomination do broyle out
thereof, as out of a whotte flaming Oue^, scorching and co^sumyng all things: by
means whereof no man can be found unblameable and without spotte. The
sutteltie of this Sophistical cavil tends at the last to this end.

God has chosen us (says the Apostle) that we should become holy, and
unblameable.

But according to Luthers doctrine, no man can be holy, and without fault, in
this life.

Therefore hereof ensues an vnauoydeable conclusion.

Because no man living is clear from offense, therefore neither Haddon, nor any
of all the Lutheranes can be reckoned amongst Gods Elect. Pack ye hence
therefore as banished outlawes all ye vile Lutheranes, pack ye hence with all
your torn and ragged works into the helles of Osorius damnable curse. For the
gate of Election is not opened to any, but unto Popes, Osorians, Phigianes,
Hosianes, Eckyans, and others the like Lordynges, in whose most pure and choice
behavior, no drop of filth can be found worthy of Reproach. If Osorius him
self had not been so shameless beastly, as to blaze abroad this trifling
Argument, it would have loathed me to have rehearsed the same in this place:
nor would I vouchsaued any answer thereto: but that I thought good to give
the Reader a taste of his blockishe ignorance, that he might smile at it a
whiles, or at the least, learn by this, to esteem of all other his poppet
reasons almost in all his book: for scarsely any founder matter is scattered
in any part thereof.

Osori. Argumentatio^ discussed.
FIrst of all. The Apostle both teach that we are elected and chosen, that we
should become holy. This is true. Whereby you may perceive (Osorius) that
whatsoever holiness we be endued withal, does neither go before, nor accompany
election, but that it ought to follow altogether, not in order of time only,
but in respect of the end and effect thereof. For the Apostle does not say: GOD
has chosen us because we were holy, or should afterward prove holy, but that
we should become holy: so that Gods Election is now the cause, not the effect
of our good works. And if good works do follow Election in order of time, I
see no cause to the contrary, but by the same reason, our Justification should
likewise necessaryly follow. For as much as the consideration of them both is
all one. For whom has chosen, the same he has Justified: and with the same
grace that he has chosen us, he is said also, to have Justified us: by one
self same mean, and to one self same end. For God has chosen us, if ye
ask here the cause: of his free mercy according to the good pleasure of his
will, if ye seek the mean. In Christ Jesus, If ye look for the end to work
good deeds, not for the good deeds sake, not for any our deseruinges, but to
the praise of the glory of his grace. Truly none otherwise fares it in the
matter of Justification. For whom God of his free mercy has chosen, the same
also he has freely Justified, not by any other means then in Christ Jesus: not
because he foresawe, that we would be holy, but to that end, that we should
walk circumspectly and holyly in his sight.

But what emporteth this saying, To be irreprehensible how it is taken in the
Scriptures.
that we should become holy and unblameable? paraduenture Osorius be of the
opinion, that the Catharres, Celestines, and Donatifies were imaginyng, that
herein our full and absolute regeneration of our renewed nature was signified
unto us: and that we should accomplish such a kind of thing as the Grecians do
call (...), without the which, Gods Election and our Justification could not by
any means consist. Ueryly I could wish withal my heart, that we all could
direct the course of our life in such sort, according to this Puritanisme of
Osorius. And that we were all endued with such integrity, and Angelicke
innoce^cie, that no part of our life might be defiled with blemish or just
reprehension. But what shall we say? Such is the condition of man's life, such
is the weakness of the flesh, that every man has his infirmity: And we
have not as yet so put of the Nature of man altogether, that we should be
forthwith transformed into Angels. Go to then? what if it come to pass, that
in this brickle estate of our frayltie, any of us do folter and falldowne? are
we therefore excluded forthwith from our Election? or have we by and by lost the
benefit of our Justification? I do not think so Osorius. For in what sense
shall ye Election of God he said to be permanent, if it may be cut of, and have
an end? or how shall it be called steadfast and assured, if it hang upon the
uncertainty of our frayltie? But do not the true elect (say you) fall at any
time into deserved rebuke? what the^? shall every one yt is worthy rebuke, be
forthwith cast of from his Election? A good fellowship (Osorius) What if this
fall happen before Baptism? You will say that Baptism does wash it clean
away. What? and shall not faith and Christian Repentance cleanse our offenses
after Baptism likewise? If there be no forgeuenes of those Trespasses which we
Christians do commit after Baptism: To what end is that Article in our
Christian Creed, wherein we confess remission of Sins? If no offense be
made, to what purpose serves Pardon? Surely where nothing is blameworthy their
Pardon may go play. Let us see now: will you now dispoyle us of an Article of
our faith, and withal bereue us of hope of remission, that erste bosted so
boldly of your strong belief in the words of Christ? But you say. God did
choose us that we should be unblameable. I do hear you Osorius and allow your
Objection, if you will likewise accept of mine answer. Whatsoever is forgeuen
to the guilty by Pardon, and purged by forgettyng and forgeuyng: there is
nothing remaynyng to terrify that person from Imputatio^, or make dismayed for
any controllement. For (that we may so bold to glory as Paul does). Romans 8.
What is he that shall accuse the elect of God? God is he that does Justify,
who shall then condemn us? We may lawfully add hereunto. Who shall comptroll
us?

You see therefore in what wise Gods elect do appear now excusable and
righteous: not so much through the cleanness of their deeds, as through the
bounty of him that Imputes: Not from the beginning of unrighteous nature,
August. Epist. 95.
(to speak Augustines own words) but by conversion from sin to
righteousness. nothing blameworthy, but because it does not please the Fatherly
cleme^cie, to exact sharp and narrow trial of them, whom he has chosen in
his Son. And therefore the Apostle notyng the same thing, says. The Cause
and end of Election.
Whom he has chosen in Christ Jesus, that they should become holy and
unblameable. etc. Wherein you have both the cause, and the end of our Election.
The cause is Christ, or ye grace of God in Christ: The end is herein signed,
that we should become holy and unblameable. For he speaks not in this wise:
he did choose the^ which had lead an vncorrupt life, to the end he might
engraffe them in Christ. But he did choose us in Christ Jesus first, that we
should live holy, and unrebukable. Osori. Objection.
But by what means unrebukable (say you) whenas the very elect them selves
can not be free from fault, as Luther does say? The answer is plain and
easy.

Whereas Luther does deny, The confutatio^ of the Objection.
that Gods true elect are free from all guilt, he seems therein to have
regard to ye frayltie of ma^s nature, and making a comparison thereof, does set
the same directly opposite against the severe Justice of Gods law. This weak
nature be^ding her force as much as she may, against ye assaults of sin,
although she get the vpperha^d sometimes, yet, besides that she yeldeth over
very often as vanquished, eue^ then chiefly, when she has obtained the maistry,
she does never yet express ye immaculate sincerity, and undefiled vprightenes
in mainteinyng ye battle, but some default may be found in her most perfect
obedience: and so pumples will yet stick fast in ye flesh, that they may be
easily espied: For curing whereof she shall be co^streined of necessity to pray
in aid for the general triacle of the Church. Lord forgive us our sins.
etc. So yt Augustines words may well be verified here, August. de natura and
gra. Cap. 53.
why is ye possibility of nature so much presumed upon? It is wounded, maimed,
troubled, and utterly destroyed: it needs a true Confession, and not a false
purgation. etc.

Furthermore where the Apostle makes this addition: Thar" we should become
holy and unblameable, he seems not therein so much to respect ye natural
perfection of innocency (which I doubt whether may be found in the very
Angels) as ye zealous mind, godly will, and earnestly bent affection of every
of us in this life, and vprightnes in every our several vocation: meaning
nothing in this placeels, the^ as he did in an other place: where speaking of
ye vocation of widows commands the^ to be instructed to lead an
unreprovable life. 1. Timo. 5. 1. Timo. 5.
Likewise making mention of Bishops: says. That they must be unblameable, and
have a good testimony, left they fall into reproach and reprofe of the
slau^derer. 1. Tit. 3. 1. Tit. 3.
Again setting an order for servants, commands the^ to have regard to
their calling, 1. Timo. 6.
lest the name of God and the doctrine of their profession should be brought
into obloquy. In like manner to Titus the 2. chap. Appointyng a rule of comely
conversation, he does exborte all persons that every one so behave him self in
his vocation, Tit. 2.
that the word of God be not blasphemed: and that the adversary may be ashamed,
having no just quarrel to accuse us. And again to the Colloss. the first chap.
Collos. 1.
That he may deliver you holy and undefiled and unblameable in his sight. etc.
Which sayings tend not to this end, as though ma^s nature could put on that
perfection, whereby by she might be preserved from falling at any time
afterward by frayltie from the state of integrity: but provoke us rather
thereby to take heed, that our will be no more in thraldom under wicked
rebellion, and so voluntary yield over the members of ye body to sin, or by
any means bring her self in bondage to wickedness. And this is the meaning of
the Apostle (as I suppose) That we are therefore chosen of God, not to be
delighted in mind with the concupiscence of the flesh, to fulfill the lust
thereof But to become holy: That every of us in this world should demean our
selves in our callying soberly, uprightly, and godly, as be seems the chosen,
and holy ones of God.

Whereby you may sufficiently perceive (if I be not deceived) That those
sentences, How holiness and frayltie be concurraunt in the holy ones.
which Paul has written concerning holiness, and Luther touching natural
infirmity, are not so repugnaunt one against the other, but they may both be
admitted well enough. For hereof arises no repugnauncie, but that in outward
conversation, and obseruyng the rules of our function duly, it may be said
after a simple manner of speech and unfeignedly: That is to say, in the sight of
God a man may demean him self honestly, in whose nature notwithstanding some
such filthe may cleave, as may of necessity compel him to cry out with that
elect vessel of God, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Romans 7.
But Osorius perhaps will chaunte us an higher note, not with this miserable
Paul: Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me? But will descaunt (I
suppose) with that blessed Pharisee. I thank thee, O heavenly Father, that I
am not as other mortal men are. etc. But let us go foreward, and pursue the
Relics of this notable monument. And sithence we are come now to the treatize
of Predestination and Freewill. Let us mark well what stuff this Raunger has
brought out of his Forest: and what dogs he leads to course other men's
game withal.

Of Predestination and Freewill.
LVther affirms that freewill is a thing in name only, Of Predestination and
Freewill. Page 149. 150. 151.
or a Name without substance: That man is the patie^t and not the agent: That
he is drawn, and does not purpose or Deliberate any thing: That man is an
instrument only, and as it were a Saw, or Axe which God does frame and force
whether he will, and whereunto him pleases: and that man has no power nor
strength reserved him either to do good, or to commit wickedness: in so much
that we are not able not only not to do good or evil: but also not to think
any thought by any means of our selves. Moreover when I name Luther, I
understand also withal Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin and the rest of your Jolly
fellows: whose opinions and writings tend to this effect at the length. That
no difference at all may seem to be betwixt man, and any other tool or
instrument.

In uery good time Sir, blessed be this hour, wherein we are come now at the
length to the most combersome and crabby treaty of Freewill, which being
heretofore so often tossed to an fro in common Schools, in assemblies, and
disputations of Deuines, after so many combats and turmoyles, has now at the
last found out a champion (hope I) through whose only force and actiuitie
being defended, and shrouded (as it were under the Target of Ajax) she shall be
able to endure and withstand all the assaults, and cou^termoyles of all
heretics whatsoever. For whereas heretofore this unsearchable gulf has
encombred and entangled the wits, and studies of so many notable Clerks,
Cardinals, Bishops, and Priests: the bottom and depth whereof could
notwithstanding never yet be attained unto: I suppose the only let thereof
hitherto has been, for that our Osorius was not hatched as then, nor produced
to be Proctour in this cause. But now sithence this vpstarte wrestler is skipt
over the old barriers, and has caught the collers in hand, may any man doubt
but that (the whole force of the Enemy being utterly discomsited and compelled
to flee the field, the Majesty of Freewill having been long time wounded and
weakened with grievous malady, yea and through feebleness even yeldyng up the
ghost) shall presently recover health? stand upon her feet, and be strong? For
this lusty gallaunt disdayneth to encounter as Bythus did sometime with
Bacchius or as Ecerinus with Pacidianus, or as Hercules against two, Hercules
not able to stand against two, yet Osorius against four.
or as Horarius against three brethren at once, or with one man hand to hand
only: but of valiant courage, challenges the field against four choice and
tried soldiers at one choppe together: to wit, Luther, Melancthon, Bucer,
Calvin. Yea with them also against the whole army of Lutheranes. Against whom
nevertheless if Osorius durst have cast his glove, when they lived amongst
us: or if they were present now to answer the challenge, and defend the
cause, no doubt the iustie crakes of proud Jack bragger would carry but a
small countenance to move the godly to be displeasaunt withal. But as to rake
the dead out of their graves, and to pike quarrel against ghostes and spirits,
is the common guise of every rascal varlet: so to the discreet and well
disposed has it been accounted most filthy and contemptuous: yea most to be
abhorred in our Osorius at this present: who in all this his discourse of
Freewill alledgyng no one thing against them, but that which in their
writings and books is fully answered and satisfied: yet (as though they had
made no answer at all) crawleth he foreward nevertheless, patchyng together
his rotten and motheaten trumperie: wherein neither is any thing of his own
inue^tion, nor any new stuff, but that he has somewhat furbushed the old
rusty Arguments of other raynebeaten soldiers, with a fresh glaze of raylyng
and slanderous terms, like the foolish Choughe attiryng him self wholly with
the feathers of other Fowls: and in this respect also more vile and loathsome:
That, where the other do in their arguyng make a certain show of some reason
vouched either out of Scriptures, or of Doctors wrongfully wrested: but he for
the more part does so frame his discourse, rather to the accusing of men, then
to the discussing of the controversy: and does so handle his matters, Osori.
more courageous in accusing, then in arguyng.
as one having regard rather to the persons against whom he quarelleth, then
to the cause, which ought to have been discovered by him.

Osori. his stinolous and foolish treatyng of Free will.
The man is fully persuaded that Freewill ought to be mainteyned by all means
possible. But what the will or choice of man is what thing is free, or not free
in the will of man: what is necessary, and what difference is betwixt free, and
necessary, and how many manner of ways necessary to be taken, he does neither
discover by definition, nor distinguishe by Argument, nor divide by partition,
nor does declare what diversity and difference ought to be betwixt branch
and branch. Many and sundry persons before him have stoutely maynteined the
quarrel of Freewill, yea with no less courage, then they would have done, if ye
state of their country had been in hazard. In the same quarrel long sithence,
the Celestines and Pelagians kept a great stir against Augustine. Amongst
many others of late, years, wrate chiefly Roffensis and Eckius against Luther.
Cardinal Pighius has stuffed up ten Inuectiues full against Calvin.
Likewise many others have written against Melancthon against Bucer and others.
All which albeit prevailed very little against the truth, yet to the end they
might the more easily deceive under a certain visour of ye truth, they did
shuffle amongst their own writings many sentences of the Scriptures, and
many also of the most approved Doctors. After all these our Osorius intendyng
to uphold Freewill being in great ieopardie to perish, what does he? what
brings he? what utters he at length else? but certain simple croppes
scattered here and there in the fields of holy Scriptures, which he has
gleaned together and wretchedly misordereth, to make his Assertions get some
credit, yet nothing auayleable to his purpose, God knows. In the mean
whiles he cites not one world so much out of the autenticke monumentes of the
ancient Authors, nor out of Augustine: who was altogether busied in decydyng
this controversy, and by whom he ought chiefly have been guided in this cause:
either because he has practiced other sciences, and read nothing of this
writer: or else because he is wicked and craftily dissembleth the things which
he has read. And yet all this notwithstanding this our Portingall champion so
carrion leave in the knowledge of Scriptures, altogether disfournished of
Doctors, persuadeth him self to be man good enough (if it may please the
Muses) to bear ye whole bru^t of the battle in the behalf of Freewill
against freely Luther, Melancthon, Bucer and Calvin, not with main strength
only, but even with a proud Portingall look.

The principal parts of Osor. accusation, reduced into certain places.
But go to: because we will not protract any long time with the Reader, in
words purposing to wrestle somewhat with Osorius herein. Let us approach to
the mark. And because the whole force of his communication seems to tend to
this end, to accuse men rather then to open any matter worthy to be learned:
and for as much he observes no order in teaching, in accusing, ne yet in
disputyng: but being violently whirled and carried (as it were) in some
forcible whirlewinde of accusation rau^geth the field without Judgment and out
of all array, and after a certain confused manner of talk does wrappe up, and
mingle all things togethers as it were under one confused heap: we on the
contrary part will to temper our answer, that (as near as the matters will
permit) we may dispose in some reasonable frame, the chief pillars and
Arguments of his accusation, which him self has set down most disorderly.
And therefore in my simple conceit the whole substance of all his accusation
whatsoever, may be gathered into four or five principal places chiefly,
which he seems to find fault with all most in Luthers doctrine, as matters
full of absurdity, and which he obiectagayust Luther in this wise.

Luther affirms that there is no free choice, or freedom in the will of man.









For into these few places, as in a short Cataloge may be divided all
whatsoever is comprehended in this huge mass of Osorius Inuectiues. Which
being in this wise placed, it remains, that we frame our answer to every of
them particularly, as opportunity and place shall offer them in the discourse,
and so to purge and wash away (as much as in us lies) all his cauillations and
Sophistical subtelties. For thus would I wish thee to be persuaded (friendly
Reader) that besides natural scoldyng, and mere cauteles of words void of
all substance of truth, there is else nothing of all whatsoever he does brabble
in all this discourse, yea and that also stroakyng him self rather with vain
conceit of his own opinion, then of any grounded knowledge or Judgment at all.

And first as touching Freewill: In steed of a proof and testimony of
Luthers own works and yet the same also, neither does he allege whole as
they be, nor fully: nor does he couple the first with the last: nor directs
to any certain place of the Author. But go to. What manner of heinous crime
is this (a Gods name) wherewith this Portingall Inquisitour does charge Luther
so grievously and cruelly? Forsooth it is this: That he did dare mutter against
Freewill, Saying that it was a thing in tittle only: and whiles it follows
his own nature, it does nothing but sin deadly. And where is this written?
In the volumes of Luther (I suppose) or else in Sybilles leaves. Seek there
Reader, or else where if thou will. For as our Reverend Master Inquisitour
assigns no place to ye Reader, so (I think) he never did read in Luther the
thing, whereat he cauilleth: nor thinks that it concerns his credit at all
to utter whatsoever him lists, in what sense, with what phrase of speech, by
what authority, or with what testimonies it be bolstered so that somewhat be
suggested whereat he may frame some quarrel. But proceed on, and what
follows? Then afterward the same Luther correctyng him self, what says he
farther? I have erred (said he) I spoke untruly: that Freewill is a thing in
name only before the time of grace: Luther in his Assertion Article. 36.
but I should have said simply. That Freewill is a feigned devise or a tittle
without all substance. Luther in his Assertions written to Leo the tenth the
36. Article. Well and what is it at last, that this Master Inquisitour will
frame unto us out of this? Ergo, Page 151.
Luther is an heretic, who dispoyleth man of all his Freewill, and traueileth
chiefly to this end, to affirm that man's mind is always holden captive, his
will fast bound, all power of workyng taken away, in so much that we can do
neither good nor evil, nor ca^ think a thought so much by any means. And
this does not Luther teach only: but Melancthon also aboundauntly, yea much
more plentyfully Calvin does debate the same. I not hear you Osorius and do
answer, not I for Luther, but Luther shall answer fully for him self.

And first touching that which we term man's choice, whether ye conster it to
be reason, or will: surely Luther did never deny. The same dare I boldly
affirm in the behalf of Melancthon and Calvin also. Certes these men were
never so reasonably mad, as to despoyle man (whom they define to be endued
with reason) of reason and of will. For by no reason ca^ the operation of will
be sequested from that part, The repulse of the cavil.
where the use of reason rests. Howsoever nature was corrupted through the
first original of Sin: yet remains nevertheless that thing after a
certain sort within us still, which we received of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil: Will ca^ not be severed from Reason.
but thus must be noted chiefly in what wise it remains, not that it can
avail any way to salvation, but that it hurts rather thereunto. And therefore
as concerning those natural properties of will, Luther was never so foolish,
nor any of all the Lutheranes, as to exclude that will from nature by any
means, which nature it self had engraffed into men. Let this therefore remain
unshaken in this controversy as touching the substance of Freewill, that the
essenciall substance thereof united together with sensible reason does always
cleave inseparably to nature: The substance of Freewill is never severed from
Nature.
which neither Luther deny, nor any of all the Lutheranes did ever deny. What
is it then (will you say) that Luther did deny in Freewill? I will tell you: so
that your understanding be able to conceive it.

Adam created in absolate freedom.
It is out of all controversy that Adam in his first creation, was endued with
wonderful and absolute freedom of will: to the vpholdyng of which freedom of
will, the grace of God was not wantyng at that time, without the which he could
not stand fast in that good will, wherein he was created though he would: now
to have a will to stand fast was not given him, but was left in the power of
his Freewill, and so left, that if he would have stood fast, he had never
been evil, if he would not been evil. And yet neither could he be good
through the force of his own Freewill, without Gods special grace. But what
did he? Being thus left in the power of his own Freewill, when he neither
would stand fast, nor could fall without sin: By Sinnyng (abusing his own
freedom) he brought to pass, that he both lost and cast away him self, and
his freedom withal: and yet not in such wise, as that there remained in him
neither sense, nor feelyng, nor use of will: but he so lost it, that, whereas
he was before immortal and free, now has he both lost his freedom, and also
his immortality and righteousness withal. Whereby it came to pass, that the
wretched man (by losing that pure freedom of good will, which he received in
his first creation) purchased to him self and all his posterity most
miserable and lamentable bondage. Now therefore being clogged and fastened to
this state of bondage (as it were cloyed in claye) albeit after a certain
sort we retain still that power of understanding and appetite, whereby the
mind of her free motion is able to discern betwixt sensible obiectes: yet can
we never of our selves aspire again to that vprightenesse and immortality,
which we have lost: for being now fast yoaked, and sold under this yoke of
servitude, we do serve such a servile thraldom in this flesh, that we can
turn our selves to no one side, through any force of freedom, but we shall
always be the bondslaues of sin and death, unless the grace of Christ do
help us, and set us at liberty.

Whereby you may easily perceive (Osorius) what is the state and condition of
Freewill: How man's will is free, and not free.
to wit: that in one sense it may be taken not altogether free, and again in
an other sense, not otherwise but free. For if ye call back the nature of
mankind to her first creation, and then will demand generally, whether there
be no free will in nature? I do answer. That nature it self was created
upright at the first, and that God the good Creator endued it with Freewill:
but that man him self became enemy to that freedom, and destroyed ye same in
nature utterly. But if you will proceed, and make a further question, and
demand what kind of will (after sin entered once) was in man toward
natural evil things, and toward deceitful good things? I do answer that
ma^s will (which they call Freewill) is altogether prone and inclined to wicked
and evil things: The title only of Freewill.
And here you have the bare title of Freewill. But if you demand how ma^s
will is affectioned to good and godly things: Luther does affirm that it is
neither free, nor effectual of it self, or inclinable thereunto and will
boldly confess yt it is bond, servile, and altogether captiuate, unless it be
hoipen. Not because ma^s will is unable to will or to attempt any thing of it
self: but because of her own power it is not able to will well, or do to
well, in those things yt apperteine unto God. The name of Freewill without
effect.
Where again you may see the name of Freewill, but void of use or substance.
But as concerning the proper quality or operation of freedom, albeit it
retain ye name of Freewill in ye Church in respect of the title: because it
seems always free either to righteousness, or free from sin, yet ought it
always to be holden in such sort free, as not being always good, yea rather
never good in deed, unless it be governed by the goodness of the almighty
God. Which thing Augustine does notably express saying. August. upon the
words of the Apost. Sermon. 13.
Freewill (says he) is nothing worth unless God do govern the same. And
immediately after. To this effect is thy will, which is called free, apt and
sufficient, that by doing ill, it becomes a damnable bondmayde. etc. Harken
Osorius. If it be a bondmayde, now is it not free the^. If by doing ill it be
damnable (for that as Augustine reports of it self it can do nothing but
evil). Wherefore is Luther condemned for saying that Freewill does sin
deadly, when it works what it ca^ of it self? etc. or what can your self
Osorius discern other then a title void of substance in that Freewill,
wherein you ca^ find nothing effectual to the purpose, that is to say, to ye
work of Salvation?

Luther does not take away will from man, but freedom from will.
For as much therefore as it so: what request is it that this accuser makes?
who contendeth so friuolously against Luther for the Mooneshyne in the water,
and for a title only? whether is it because he takes away will from men, or
freedom from will? As touching the substance of the matter, there is no
quarrel against Luther: The whole controversy arises then about the form and
quality of will. Well then Luther does not deny the will of man (as I do
understand) but the freedom of will only. Be it so Osorius: yet this may not
suffice in the accuser, that he which is quilty shall make a simple denial
only. But it behaueth to consider diligently in what sense, and with what
words deny all is made, what liberty he means, and in what manner of
persons, and in what things that liberty may be known to be. For neither does
Luther so utterly abandone from nature of man all freedom, as though there
were no freedom at all, or as though it were so fait chayned with iron roapes,
that it could move it self to no use. Albeit (I say) he do deny that will is
free, and confess it to be a thing of name and title only: yet does he not
affirm this so to be simply a title, as though man had no will at all, or as
though it were never, or never was and never should be free. And therefore in
the same Article, he does very learnedly annexe these words of restrainte.
Post peccatum, After sin, which words of Luther our Osorius does very
craftily dissemble and skippe over. The words of Luther touching title only
are expounded.
Besides this also is added thereunto an exception of time, to wit, Ante
iustitiam and gratiam.i. Before righteousness and grace. By which plain
words you might (as you are otherwise sharpewitted enough) have easily
discerned that Freewill is not so, simply, nor altogether taken away, neither
from all men, nor out of all order of nature: seeing as the state of Adam before
sin was most perfect in that integrity of Freewill: also seeing as after
grace received Freewill is mighty in those persons, which are made free through
Christ. As for the rest, who as yet stickyng fast cloyed in that old puddle of
Sin, are not yet come to be regenerated by grace: in these persons if
question be moved, what Freewill is in them, and of what efficacy in her own
nature: Freewill being with out grace whiles she does what it can of it self,
sins deadly.
Luther does answer truly, that it is a thing of title only, and that it
sins deadly, when it works what it can of it self, though she endeavor
the best that she can: meaning hereby, that albeit Freewill continue to be
called Freewill after her first de^^^mination and state, yet that she has
utterly lost the very substaunciall operation thereof, and so lost the same,
that whatsoever enterprise it attempt, yet can it not avail one jot so much
to the very substance of the matter, until the first nature being renewed by
faith, be fashioned a new, into a new creature. Well then, and what heinous
matter at the length contains this sentence that may provoke you to bark so
cruelly? or what have you espied in this Freewill, that may avail you or any
other person to Godward? If there be any thing, declare it I pray you: If there
be nothing: wherein then has Luther offended? who perceauyng, as truth is,
that Freewill is altogether ineffectual to profit us, does therefore make
small account thereof.

Of Luthers Hyperbolicall manner of speech.
But your Catholic stomach is somewhat queysie perhaps at the sound of
that Hyperbole of Luther not usually frequented in your Schools, whereby he
does so embase Freewill to be nothing else but a title, and a forged fantasy
amongst natural causes: As touching Luthers frequentyng of Hyperbolicall
speeches: Admit I would somewhat yield unto you: yet sithence the Scripture it
self does not altogether vnacquaynte it self with such kind of figures,
reseruyng always the truth of things: what waywardness is this of those men
not to vouchsafe in Luther to express certain words with some sharp
vehemency of speech, Outrageous Hyperbolicall speeches in the Popish doctrine.
whenas they them selves meanewhiles, either for very blockyshnesse do not
mark, or for very malice do not reform, not only ye most frivolous barrennes
of words, but also the most outrageous excess of speeches, wherewith their
whole doctrine swarmeth every where? And what marvel is it then, if Luther
inueighyng against those so monstrous outrages of doctrine, wax somewhat
whotte sometimes, after a certain more vehement manner of speaking? But if any
man adiudge him worthy to be reprehended in that respect, I would feign have
the same man required: if he will not vouchsafe to Impute that his heat to ye
veheme^cie of Gods Spirit (which after the purpose of his good pleasure
directs his Instruments as him lysteth) that he will yet at the least
bethink him self, of how great Importance the cause was wherein Luther
trauayled at that time: and weighe advisedly the manifold darkness, and
errors of that season: and withal enter into a deep consideration of the
unmeasurable injuries of his adversaries. Luther did then mainteyne the most
just quarrel of Gods grace and mercy against the innumerable droues of drousie
Monckes, who having overwhelmed the glorious Majesty of the Grace of the
Gospel, The Papists can neither away with faith only: nor with grace only.
did of an incomparable shameless excessive Impudency extol above Moon and
Stars, yea beyond all compass of reason, the force of man's Freewill: in such
wise that nothing might bear palm besides man's merits only, and the works
of Freewill (the mercy of God being utterly banished and exiled) Or if they did
at any time admit Grace to be cape merchant (as it were) with Freewill,
least they might seem utterly to exclude Grace: Yet did they so admit her,
as they did the Article of Justification. Wherein as they did with most vain
practice enforce this one point continually: to wit: That faith only without
works could not Justify: even so and in lyk^ manner in this question of
Freewill, they would needs have this to be granted, that the Grace of God
was not the only foundresse of good works, and of our Election, but a
servant rather, or at the most a companion of Freewill.

Whose unmeasurable error forced Martin Luther to that vehemet sharpness of
speech, Luthers vehemency whereupon it began.
and not without good cause. And yet in all that his heat of words, what can
any man (I pray you) find, being not otherwise lead by corrupt affection, that
is contrary to the natural truth of things? or that is not in all respects
faithfully agreeable with the very spirit and words of Gods Scriptures? Freewill
is denied to be of any value, not because it is of it self nothing (if you
respect the substance of it) but in respect of the operation thereof, it is
said to be altogether ineffectual to that work, whereunto it is supposed to
be conducible: not much unlike to that figurative phrase of speech, wherewith
Paul does esteem of Circumcision, and Uncircumcision to be nothing worth:
wherewith Esaias the Prophet does term Idolles and Idollmakers to be nothing:
and wherewith Jeremy beholding the earth with open eyes, was said he saw
naught. Or as a man might say, that Osorius does say nothing at all, when as
otherwise he is over lauishe of tongue, if you regard his words and sillables:
but nothing at all to the purpose, if ye consider his Arguments. Semblably
Freewill is called a feigned devise amongst things, or a tittle without
substance, from whence arises no prejudice to ma^s nature: only the
corruption of nature is discovered hereby. August. de great. and Lib. A^bit.
Cap. 16.
For it is undoubted (as Augustine truly teaches) that we do will, when we
will: and that we do work, when we work. But to be able to will, and to be
able to work be brings to pass in us, of whom it is said, God is he that
works in us both to will, and to do: giving most effectual power to our
will: which said, I will bring to pass that you shall do. And again in
other place. Aug. in his book de bono perseuerentie. Cap. 13.
Thinking (says he) we do believe, thinking we do speak, thinking we do all
whatsoever we do. etc. Lo here you have the tittle of Freewill. And forthwith
in the same Chap. But to the attaining the way of righteousness and the true
worshipping of God, we are altogether of our selves insufficient: for all our
sufficiency herein proceeds from God. etc. Where you may easily conceive the
substance it self, which Augustine acknowledges to be none at all in
Freewill, but affirms boldly to co^siste wholly in God. Albeit neither does
Luther him self (when he terms Freewill to be a fantasy or devise in
things) simply and barely affirm the same to be so: but annexeth thereunto an
addition: namely Post peccatum, and ante gratiam. That is to say. After Sin,
and before Grace. Whereby the godly Reader may understand, that those persons
are not noted here, whom either the Grace of Christ has vouchsafed into
Freedom or who^, after Grace received, Christ will crown in glory to come.

For there be certain distinct differences of times, and persons (if you know
them not Osorius) which ought chiefly to be observed: The differences of times
and persons must be distinguished.
wherein if you be as yet unskillful, ye may repair to your M. Lumbard, who
will lead you to a description of Freewill, deuidyng it into four branches as
it were.

Whereof the first is: The same that was created jointly with man's nature at
man's first creation, sound and perfect. Four degrees of Freewill after
Lomband. 2. Lib. Distinct. 25
The second which after man's fall, was thrown down in them that were not
regenerated. The third, which is proper and peculiar to the godly, after their
conversion unto Grace. The last, which shall be accomplished in those that shall be
glorified. As touching the first and last whereof, the Deuines make no question
at all (as I suppose) Again if you will assign Freewill to the third
branch, Luther will nothing gaynsay you: whose disputation concerns those
persons chiefly, who after Sin, and before their conversion being wounded
with original Sin, have not as yet recovered health in Christ Jesus, through
the triacle of better Grace. In which sort of people, if you be of opinion that
the state of Freewill ought by any means to be defended, I would feign learn
of you first, whether ye will inueste those persons with Freewill plainly,
perfectly, whole, and not diminished, or otherwise? If you will attribute such
a freedom unto them: it remains then, that by way of definition ye expound
the difference betwixt the state, and condition of the first man before his
fall, and this latter state and condition after his fall. But if you will
dismember it, and will grant unto them certain imperfect dregs thereof
only, neither will Luther vary much from you herein: Freewill weakened after
the fall, but here must be observed a distinction of actions.
so that ye will yield some distinction thereunto, and utter plainly and
distinctly what kind of liberty you mean: in what things you settle it, and
how it ought to be taken: what this word Freewill emporteth: and to what
actions of man's life it ought to be referred: and withal will unloose those
crabbed knottes of equiuocatio^s, wherewith ye seek to entrappe the truth.

For whereas the actions of man's life are not all of one sort or kind: some
whereof proceedyng from nature it self be natural, others altogether faulty
and corrupt, others politic and apperteinyng to manners are moral, called
good: Again some other spiritual, and consiste in the worshyppyng of God: It
behooved you here to make manifest unto us, which of those actions you do
mean. If you speak of the first kind: certes eue^ unto these, by ye very law
of common nature it self, we are all fastened and bound of necessity, whereby
we are bereft of ye greatest part of our freedom. For what freedom can be so
mighty in man's will as to preserve man so, that he never need to sleep, but be
always watchful: that he never be sick, but always healthy: never receive
sustenau^ce, not to digest the food received, Natural actions.
not to provide for his household, not to be careful for him self and his
family, not to be busied abroad, not to rest at home, not to enjoy ye common
air, not to live, not to dye, not to perform the other duties apperteinyng
to man's life, whereunto we are forcibly drawn by course of nature, not so much
by allurement of will, as by very constrainte of necessity. Civil actions
belongyng to the use of common life.
I come now to the use and handlyng of Civil trades and foreign disciplines,
and to other dutiefull actions, and considerations of the same kind which are
daily frequented in man's life. In the which albeit Luther will confess many
things to be contained that are subject unto Freewill, yet will he not
otherwise grant thereunto, but that even in the self same, ye understanding
mind is many times deceived, will defrauded, and freedom altogether
overthrown. And yet do we not for that cause utterly extinguishe will or
freedom, nor wrappe up and entangle the mind, nor spoil reason of counsel,
nor dispossess man from his ancient inheritance of choice or will: howsoever
the cruel outrage of Sin has weakened, and wasted the sinews and strength
of nature, being well created at the first: yet remains nevertheless that
natural power of the soul, not only in those that are renewed in spirit,
but in them also that are not regenerate, in respect of those actions
especially, whereof I made mention before. Actions merely spiritual.
But if the question be removed to those actions, which do not belong to the
natural and common conversation of life, but apperteine to the spiritual
worshyppyng of God, and concern the kingdom of Christ: who can not here
easily discern that Freewill before it receaueth Grace, though it be garnished
with never so gorgeous a tittle, has besides a glorious tittle only, nothing
else, whereby it may defend it self from servile bondage, or raise it self up
to attain the true freeedome of Salvation. I do not speak here of that
freedom (Osorius) which is properly opposite to constrainte and compulsary
violence, whereof we vaunte all in vain: nor of that natural power of the
reasonable soul, which we seek not to shake of: ne yet of man's will being
regenerated, which we do not disable: finally nor yet of those actions
wherewith this sensible life is beautified, but I speak of those affections
which are ascribed to the spiritual life of the person that is regenerate in
Christ. Five kinds of Questions.
Whereupon according to those five distinctions before mentioned, as many
several kinds of questions do arise: which for auoydyng confusion, must be
severally distinguished.

1. Quest.
First, if a question be moved of the freedom of nature being pure and sound:
as was before the fall of Adam: who does not know that the state of that will
was most pure and free. Aug. upon the word of the Apostle, Sermon. 2.
And it is not to be doubted, that man's Freewill was absolutely perfect in his
first creation. But that man by sin, lost the same freedom altogether.
August.

2. Quest.
Secundarely, if the question be removed over to the substance, and to that
part of man wherewith the mind is endued with understanding and appetite: as
if this be the question, whether man's will which is called free, were after the
fall of Adam utterly extinct, and of no substance? we do answer here with
Ambrose, Ambros. of the calling of the Ge^tils. Lib. 1. Cap. 3.
that the Judgment of will was corrupted in deed, but not utterly taken away.
And again. The devil did not spoil man of his will utterly, but bereft him
of the soundenesse and integrity of will. For although man's will and the
understanding part of his soul, was miserably corrupted through original
Sin, yet was it not so altogether abolished, but that there remains some
freedom to do: free I call it in respect of those things, which are either
naturally carried to motion without Judgment, as brute beasts: or which are
forced by coaction against nature, as stones. By this therefore that is spoken,
it appears that will (wherewith we are naturally endued in respect of the
essential and natural disposition thereof) does always remain in man's
nature, how corrupt soever it be: yea and remains in such wise, as having
always a free and voluntary operation in natural causes, without all foreign
coaction (unless it be hindered) and a natural sensibilitie also, and
capacity (as Iustine terms it) in heavenly things, Capacity, (...).
if it be helped. And this is it that Augustines words seem to emporte to my
Judgment, where speaking in the defense of Freewill uses these words.
August. Epist. 46.
Believe (says he) the holy Scriptures and that will is will, and the grace
of God, without help whereof, man can neither turn unto God, nor profit in
God. Again in his second Epistle to Valentin. The Catholic faith does
neither deny Freewill applyable to good life or badd life, nor does esteem
thereof so highly, as though it were of any value without the grace of God,
either to turn from evil to good, or to persevere steadfast in good, or to
attain to everlasting goodness, whereas it fears not now, left it may fainte
and decay. etc. And again in an other place. August. de great. and Lib. A^b.
Lib. 1. Cap. 15.
I confess (says he) that will is always free in us, but it is not always
good. But the manner how it is said to be always free, must be learned of the
same Augustine: It is either free from righteousness (says he) when it is the
bondslaue of sin and than is it evil: or it is free from Sin, when it is
handmayd to righteousness and then is it good. etc.

It appears therefore by this twofold freedom of Augustine, Man's freedom is
twofold. How freedom of will must be co^strued.
that man's will is always free both in good things and in evil things. But
we ought to conceive of this freedom in this wise: not that she has power of
her own strength to make choice of good or evil, namely in spiritual
matters, as our adversaries do dream: But according to Augustines
interpretation, when will is naught, it is of her own disposition naught: when
it is good, then is it guided by grace not unwillingly, but voluntaryly,
without compulsion: How Freewill must be taken.
yet free notwithstanding always, whether it be good or bad: because it is
always voluntary and never constrained. And this much touching the property
and natural disposition of ma^s will, which who so will deny seems in my
conceit to do even all one, as if he should deny that man is a reasonable
creature, for I see no cause why reason may be more sequestered from man, then
will ought to be severed from reason. Which two things are so united together
with a certain natural affinity, and are so mutually linked together with an
inseparable knot in the reasonable soul, that Reason ca^ neither perform any
exployte without will, nor will enterprise any thing advisedly without the
guidyng of Reason. Therefore as Judgment belongs properly to Reason, so to
will and to work, apperteineth properly to will, whether it be to good, or to
evil. The one whereof respects ye substance of will, the other is peculiar to
the disposition thereof. But as this lively Reason being enclosed within her
certain limittes and bounds has her proper and peculiar obiectes, so that
she is unable to raise it self beyond the compass of natural and vital
causes, unless it be enlightened: eue^ so will, being straighted wtin ye same
limittes and bounds of natural causes, has no power at all in it self
either to attempt or to atchieue those spiritual good things, unless it be
helped.

3. Quest.
For as much therefore as reason and will do in their own right exercize their
actiuitie and dominion in natural things only (as I said before) as it were
in their lawful provinces, hereof springs the third question. Whether there
be any such freedom in will, as to be able of it self to embrace or eschew
those things, which are governed by the external senses, and by reason?
Whereunto the answer is very easy: Whether will be free to those things
which are ruled by reason.
for it is not to be doubted, but that the mind and the will (out of which two
Freewill is derived) do yet still retain some certain sparckes of freedom,
such as they be, even in the forlorn nature: for the mind after a certain
sort is able to think, to purpose, to take counsel, to Judge, to allow or
disallow: The Master of the Sentences. 2 book Did. 24.25.
in like manner also will does enjoy her certain freedom in those things,
whereunto Sense and Reason do direct. For it as able to will, or not to will, to
choose or not to choose, to desire, or to forsake, to stay his purpose or to
change it: to move hither and thither: and after a certain manner to exercize
it self in her kind to external discipline, that is to say: to work
external honest actions agreeable with the law of God, and to eschew the
contrary. Which thing besides that many other things do approve to be true:
as well the sundry examples of Ethnicke people, as also the whole political
estate does verify. So is it true also, that the same is not performed without
Gods guidyng: which thing Nazienzen did notably aduertize and express in his
Oration. Nazienzenus in Oratione.
I know (says he) that the Goal is not attained by the quyuernes of the
person, nor success of battle by prowess, nor conquest achieved by
fighting, nor yet safe and sure Road always at skillful sailors
commandment, but it is the only work of God to give victory, and to
conduct the Ship safety unto the happy haven. etc. But for as much as these
actions are referred more properly to politic reason, then to Divinity, nor
concern Luthers discourse very much, it shall be needelesse to bestow any great
labor herein.

Fourthly, to approach somewhat near to those things which are peculiar, 4.
Quest.
and belong chiefly to the doctrine of Deuines: and first of all if question be
moved, whether man's Freewill do bear any stroke in actions merely evil and
corrupt, the doing whereof does defile man in the sight of God? our answer
herein will forthwith be supplied with ye words of Augustine. August. de
peccat. merit. Lib. 1. Cap. 5.
God does not help us to commit Sin (says he) but in that we fall from
God comes of our own corruption. And this is our corrupt will. And again,
where he recites the Objection of Julian, writing against ye two Epistles of
ye Pelagianes, Aug. writing against 2. Epistles of the Pelag. 1. book Cap. 2.
Did the Freewill of the first man perish therefore (says Julian) to the end
it should compel all his posterity to Sin in their flesh of very
necessity? To whom Augustine makes this answer: Which of us dare say that
mankind was utterly spoiled of Freewill by the sin of the first man?
freedom perished in deed through Sin, but it was that freedom wherewith
man was created in Paradise, free to enjoy full righteousness with immortality:
for the which the nature of man stands in need of Gods grace, according as
the Lord him self does testify, saying: If the Son do deliver you, John. 8.
the^ shall you be free in deed: Free I mean, to live well and uprightly: for
so far is it of, that Freewill did so altogether perish in Sinners, that by
the same Freewill men do offend, especially they that take pleasure in Sin,
and which being delighted with the love of Sin, do with pleasure greedely
follow their own lust. And in ye 3. Chap. In the same book the. 3 Chap.
We do not say, as they report that we say, that all men are constrained to
fall into Sin through the necessity of their flesh, and as it were against
their wills. But after they be grown to that rypenes of years, that they may
discern the inclination of their own mind, and find them selves fast holden
in Sin, through their own consent, and so suffer them selves to be carried
headlong from Sin to Sin wilfully and wittingly. This will now which is
free to evil things, wherein it takes pleasure, is therefore not free to
good things, because it is not made free. etc. Add hereunto the words of the
same Augustine to the same effect discoursing upon the words of the Apostle.
Aug. of the words of the Apostle Sermon. 13.
To do evil thou have Freewill, without the help of GOD, albeit that will is
not free. For of whom soever a man is holden bound, to him is he a bondslane.
And again in an other place, To fall (says he) comes of our selves and of
our sluggishenesse: Moreover writing against the same Pelagians. Aug. of the
words of the Apostle Sermon. 2. 11.
That person has Freewill to do evil (says he) either whom Satan allureth
to take pleasure therein by covert or open suggestion: or who that persuadeth
him self thereunto. Finally, if a man might tarry still in alledgyng ye
testimony of Augustine, what ca^ be clearer the^ these words. De Ecclesiastic.
Dogmatibus, 21
Freewill being captiued has no power to work any thing but sin, and is
altogether unable to work righteousness, unless God give it free passage.
Whereby you may perceive how ma^s will is at one time both free and captive:
Man's will how it is free, and not free.
to wit, free to do evil, in as much as pursuyng lust with voluntary
delight, needs not any foreign coactio^ to work evil: which also Luther
does not deny: but in no respect free to do good, unless it be set at liberty
by Gods grace, and to speak Augustines words, unless it be guided to every
good actio^ of doing, speaking, and thinkyng. And where be these jolly fellows
now, which do so stoutely yield to man's will equal freedom to do good, or
evil in this corruption of nature? and yet this might be granted also after a
sort, so that it be interpreted accordingly: for if they mean of will
regenerated, it is tolerable enough, neither will Luther be against it: all
whose discourse of Freewill tends not to any other will, then to that whereof
mention has been made out of Augustine, which being without grace, is
altogether ineffectual of her own nature to do any thing but to Sin.

And hereof springs at the length the whole substance of the fifth question.
5. Quest.
Wherein the chief and special state of Luthers discourse consists: to
wit, touching spiritual motions and actions: touching heavenly things and
works apperteinyng unto God: touching spiritual righteousness: inward
worshyppyngs: faith: repentance: conversion: love and new obedience. etc. As
if the question were demanded now, not of the substance of reasonable will:
whether after the fall, there remain in man a power of understanding, and
appetite to those things, which nature has made subject to man's wit and
capacity? or whether man have any freedom of will to corrupt affections? but
rather that the question be after this manner, Whether nature being not
regenerated have any free motions in spiritual things.
whether ma^s will after Sin, do reteyne still that force and strength of
freedom in those spiritual things before rehearsed, as that it be effectual
of it self before Grace, or being helped by Grace, could prevail so
farreforth inspirituall things, as that through grace and the natural force
of Freewill workyng together, it might become sufficient cause of it self, to
enterprise spiritual motions, and with all to put them also in practice? For
all those things must be duly considered Osorius: If we will show our selves
upright and ha^dsome disputers of Freewill: in debatyng of which question, if
ye will permit our Confession to be coupled with the authority of the most
sacred Scripture, we must of necessity hold this rule fast, which teaches:
that albeit man's nature is fallen from the integrity of that excellent and
absolute freedom, yet it is not overthrown into that miserable state of
seruilitie, which is proper to brute beasts: neither that it is so altogether
dispoyled of all the power of the first creation, as having no sparks at all
of her ancient dignity remaynyng. For the nymblenesse of the mind deuiseth
many things with understanding, digesteth with Reason, Reason.
comprehe^deth with memory, debateth with advise, gathers in order with
wisdom, inuenteth Arts, learneth Sciences, Records things past, observes
things present, and provides for things to come. Semblably will does choose,
Will.
and refuse the things that seem either agreeable to reason, or profitable to
the senses. So that by those qualities appears sufficiently (I suppose) the
difference that is betwixt us, and brute beasts, and insensible creatures.
Which actions being naturally engraffed within us, yea without grace, albeit
proceed from the voluntary motion of the understanding mind, yet because they
extend no further, then to this present life, and perish together with this
mortal body, serve but to small purpose: yea even then chiefly, when we make
our best account of them. Moreover although they be after a sort free of their
own nature, yet stand they not always in such an unchangeable integrity,
but that reason is many times deluded by great errors, will ouercharged with
waywardness, and ye power of the mind suffers many defectes. Almighty God
many times by secret operation communicatyng his handyworke to gether with
these actions, does apply the wills of men hither and thither, whereunto it
pleases him: confou^deth their devises, aduaunceth their endeavors, not after
the free Imagination of men, but according to his own free decree and purpose.
And this much hitherto concerning those obiectes, and external operatio^s
only, which concern the common preservation of this present life, and which
perish together with the same.

Freewill in respect of spiritual functions is not only weakened in us, but
altogether blotted out. (...), power.
But yet truly as concerning either the enterprising, or accomplishyng of those
spiritual motions and operations, for as much as they do far exceed the
capacity of man's nature, the Scripture does utterly deny that man (being not
as yet regenerated) is naturally endued with any force or ability of will
sithence the first creation: but that all those gifts are utterly lost through
the greatness of Sin, and that by this means (...) imbecillitie and
weakness of nature, is by propagation descended upon all men, and nature it
self corrupted with miserable faultiness, yea and not with faultynesse only
(that does exclude us from those everlasting good things) but besides this
also, that through this corruption of nature has succeeded in steed of that
ancient integrity, a certain rebellious contumacie, and filthy infection of
Diabolical seed, which does deprive us of all heavenly knowledge, and carry
us headlong into all manner of abomination: whereupon ye doctrine of Luther is
not unfitly confirmed, wherewt they do conclude with Augustine most truly as
against the Romish Doctors, that Freewill is not only weakened in us, but
utterly extinct also, and so thoroughly defaced, that if we be any time
enlightened with any sparcle of Regeneration, the same ought wholly be ascribed
to the grace of God, and not to Freewill, nor to any strength of ours, and (to
speak the words of Augustine) neither wholly, Aug. de bo^^ no perseue. Cap.
6.13.
ne yet of any part. For upon this point chiefly depends the whole variaunce
betwixt us and the Papists touching Freewill.

These things therefore being in thus sort discovered, Luthers proposition of
bond will defended.
which ought in deed have been distinguished at the first, for the better
demonstration of the manifold diversity of questions. I will now return
again to Luthers position, who does profess that Freewill is a thing of Title
only, and a Name or Title without substance. Wherein if Osorius shall Judge
any word to be misspoken and blameworthy in him, he must then first answer
me to this question. For as much as Freewill is not all alike in the persons
that are regenerate, and in them that are not regenerate: and for as much as
liberty also is to be construed in humane actions after one sort, but taken
after a contrary co^struction in spiritual exercizes: he must (I say) tell me
which sort of Freewill, or what manner of actions he does treat of. If he
mean that Freewill, which is now governed by the Spirit of God: Surely
Luthers position makes thereof no mention at all. Or if he mean those natural
obiectes, which proceed of common nature, or which are usually frequented in
the daily practice of common conversation, after the conduct of Moral reason,
either in doing right, or executyng wrong: So does not Luthers position tend
to these actions in any respect. But if the question be after this manner: Of
how much force and efficacy the bare choice of man may be of her own natural
ability, either in enterprising or performyng those things, The bare Freewill
of man being deuoyde of grace, is none otherwise the^ as a dead man without a
Soul.
which do obtain Gods grace for us, or make an entrey for us into heaven:
then will Luther answer most truly: That there is scarce any substance at
all in Freewill, auayleable to the purchassing of the kingdom of heaven,
except a glorious visour of Title only: no more substance verily then is in a
dead man, who besides the only shape and denomination of a man, has nothing
in him whereby he may receive breath, and recover life to the dead carcass.
For of what force is man's Freewill else toward the things that apperteine
unto God, before it have received grace, then as a dead man without life? And
for this cause the Scripture in many places, expressing our natures in their
most lively and native colors, calls us darkness, blind to see: deaf to
hear: uncircumcised of heart: wicked in the devises and imaginatio^s of our
conceits: stony hearted: cast awayes: enemies in respect of our fleshly
thoughts: Rebels against the Spirit: unprofitable Servants: bondslaues:
sold under Sin: dead unto iniquity: inexcusable: subject to wrath. S. Paul
describyng the calling of Gods Elect in the first Chap. of his first Epistle to
the Corinthes. 1. Cor. 1.
And those things which were not (says he) God has called. etc. If Paul
do affirm that the things which are, were not so at the first, and that
truly: How can Osorius Justify, that will was any thing worth in them which
as yet were not? I will rehearse unto you the saying of our Savior in the
Gospel, where setting us forth to behold our selves, as it were in a glass:
Let the dead (quoth he) bury their dead, Come thou and preach the kingdom of
God. Tell us here Osorius, in what sense did Christ call them dead, whose
bodies were not dead, if their life were endued with Freewill able to come unto
God in any respect, howsoever they seemed to be alive in the Judgment of men?
But and if they had no life in God, how then could Freewill be lively, and
forcible in the dead? Go to: And how can the dead by any means restore him
self to life? May it please you to hear Augustine treatyng of the same
matter. Aug. in his book of Retract.
Man can not rise again (says Augustine) of his own accord as he fell
voluntaryly: Let us take holdfast of the right hand of God, which he reatcheth
out unto us. etc.

So that I would wish you to consider with your self advisedly, what thing it
is which we ought to receive at Christ's hands, without Freewill first: and
what afterward of Freewill, without Christ: for the which we ought to be
thankful to him for them both. For if according to the testimony of
Augustine, Aug. En^hirid.
There was none other cause of our destruction greater, then man's Freewill, by
abuse whereof man lost both it, and him self: by what reason will you prove
that to be sound: which Augustine affirms to be utterly lost? or how can
you restore life to that thing, whereunto you are indebted for your own death?
Freewill of it self utterly lost.
Or what relief can you find toward the purchasing of eternal life from
nature being so utterly dispoyled? which even then especially, when it stood
in most perfect integrity, could neither help you nor her self, nay rather
which brought you and her self both to utter destruction? The Lord cries out
in a certain place by the mouth of his Prophet. Os^c. 13.
O Israel thy perdition is of thy self: but in me only is thine help. etc.
If there be no help else where, then in the Lord only, upon who^ alone all
help depends, what is there left then in Freewill, that we miserable
wretches may trust unto? If you be ignorant thereof (Master Osorius) the
Prophet will forthwith declare it unto you: Forsooth what else think^ you, but
utter destruction? For in as much as one man by one fault only, wherein he
alone offended, did through his freedom of will (whenas yet it was most pure
and sound) throw headlong both him self, and all his ofspryng into so
horrible thraldom, from most absolute and most perfect Majesty of freedom:
what other things will Osorius then gape after, out of this his Freewill,
sithence nature is altogether defiled now, who has made so often shypwracke of
his freedom and of all his Freewill also, and standing (as it were) in
dispayred case, is enforced daily to run to the second table of Penitentiary
Confession for relief, but utter perdition? unless he take holdfast by faith
of that right hand of God, whereof S. Augustine does make mention before.
Therefore let this great Proctour of Freewill take good heed, least whiles he
accuse Luther to much, he commit a more execrable fact, and bewray him self a
more deadly enemy to Gods grace, the^ ye other may seem adversary to Freewill.
For if this controversy here debated touching the merit of Salvation tend to
this end only, to sifte out from whence the cause thereof arises: to wit:
whether from the only grace of God? or whether from Freewill as a necessary
and inseperable coperterner therewith? truly, if it be true which the
Prophetical Scripture does most truly conclude, The Grace of God without our
Freewill only sound and perfect,
That all help consists only in the Lord, and in our selves nothing but
destruction. I can not see, but that by how much soever it shall please Osorius
to establishe Freewill, by so much shall he disployle GOD of his Grace and
that most injuriously.

But I hear the colorable pretense of Osorius, wherewith he practizeth to make
his defense carry a certain show of truth, paintyng it out with a deceauable
foil: so that he may seem neither to yield all to the grace of God, according
to the Catholic faith, nor yet (after the error of the Pelagians) leave
nothing at all to the operation of Grace. August. de Nuptijs and co^c^p. Lib.
2. Cap. 3.
For whereas the deuilish doctrine of the Pelagians (which taught that every
man was endued with sufficient freedom to do good without the help of God)
has been long sithence condemned for heretical, according to the testimony of
Augustine: This Gentleman fearyng to be deemed a Pelagian, does divide his
Assertion after such a sort, that he may neither seem utterly to exclude Grace
altogether, nor yet so yield over all to Grace, but that Freewill must of
necessity be copemate with Grace. But let us hear Osorius vtteryng his own
words.

Page 148.
Verily we do confess this to be true, that our thoughts and our works which
we devise and bring to pass virtuously and godly ought to be ascribed unto
God, through whose grace and favor they are accomplished in us. Behold godly
Reader, how this godly Prelate, of his Catholic piety, attributes some
thing to the Grace of God: which does ascribe our godly sayings, thoughts,
and deeds to the work of God. And this much truly did never any of the
Pelagians deny, but affirmed always, that only God must be accounted the
Author, not only of our life, of our being, yea of all the actions also of
our life: but also that all our Freewill ought to be referred to him, being the
Author thereof. But this is not enough Osorius: for question is not demanded
here, whether God be the Author of all good works, which no man will deny.
But the question is whether those things, Whether our conversion be the work
of God only.
which belong to the purchasing of our conversion and Salvation in the sight of
God, do so proceed from God the Author thereof, as that his only Grace do
work ye same altogether in us: or whether Freewill also does work any thing
together with Grace. For herein consists the chief knot of all the
controversy. Which shall be debated afterward more at large in place fit for
it by Gods grace. In ye mean space, let us mark how Osorius goes foreward.

For unless God had restrained me from rushyng wilfully into wickedness:
unless Gods spirit had forewarned me with his counsel, that I should not
throw my self headlong into everlasting calamity: unless he had strengthened
me with his wholesome and strong protection, and made me able to work the good
work that he commanded me, I should never have been able either to think a
good thought, or to do a good deed: and all mine endeavor employed either to
the purposing or accomplishyng my work should have been utterly ineffectual.
What need I answer much hereunto? Neither could Luther him self (if he were
alive) speak or profess any sentence more godlyly, if a man regard the
words, and not the meaning of the man. For what can be more truly or more
substauntially spoken, the^ that Freewill can work nothing but wickedness,
destruction, headlong ruin, and everlasting wretchedness? nothing but noisome
thoughts, unlawful Imaginations? finally nothing that is godly or good,
except it be guided by the grace of God? which Grace does restrain from
wickedness, does recover from destruction, does direct from wandering, does
reform with wholesome counsel, and bring into the right way those that go
astray. Truly if the matter go thus altogether, as the words emporte: That is
to say: If the very founteine and perfection of all our actions, thoughts, and
devises tendyng to godliness and poured abroad into our lives, do issue unto
us from no where else, the^ from the only wellspryng of Gods grace: what other
ability then shall be left in wretched Freewill to work any good work (if
Osorius he the man he would seem to be) but an unprofitable and naked name
only? But least peradventure he may seem to be hired by the Lutheranes, to
write so effectually in the defense of Grace, our Catholic Bishop returns
again to the patronage of Freewill, endeuouryng to prove by his Divinity,
that the work of our conversion does not so altogether depend upon Grace
only, but that Freewill also must play his part withal. And why so?

Because (says he) it is in our power not to consent to good counsel, Page
149.
to reject it being offered, to refuse courtesy, and through wickedness and
outrage to tread under foot proffered grace. And who does deny but that we may
so do? Nay rather what else does Freewill at all, when it works after her own
nature, but by resistyng and refusal throw headlong into error? ( Luther him
self witnessing ye same?) But for more credit of the matter Augustine shall
answer for Luther. An answer of August. De peccat. and merit. Lib. 2 Cap.
18.
In that we turn our selves away from God (says he) comes of our selves,
and this is evil will. But in that we turn unto God, we can not, except he
stir up and help us thereunto. And this is good will. Thus much Augustine. We
may therefore resist (say you) and withstand the holy Commandments of God
according to the operation of our Freewill. In deed there is nothing more
easy, neither needs any help hereunto. Again, We can give our consent
unto, and embrase Gods Commandments also: Surely this is true, if the Grace
of God do guide us: But if Gods grace do not govern us, we do then utterly
deny it, Augustine agreeyng with us herein. To Sin (says Augustine) we are
not helped by God: August. De peccat. and merit. Lib. 2 Cap. 5.
but to do well or accomplish the Commandments of righteousness thoroughly,
we are not able except God help us: And immediately after. If we be turned from
God, August. De peccat. and merit. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
it proceeds of our selves, and then we be wise according to the flesh: God
therefore does aid men being converted, and forsakes them being revolted, yea
he does not only help them being converted, but helps them also that they
may be converted. Thus much Augustine. Go to, and what will Osorius Logic
conclude hereof at the length? Objection.
Forsooth if every man of his own free power be able to dissent from, and
consent with the Grace of God, it appears then, that Freewill is not
altogether ineffectual. For to this effect I suppose will he direct the force
of his Argument. But I do answer again with Augustine. Answer out of
August.
That the same might be so construed and granted well enough, if it were not
spoken by them, whose meaning is apparaunt. For to admit that man him self
may will, and may condiscende, and yield, and do somewhat in his conversion, and
spiritual works: yet has not man this power of his own natural strength
neither in whole, nor in part: but he receaueth that strength of him, which
works in man, both to will and to do.

Freewill has no power of her self either of the whole or of any part to
work.
And therefore the reason that Osorius frames here, of not reiectyng, and of
condiscendyng: if he mean of natural gifts: Augustine does plainly
declare, that this is the very error of Pelagius. If he mean of the power of
Grace, he gaynsayeth Luther nothing at all: who did never so dispoyle man's
Freewill of freedom, but that being manumysed and advanced by Gods grace, it
was able to do much: and again he did never so uphold this freedom, but that
man might of his own proper strength refuse Grace, being at any time offered:
(for neither Luther nor any other did ever dream (I suppose) that Grace was so
necessaryly thrown upon man's will in his conversion, as that he should be
enforced to retain it being offered, whether he would or no, like as when a
mark is emprinted into the flesh by a who^e iron, or as stones that are
violently whirled out of a Crossebow. But this is generally affirmed, that the
holy Spirit of God does by his secret operation, work such an effectual
influence in the minds of the faithful, that the grace which he offreth may
be received, not with unwilling will, but that will may with gladsome cheer
delight to embrace it, with most earnestly bent affection. But if it happen to
be rejected, the fault thereof to spryng from out the corruption and malice of
the flesh. If Osori. will not be satisfied yet, but will urge still with this
his Argument, that every person according to the proportion of his Freewill,
may freely reteyne, or refuse the Grace of God, if he will. I will then
answer briefly and resolutely, that the disceit of this subtle Sillogisme is
framed of the Fallax: A Fallax, a Diuisis ad Coniuncta.
to wit: a Diuisis ad Coniuncta, as the Logicians do term it. For albeit
will (being severed from Gods grace) be of it self free to reject Gods
calling: yet is it not after the same sort free to obey Gods calling, unless
it be altogether vpholden by the aid of Gods grace. Let us now see further
the remnaunt of his disputation.

I do stand at the door (says he) and knock: Page 149.
he does not say, I do break open the doors, or I do rende abroad the henges
and do violently rushe in: but I knock only: that is to say: I do admonish:
I do foretell the danger ensuyng: I do foreshew hope of Salvation, I promise
to give aid: and I allure unto me, with fair promises. In deed Osorius he
stands knockyng at the door, and they to whom it is given do open unto him,
but unless it be given unto them they open not at all. Therefore in that he
does knock, this is proper to the calling: but in that an open entrey is made,
this is to be peculiarely ascribed to Election and Grace. So likewise he does
not heave the doors of the hooks, nor rusheth in forcibly: and yet although
he press not upon with any foreine force, he works notwithstanding a secret
effectualnesse, and draws them unto him, who^ he has chosen, and entirely
loves, through inward operation of voluntary will. Against the 2. Epistle of
the Pelag. 1. book Cap. 18.
Neither is any man good that will not be good (as Augustine reports) yet to
have a will to be good, must the grace of God needs be assistaunt: because it
is not written in vain: God is he that works in us, both to will and to do
according to his good pleasure, and the Lord does first frame and fashion the
will. etc. Therefore whereas it is said that God does knock at the gate of our
will, I gladly yield hereunto: but to say that he does no more but knock, this
I do utterly deny: In like manner whereas you say that he admonishes, that he
foretells danger ensuyng: that he feeds with hope: that he promises aid,
and that he allureth with reward, truly these are not untruly spoken Osorius:
But ye speak not all, nor as much as should be spoken. And therefore herein
your haltyng bewrays it self plainly. For you are flowen into a Fallax,
which the Logicians do term Ab insufficiente causaru^ enumeratione. The
sutteltie of the Argument framed by not yeldyng cause sufficient.
True it is, that the grace of God does knock: does forewarne, and does
allure: what? does grace therefore nothing else but knock? forewarne? promise?
and persuade? Does it not also create within us a clean heart? does he not
renew a new spirit within our bowels? does he not pluck out of our flesh the
stony heart, and engraffe in steed thereof a fleshly heart? Yea does he not also
alter all our whole nature? I mean all those inward natural qualities: does
he not make them pliable and (as it were) out of an old deformed lump, new
fashion it into a new creature? does he command those things, which he
wills by admonishyng only? by calling, and persuadyng only? does not Gods
Grace give also that which he commands? And where in the means whiles
lurketh then the law that is written within, in the hearts of the faithful?

When we hear these words in the Gospel: No man comes unto the Son, but
he whom the Father draws: Tell us a good fellowship, does he which draws
nothing else but admonish? but call? but allure? August. against the 2. Epistle
of Pelag. 1. book Cap. 19.
What is he (says Augustine) that is drawn if he be willing? for the willing
are lead, and none are drawn but the unwilling. And yet no man comes, but he
that is willing: but to this willingness he does draw us by wonderful means,
who is skillful to work within, even in the very hearts of men, not to make
the unwilling to have faith, but to frame the unwilling pliable to be willing.
etc. If it be so that ye heavenly Grace by inward operation do make men
willing, that before were not willing: I would feign learn now whether Grace
do nothing else, Grace does not knock alone, but opens man's will also.
but knock only? Go to, and whiles Grace is a knockyng, who is it within that
opens? Freewill, I suppose: But now for as much as this Freewill is powered
into all persons indifferently by a general influence, as much in one, as in
an other, why do not all alyke open to the heavenly Grace, when the Lord does
knock? forsooth because they will not (you will say) yet does the wheale run
nevertheless as round as it did before. For I demand again, why some seem
to be willing whiles others are unwilling? what else think you to be the cause
hereof, but because God does open their Freewill first, which do open unto
God, that they may be able to open, otherwise it could never open unto him.
Whereby you may easily perceive, that Freewill is not the porter to let in
Grace, so much as the very gate it self: and that it does not else open, but as
it is first opened by his means which does knock, and that it applies not
any way else, but as it is made pliable, and so made pliable, that it may seem
rather to be drawn, then to be lead: never going before Grace, but followyng
altogether, and to speak the words of Augustine, August. de verbis Apost.
Sermo 13.
Never as a foregoer, but as an handmayden of Grace only in every good work.
If you will deny this to be true, what Argument shall I better use against you
then the words of your own mouth? For what means it else that you your
selves of the Romish Sinagogue at the beginning of your Mattens, pray daily to
the Lord Domine labia mea aperies, Lord open thou our lyppes, O Lord open thou
our lyppes.
if they open of them selves, and are not rather opened by him? And in what
sort do you then desire the Lord to open your lyppes, that your mouth may
show forth his praise, whom you affirm to do nothing else but knock only? Why
therefore do ye not rather amend your book, that your prayer may be agreeable
with your desire, and sing an other song on this wise: our Freewill shall open
our lips O Lord, and our mouth shall chaunte forth thy praise.

Objection.
What then (will you say) is it not in our own power to move our lyppes?
Answer.
Yes truly Osor. there is nothing more easy then to move them to conte^tion,
to quarellyng, to lyeng, to blasphemous communication, to noisome talk, and
vain tittle tattle. But I will in no wise grant that we are able to move our
lips, or to open our hearts of our own will, to show forth the praise of
God. All which notwithstanding tend not to this end, as though Freewill did
work nothing at all: yes it works surely: but how it works and how it is
wrought, because Osorius does not declare sufficiently Augustine shall make
plain unto him. Aug. upon the words of the Apostle the. 15. Sermon.
Not they that are carried of their own motion but as many as are carried by
the Spirit of God, they are the children of God. Here will some man say unto
me. Then are we plied, and do not plye our selves. I answer, yea rather thou
do both apply thy self and art applied: And even then do thou plye well,
if thou be plied by Gods spirit, without whom thou can do no good thing:
even so also thou do apply thy self of thine own Freewill without the
help of Gods Spirit, and the^ do thou evil. To this end is thy will,
which is called free, prone and effectual, that by doing evil, it become a
damnable handmayd. etc. Which words you must interpret to be spoken of
Augustine in this wise: not that will does work nothing, but that it works
no good thing without Gods help. And that you may conceive the same more
effectually, harken what the same Augustine teaches in his treatize De Gratia,
and Lib. Arbit. August. de great. and Lib. Arbit. Cap. 16.
It is undoubtedly true (says he) that we do, when we do: and that we will,
when we will: but he brings to pass in us to will, and to do giving to our
will most effectual ability, which has said: I will make you that ye shall
be able to do. Briefly to conclude. It shall be lawful for me to speak the same
and in such wise touching openyng, which and in what wise Augustine spoke of
doing, when the Lord does knock we do open with a Freewill in deed, because
when we do open, we do it freely and willingly: but that we may be able to do
so, not we, but he does open our hearts first. Whereby you may perceive to what
end this our discourse tends, not that Freewill has no place, Freewill is
made naked of all manner merit.
but that it be void of merit, unworthy of praise, and to be taken for no
part of any cause, not because we dispoyle her of all manner of motion, but we
do distinguish the manner of motion in such wise, that all the praise of well
doing be ascribed unto him, unto whom only all is due, whatsoever we will or
can, as Augustine reports: and that in this respect Freewill is endued with
no actiuitie, whereupon it may vaunte her force: Aug. in the same book the 13.
Chap.
For so shall we live more out of danger (says he) if we yield over all unto
God, and not commit part of our actions to him, and part to our selves. etc.
And again in the xiij. Chapter of the same book. I grant in deed that we
will and work, but God works in us both to will, and to work, according to
his good pleasure. Thus it behooves us to speak and believe. This is godly:
this is true, that by this means our Confession may be humble and lowly, and
all attributed unto God. etc.

But I hear what this arrogaunt hautynes of Frewill does whisper against this
humble Confession.

If all this (says he) be the work of God, Page 149.
and no power be left in man's endeavor that may procure furtheraunce to our
conversion.

Ergo, sithence there is nothing left in us to do, what are we the^, other
then as good as stones and stocks.

Which Argument Osorius has gathered (as he says) not out of S. Paul, but
out of Luthers braynsickenesse. I would have marueiled if Osorius could have
gathered any Argument from any without some reproach, or could have reproched
any man without a lie. But thus to do is not to gather some thing from an
other, but to lie rather: not to dispute by Arguyng, but to play the part of a
captious scoffer. But to let pass this dronken scoff, as which neither
furthereth his cause, nor empayreth Luthers estimation: we will turn our talk
again to ye matter. Luther is here therefore cited for a drunckard, who by
blazing abroad Medusaes head does enchau^t men into stones and flyntes. And why
so? Forsooth because he does deny, yt we do aspire to ye favor of God of our
own strength: but affirms that all whatsoever we do take in hand, The beatyng
down of Osorius Argument.
or bring to pass toward ye attaynement of salvation, we obtain the same
wholly through the only work of Gods grace, which works all in all in us.
Hereupon Osorius cries out forthwith, That will is fast tied, bound, and
restrained with everlasting fetters, so that men must of necessity be changed
into stones, rocks and stocks. So that it is much to be feared, least by
this Argument he turn Peter also into a stone, because Christ called him a
Stone: and least he change Christ him self Peter's Master also together with
Peter into some stony substance, because Paul calls him a Rock, and
because the Prophets do nominate him ye Corner Stone. It is also to be
feared, least he bewitche into stones all the whole ancient race of the old
Testament: of who^ we hear the Prophets speak in this wise. Ezechiell. 11.
Chap. and 36. Chap.
And I will take away from their flesh their stony heart. etc. If the
prophetical Scripture do accustom to resemble the properties of personages by
some similitude of domme creatures, after an usual phrase of figurative
speech: may it not likewise be lawful for us to express the hardness of
ma^s nature, unless we enchau^t me^ forthwith into stones, stocks, and
flyntes? I beseech you. Or because we profess that Freewill is all together
ineffectual in those things, which apperteine unto God, and to work or
understand things, which pass beyond the reach of ma^s capacity (unless it
be plied by Gods Spirit) is there no force therefore in Freewill to work in
other things? The Fallax from the proposition Secundum quid, to Simpliciter.
or to work in those things, which belong unto God being helped and assisted
by the grace of God? And will you so frame your Argument from the proposition
Secundum quid, to conclude with that, which the Sophisters term Simpliciter?

Osori. double fault.
Wherein though you be a Bishop, your fatherhoode seems to me to have
committed a double error. First because you conceive not the sense of those
men sufficiently, who^ you quarrel against: next because you deceive your self
in ye self same Assertion which you do maintain. For those men, which do call
back all the causes of actions from Freewill, attributyng them to Gods grace
only, do not conceive of it after such sort, as though the mind being endued
with heavenly strength, when it is made pliable, does not apply it self any
thing in the mean space. Aug. contra Julian. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.
For eue^ as Gods secret Grace through Jesus Christ our Lord, is not powered
into stones stocks or brute beasts (as Augustine does truly record) but into
him which was created in the Image of God): eue^ so God does not work in this
his own Image, as he works in a stone: or after the manner as huge heavy
burde^s are drawn by man's policy: in the which abides no inward operation
(as Aristotle says) which may avail to motion: Aristotle's Ethickes book. 3.
Cap. 1.5.
The matter goes far otherwise here: and the natures are far unlike. True
it is that the heavenly grace does draw us in deed, not through any force of
external coaction, as blocks and Images are drawn: but God leads and
boweth, which way him lists, every person inwardly by his own will, or
plyeth he any man otherwise then voluntaryly.

It is well then (say you) If will do nothing but when she will, Objection.
and if it will always first before it do: how then shall will be said to
work passiuely, which both wills always those things which it does, and
does nothing but that which it wills? The Answer.
The Answer is easy: Will in deed does nothing, but when it wills: this
is true. For otherwise it could be no will, unless it did do willyngly and
voluntaryly. But yet neither does will always all those things which it
wills: And again to be able to will, it is always made pliable first. By
the one whereof may be understood the Instrument or tool of action, How man's
will does execute the force of an instrument.
by the other the cause of action. Wherefore whenas will is taken after this
manner, that it yield to the guiding of the workman in ye manner of a tool, by
what means can it be called either free, which serves as bound? or how can
it be said to do, which in doing does always suffer and is driven? And yet it
does not so always suffer by doing, that it never does any thing of it self:
and again does never so do in those things which apperteine unto God, but
that it is made pliable to do. And therefore the manner how it does, and how it
suffers, must be advisedly considered. By what means will does both work and
suffer.
For we do confess that both are true after a certain sort, as Augustine
testifies in his book De Correp. and gratia. Let the^ not deceive them selves
therefore (says he) which say. To what purpose are we taught and commanded to
eschew evil and to do good, if we can not do it, but as God does work the
same in us, Aug. Lib. de Correp. and gratia Cap. 2.
to will and to work? Nay rather let them understand, if they be the children
of God, that they are made pliable by Gods Spirit, to do the things that
ought to be done, and when they have done so, to yield thanks to him, by whom
they were made to do so. For they are made pliable, because they should do
something, not because they should do nothing. etc.

Which saying does make evident unto us, that each of these two are to be
found in Freewill, both that it is made to do, when it does well, and again
that it self also does, when it is made to do. How will demeaneth it self
passiuely and actiuely.
So that herein is no contrariety at all, but that it may both demean it
self by suffering, and also by doing (and to answer for Luther with Luthers
own words) to wit, after diverse and several sorts, and after the common
phrase of speech in diverse and several respects. For in respect of the work
it self, whenas will occupyeth the place of an Instrument or tool, it both
does, and is made to do, even as other tools do in any matter whereunto they
are applied. But if you have relation to the efficient cause or workman, to
whose use it serves in steed of a tool: in this respect the will of man
demeaneth it self altogether sufferyngly, as the which in respect of procuryng
of Gods Grace (from whence issues all motion of good will) it works nothing
at all, but simply obeys and suffers. For in any good work, what is man's
will else, then an instrument of the holy Ghost? Man's will is taken for an
Instrument, yet free nevertheless.
voluntary in deed, because it is moved whether soever it is moved of her own
accord, yet is it an instrument notwithstanding, because of things well done,
it is neither the cause it self, nor any sparcke of the cause in respect of
the worker, but a servant rather, and a handmayde only: whose service, the
Spirit of God being the worker, does apply to do these things which it
pleases him to have to be done in us: for the accomplishyng whereof it
ministers no help at all, as of her self.

But the Papisticall generation can not digest this by any means, to whom
suffices not that Freewill shall be taken as an instrument, Wherein the papists
do attribute to much to Freewill.
or as it were a workeshoppe only, unless it bear as great a stroke or
rather with Gods Spirit workyng together with it: nor do they think it
sufficient that the whole action of our Election and regeneration be ascribed
to the only free mercy of God, unless we also as fellow workeme^, be
coadiutours of this work together with God. For even the same do Osorius
words emporte manifestly, which follow in this wise.

Page 149.
Do ye not therefore perceive (says he) by Paul's own words, that Freewill is
approved by his authority, which Luther does practice to overthrow? For to
what end would he have called us fellow workers with God, if none of us did
further the work that GOD works in us? to what purpose would he have
admonished us to work our own Salvation, if to do it were not in our own
power? We are together Gods laborers as Paul reports. 1. Corinthians. 3. 1.
Cor. 3. (...).
Where I know that the word (...), does signify together laborers. But what
is this at the length to the purpose? do you not here plainly put the old
Proverb in practice? to wit: I ask you for Garlic, and you offer me
Oynyones, I desire to borrow sickles, and you like a churlishe neighbor deny
that you have any Mattockes. How careful the Apostles were in plantyng the
doctrine of the Gospel we are not ignorant, nor do deny. And it is not to be
doubted, that Gods providence used them as most choice instruments to
address, and husband his Uynearde, yea and that not without singular profit.
But we make no enquiry here as now, how much man's industry did bring to pass
by the outward preaching of the word, or whom it profited most: but the
question is here touching the fruit of inward conversion, whether Freewill of
her self do work, or not work any furtheraunce toward the embracyng of
faith, toward repentance, toward spiritual righteousness, toward
attainement of Salvation, and toward the regeneration of life: So that the
state of the question be now, to wit: Whether ma^s mind and will being of
the self same nature (that it was when we were first borne) be endued with any
actual or effectual power able to work together, The state and substance of
the question of Freewill.
with Gods holy Spirit toward the beginning of our conversion, and entryng
into our godly consideration of good purposes, and actions of inward obedience?
Wherein many writers do vary in Judgment and opinion, yea that not a little.

But Osorius proposition alleged here of ye Apostles together workers makes
nothing to the purpose, How it is to be understood that the Apostles were
together workers with God.
nor avails to ye maintenance of Freewill a rushe. For to admit that the
Apostles were together workers with God: yet that those same together workeme^
should be hypred to work in this Uyneard, and sent abroad into the Lords
harvest, proceeded not of their own voluntary motion or Freewill, but of the
free Election and calling of God only. Again this their Ministry (as far
forth as concerns their own persons) even then when they labored most
earnestly, was extended no further, then to the outward preaching and
dispensation of the word: for as touching the inward conversion of the hearers,
and nourishment of their faith, this was the only work of the holy Ghost, and
not of the Apostles: Paul did plant: Apollo did water. But what does this
help to Freewill, when as neither he that pla^teth, nor he that waters are
any thing at all, but God only who gives the increase. And what is the reason
then, why they are said to be nothing? Is it because he that pla^teth, and he
that waters, and he that ploweth does nothing at all? was Paul nothing? or
did he not work at all? who being continually trauailyng is reported to have
labored more then all ye rest? or shall we say that ye rest of ye Apostles did
nothing, which did employ not their travail only, but shedd their blood also
in furtheryng ye work of the Gospel? Yeas verily, wonderful much, if you
respect the outward Ministry of Preaching the word and their function. But we
do inquire of the inward operation of conversion, and the renewyng of the
minds, which is the only work of God, not of Freewill, nor of man's outward
endeavor. Godly Preachers in deed do pearce into the ears of men with
outward voice, and set down before them the words of faith and truth: And yet
thus to do, springs not of their own Freewill, but from the free calling of
God, whereby they are lead to do the same: but to believe ye doctrine inwardly,
to become faithful hearers of ye wholesome word, is the only work of ye holy
Ghost, who by secret inspiration does dispose ye minds, does renew the hearts,
does inspire with faith, finally of unwillyng does make willing: so that here
is no place left now for Freewill to challe^ge, but yt he only possess the
whole, which only works all in all: who thrustyng out workmen to preach the
word, does frames the wills of the hearers that they may believe. Whereupon I
do answer to that subtle Argument of Osorius briefly, and plainly in this
wise.

Whosoever works together with an other, works actiuely and not passiuely
only. The Argument of Osorius and the Papists.


The Ministers of the Gospel are together, workmen with God.

Ergo, The Preachers of the word, when they work with God, do not suffer
passiuely only.

I answer, Tne Answer.
that in the Mayor proposition should have been added these words Per fe, and
inys que ngit: That is to say: Of him self, and in the things wherein he
works. For ye thing that of his own power works together with an others
help, does somewhat in deed in those things, which it does, and is not
wrought only. That is true. And for the same purpose the Minor proposition
must be denied: for the Freewill of Gods Ministers does neither work in
Preaching the word Per se, of it self, except it be helped by Gods Spirit:
nor does proceed any further even when it is helped, the^ to the outward
action of preaching. But as concerning the inward fruit of preaching, (namely
nourishment of faith, and the operation of conversion) all this action
proceeds from the holy Ghost, and not from Freewill. And this seems to be
the very meaning of Luther, How Luthers words are to be co^strued.
to wit, having respect to those things only, wherein Freewill can not
challenge to be any mean of effectual operation, either in workyng, or in
together workyng, nor can make any title of claim therein, nor prescribe to
be any partener with the holy Ghost in the work.

It remains that we arm our selves against the other sutteltie of Osorius,
An other Argument of Osorius, Page 149.
which he coyneth out of the Apostles words.

S. Paul writing to the Phillipians, does counsel them in a certain place to
work every of them their own salvation with fear and tremblyng. I do hear
it, and I awayte what this choppelogicke will stamp out hereof.

Ergo ( says Osorius) we are able to work our Salvation of our own Freewill.
I do answer. An Answer.
The antecedent is true, but the consequent most false, and altogether sauoryng
of Pelagius error, nor agreeable with the antecedent. For this word working,
which the Apostle uses, does not signify any such thing as may uphold the
force of Freewill, or declare it to be the efficie^t cause of Salvation, as
though it did depend upon the dignity of our works: but is only a word of
exhortation, to comfort them to go foreward diligently, and to persevere
carefully in the course of Salvation, where they were now settled. Phil. 2.
And withal teaches them further how they ought to persevere with fear (says
he) and tre^blyng, to wit, exhortyng them to take unto them the fear of God
in humbleness of mind, which might hold them always conuersaunt in good
works, whiles they made have to attain the goal of Salvation. Finally that
no man might cavil and say, that this virtue of perseuerau^ce did far
surmou^t their weakness, he adds forthwith, calling them back as it were to
a better hope through confidence of greater help: For it is God (says he)
which works in you both to will and to work according to his good pleasure.
etc. If God do work in us (Osorius) both to will and to work, what is it then
that Freewill can will or do? Furthermore if life everlasting be the gift of
God, not for the works sake which we have done, how shall Salvation be
obtained by good works? wherefore you trippe twice in your Argument. First,
whereas you place Salvation in good works. Then, whereas you derive good
works out of man's Freewill, as from the sprynghead thereof. For thus ye
conclude. If it were not in our own power (to wit in our Freewill) which both
are false and most frivolous. The double error of Osorius.


And yet after all these manifest trackes of Pelagius plain footesteppes, not
unlike that crafty varlet Syrus in Terence, which clears him self to his
Master, as unacquainted with the Marriage of his son: even so least he should
seem to be defiled with some spotte of Pelagius error, adds immediately:
What? Page 149.
Are we such as will consent with Pelagius? Did we say at any time that we were
able to work any godly or praise worthy work through our own strength and
industry? If you will abide by your words Osor. you have so said in deed. For
he yt does auow, that it is in our own power to work our salvation: what does
he mean else by these words, but that we be able of our own strength to
work somewhat worthy co^mendatio^? But whether he agree herein with Pelagius or
no, let ye indifferent Reader Judge as seems him best. But I pray you sir, by
what means do you affirm yt to be in our own hands, which you deny again
to be in our own power? Or how ca^ ye defend them both, but you must needs
make a lie in ye one? or what slipper devise will you use here to cover your
lie withal? You say that Salvation is not obtained by our own strength; but
through Gods grace workyng within us. And why then chaufe you so maliciously
against Luther, Melancthon, Bucer and Calvin, which affirm the same that you
do? But a little erst ye confessed the thing, which ye do now deny. Be steadfast
therefore, and set down your mind whereunto you will stand, that we may know
once where we may find you. If you affirm that all consists in our own
hands, then do you not agree with Pelagius, but you go far beyond him: If
you ascribe all to the grace of God, what needs any more scoldyng? But you
will divide your meaning perhaps, and will allow to Gods grace such a part
of the work, that Freewill also may occupy some part with all. Osori. does
attribute our Salvation, partly to Grace, and partly to Freewill,
Yet do ye not untwine this meashe notwithstanding. For if you will so cut
asunder this ship, which can by no means be unjointed, and will yield over
the forepart thereof to ma^s guidyng, and the powpe to Gods tuition: surely S.
Paul will gain say you every way, which yeldeth ye whole interest of both,
as well the former as the hinder parts to God, whether Osori. will or no:
Declaryng That it is God that works in us both to will, and to bring to pass
all things according to his good pleasure. But you will find out some mean
thing paraduenture betwixt both, which you may attribute to Freewill. But even
here again you shall be driven back, whereas you may hear Paul pronounce
That it is God that gives the increase, so that now not only the original of
good will, but the increase also of well doing, the accomplishyng, proceedyng
and successes also flow from out the holy Ghost, and not from man.

If it be so the^ (will you say) that Gods grace does work all in all in us,
Osorius Objection.
to what purpose serves the Freewill that is naturally engraffed within us? or
being helped by grace, how is it said to do any thing, if you shall think
that it ought not to be accounted in any respect a partener in workyng a good
work? For answer whereof, Answer.
I would wish you to harke^ not to the words that I speak, but unto
Augustine. It is most true Osori. that whatsoever good work is wrought by us,
the praise thereof ought to redounde wholly not to our Freewill, but to Gods
grace, which performs all whatsoever is performed by us godly, and worthy
praise. For that is it that the words of Augustine emporte, that true and
humble confession does require in us. That is to say. That we refer all unto
God. And yet this grace of God does not so work all that which is proper to
it self, by her self only, as workyng in us without our Freewill. And again
it neither works so together with our Freewill, that any portion of praise or
reward should be ascribed to Freewill, for any of all whatsoever is due unto
God. And therefore where as Augustine in his book De gratia and libero arbit^
both affirm, August. de great. and Lib. Arbit.
that neither grace without Freewill, nor Freewill without grace is sufficient:
We do confess both to be true: for either of them works with the other I
confess it: but yet after a certain several sort. For the Grace of God
works, when it helps man's Freewill, yet it works in such wise, as that it
is never wrought by an other: it does so help Freewill as being never helped
by Freewill. Furthermore it does so help, but that it is always free not to
help, if it will: In fine whe^as Gods grace does work most effectually by
helpyng ma^s will, Otherwise works Gods Spirit, otherwise man's Freewill and
the diversity of them both.
yet works it not so with ma^s Freewill, as sta^dyng in need of the help of
Freewill by any means, but rather using ye service thereof. But the state of
Freewill is far otherwise: For Freewill works together with Gods spirit,
not as commaundyng his service at any time, but always wantyng his
assistaunce. In the one whereof you perceive the efficacy of the cause that
works, in the other the service only of the Instrument. Will does nothing in
good things but when it is helped and applied.
Moreover when will does work most effectually (Gods grace directyng it) yea
and freely, because it works voluntaryly, yet does it never attempt any good
thing of her self, without the direction of grace, neither by any means
otherwise, then as it is helped, but never helps grace by which it is both
wrought and helped. Yea and then also when it is wrought it so works, that it
can not choose but work of very necessity. Even as Servants in respect of
their birth are free, but being commanded by their Masters (whom they be
bound unto) they must obey whether will they nill they, of very Necessity. In
like manner fares it with men's Freewilles, albeit they stand in such plight as
that they be always carried with free motion, that is to say, with voluntary
motion to the things whatsoever they do, yet is it so far of to be able
enough of their own power to prosecute their purposed imaginations as they
would wish them selves, that many times they are withdrawn against their
wills, Grace does plye, but is never plied
from executyng the mischief which they conceived. Again to do good deeds,
they are so the Servants of grace, that when they are drawn, they can not
choose but obey of very necessity.

What need examples in matter most apparau^t? Examples of ma^s will being
hindered even in the evil which it purposed.
How often and how many do we find, that purpose many things in their
minds, which notwithstanding come to a far other manner of end then they were
devised for, being quite overthrown by the only countermaunde of almighty
God. As appears in Balaam, and the brothers of Joseph: of whom the first was
barred from speaking that which he determined: the other from executyng their
devises by the wonderful providence of God. It would be to much to recite all
the examples mentioned in the scriptures to this effect as Pharao, Sennacherib,
Hamman, Antiochus, Herod, the Pharisees, Julian and innumerable others of the
same sort: whose Freewill being wonderfully interrupted even amiddes their
chiefest practizes, was neither able to do any good thing well, nor yet
accomplish the evil that they had imagined according to their determinate
purpose. It shall suffice to produce one or two examples, whereby it may make
both evidently appear, how that it neither rests in the choice of man to
proceed in evil doing after his own will, nor to leave of from doing well
being drawn by Gods Spirit. Saul breathyng forth as yet slaughter and
threatenynges, whenas he persequuted the Christians with wholly bent affection
of Freewill, Will obeys the spirit of God many times whether it will or no.
what cruelty would he have executed, if he could have brought to pass the
devise, which he had thoroughly determined in mind? And why could he not do
it? But because there is no freedom in man's Freewill of it self, even in
workyng wickedness, but such as being hindered many times, and always bond,
must be enforced to acknowledge her own weakness on every side.

Let us couple with Paul the Apostle Peter: The example of Paul and Peter.
that we may learn in the^ both, how that we are not able of our selves either
to frame our lives altogether to wickedness, or to direct the same sometime to
godliness. And first touching Saules wicked will in his most wicked
enterprises, how little it auayled has been declared already. Let us now behold
Peter's faith, not by what means he received it at the first, but let us see
what his fleshly will was able to do, to the uttermost of his power, either in
refusing faith when it was given him, or in forsakyng it when he was helped.
Upon which matter let us geaue care to the testimony of Augustine: August. de
Correp. and great. Cap. 8
When it was said unto Peter (says he) Peter I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith may not fainte: Dare thou presume to say that `Peters faith should have
failed though Peter him self would have wished it to have failed, considering
that Christ prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, as though Peter would
have willed any thing else, then as Christ had prayed for him, that he should
will? Whereupon appears that Peter's faith did not depend so much upon his
own will, is upon the prayer of Christ: who did both help his faith, and
direct his will: And because his will was directed of the Lord, therefore could
not the prayer made for him be ineffectual. And therefore when he prayed, that
his faith might not fail, what prayed he for else, but that he might be
endued with a most free, most valiant, unvanquishable, and most perdurable
will in the faith? Thus much Augustine. Ierem. Cap. 10.
And therefore Jeremy the Prophet cryeng out unto the Lord most worthily: I
know O Lord (says he) that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it
in man to walk and to direct his own steps. Which words me seems that
Luther did note not altogether indiscreetly, whose words if I would here set
down, I can not see which part thereof Osorius would be able to confute. For in
this sort does Luther argue: Luther in his book of Assertions. Art. 36
If man's way and man's steps be not at his own disposition, how shall the way
of the Lord, and the paths of the Lord be at man's direction? And hereupon
deriuyng an Argument a Comparatis, as they term it in Schools, adds
forthwith, how then is man able to dispose him self to good, whenas he is not
able of him self to make his ways evil? For otherwise if he be able, how
then did the Prophet say, that he knew that man's way was not in him self? or
how is it that in ye 16. of his book of Proverbs ye wise King being enspired
with ye same Spirit confesses, that he knew as he testified? Prouer. 16.
The heart of man (says he) purposes his way, but the Lord does direct his
steps. Albeit this is not spoken to this end, as though we did affirm that
ma^s will is no ways free toward wicked things: Man is not altogether
deprived of free will to evil, though the same be many times stayed.
for who knows not how frail and prone the disposition of ma^s will is
always to catch hold of evil? though from doing thereof, it be many times
hindered. The comparison tends to this end only, that if man's Freewill
being hindered, and bond, seem many times less free to put in execution
evil things: how much less freedom think you does it enjoy toward the
things that further unto godliness? for as much therefore as this appears to
be most true by the evident testimonies of the Scriptures, and experimented by
the continual course of men's actions and conuersations: Let us hear what
Osorius does object against Haddon.

But I say thus that all good men, Page 151.
all godly men, all men most endued with heavenly gifts do testify, that in
this sentence of thine lurketh heinous wickedness: unshamefast impudency:
detestable madness and most execrable treachery. Unless your so manifold
lies hitherto dispersed abroad, and as it were clouted together in one lump,
unless your shameless face Osorius, and that your impudent usage in lyeng and
blaunching, your monstrous vanity (the like whereof can scarce possibly be
found in any writer, surely more monstrous in no man) had long sithence
disabled all the substance and credit of your talk, in the Judgment of all
good and godly men: you might happily have found some one, which would have
soothed this your co^municatio^. But now having uttered scarce one true
Sentence throughout all this work of yours, with what countenance, and with
what face dare ye speak in this wise? But I say this. etc. And what does this
famous speaker tell us at ye length? I do say this that in this sentence of
Luther, Melancthon and Calvin lurketh heinous wickedness, unshamefast
impudency: detestable madness and most execrable outrage. Go foreward then,
and tell us first without a lie (if you can) I pray you, what they have uttered
in their words. Page 152.
Forsooth because they stand stiffely herein that man's mind is always holden
captive, his will fast chayned, dispoyled of all ability to do, in so much
that we can neither do good nor evil, no nor think any good thought by any
means. Finally this is the effect of their opinion, that there is no
difference betwixt us and any other tool or instrument. etc. Truly I should
have marueiled much Osorius, if that lyeng spirit in your mouth, if your
wicked lips and deceitful tongue could have uttered any thing unto us without
a lie, or have made a ly^e without raylyng. Yea Sir? Is the wind in that
door? who that assigns free and voluntary power to do good, Osor. lyeng
railing against ^uther Mela^cthon, Calvin. etc.
not in our own will, but in Gods grace: who that ascribes all our actions
(especially these which be godly) to the direction and disposition of God: who
that affirms that our will is neither free of it self without Gods Grace,
and that it does nothing else but sin deadly, when it works after
disposition of her own nature: does he so dispoyle man naked altogether of all
will, as though it could do nothing at all? or purpose nothing at all? or as
though he made no difference betwixt man and any other instrument or tool? who
that endeavors to prove manifestly by the Scriptures this thing chiefly, that
all the thoughts of man's heart, and all his senses always are prone, and
inclined at all times to wickedness, does he seem to affirm that man is
void of all feelyng of thought? Tell a good fellowshyppe, the man that does
that which is in his own power, or the man doing that which is in his own
power, does nothing else but sin: does this man now nothing at all, whiles he
sins? or whiles he imagines mischief, does he imagine nothing at all? And
how then, I pray you, does Luther spoil men of their will? or how is he
reported, to bind man's will fast in everlasting chains, in such wise, as that
it can not only not do, but also not think any good or evil?

Osor. Page 151.
But Luther does deny that it rests in man's Freewill to make his ways evil.
And what inconvenience is there in this sentence, if the meaning thereof be
taken in the right sense, as it ought to be? Freewill is not of powder simply
and absolutely to make his ways evil
Truly if our ways either good or badd were simply and absolutely at our own
disposition: how is it that the Scripture teaches that man's steps are
directed? or how is it that the Prophet does deny man's way to be his own? or
how read we in the holy Proverbs, That when man has prepared his heart most,
yet it is the Lord that governs the tongue? How often do we find the old
Proverb to prove true, that man does purpose one way and God does dispose an
other way? How rife are the examples of some persons which with halter in hand,
and knife ready bent to dispatch them selves of their wretched lives, or which
have practiced to drown them selves, have not accomplished the wicked fact,
that they devised even then, when they were most willing thereto? Surely Gods
divine providence does wonderfully dally with man's thoughts and imaginations,
deludyng, ouerthrowyng, making frustrate transposing beyond all expectation of
man, the things which we have most firmly determined. And what freedom is
this at the length, which is always constrained to serve at an others
appointement? the strongest force whereof being many times hindered, must
always depend upon the permission and commandment of the higher power?
which thing Augustine does very well declare. August. de Ciuita. Del Lib. 5.
Cap. 9.
All wills are subject (says he) to the will of God, because they have no
power, but such as he grants. The cause therefore that makes this, and is
not made, is God, other causes do both make and are made, as are all created
Spirits, but chiefly such as are endued with reason. And again. Aug. in the
same place.
Our wills are so far able, by how much God would have them to be able and
foreknew it. And therefore in what soever ability they stand they are
undoubtedly able, and what soever they shall do, they shall surely do, because
he did foreknown that they should be able, and should do, whose foreknowledge
can not be deceived. etc. August. de Correp. and gratia.
And again in an other place. Neither is it to be doubted, that men's wills
can not resist the will of God, but that he must needs do what God will, for
as much as he does dispose the wills also as him lists, and when him
lists. Therefore to will, and to nill, is so in the power of him that wills
and nylleth, that it neither goes beyond Gods power, nor hinders his will,
but is many times hindered by the power of God, and always ouermaistered. etc.

But that is somewhat more hard which is objected out of the same Article, that
will is so fast bound, that we ca^ think no evil thought by any means. For
so does Osorius cite the place. Wherein he does first cast a myste before the
Readers eyes, and then deal injuriously with Luther. For he does neither
faithfully, nor fully rehearse the words of his Article. He is also no less
injurious to Melancthon and Calvin, who^ he alleges as partakers of the same
opinion. Albeit I know right well, that they do not vary from Luthers
meaning, yet did they always of very purpose refrain from this kind of
speech. Where did Melancthon ever write, that all things are performed by
vnaduoydeable necessity? Where did Calvin say, that Freewill was but a devise
in things? Who ever heard Bucer say, that man was not of power to think
evil? not because they varied from him in meaning and Judgment, but they
chose rather to quallifie, with some more plausible kind of style, that which
seemed to be propounded by him somewhat more roughly. But to return again to
Luthers words: I do reknowledge herein not your new furnished cavil Osorius:
but the ancient rusty canker of many others against Luther, as of Leo,
Roffensis, Eckius, Ioha^nes Coclaeus, Albertus Phigius, John Dreidon, Alphansus
de Castro, Andrew Vega, Peter Canisius, and such like: which do neither read
Luthers writing with Judgment, neither consider his meaning, nor co^ferre the
first with the last: but catch here and there a word half gelded for have:
and out of these being sinisterly construed, if they find any one thing more
then other fit to be quarelled withal, that they snatch up, that they urge
stiffely, and are always rakyng their nails upon that scabbe (as the Proverb
says). And because amongst all other his Assertions, they can pick out no
one sentence more odious in the Judgment of the simple people: it is a wonder
to see, what a coil they keep here, and how viperously they gnaw and turmoyle
this one Sentence, wherein he said, That man's will having lost her freedom, is
now of no force at all, not so much as to think an evil thought. And in this
respect surely, I can not but marvel much to see the indiscreet disorder of
some, but chiefly the singular shamelessenes of Osorius. For albeit Luther in
so many his Commentaries, Sermons, Books, and Aunsweres does urge this one
point always, and every where travail earnestly to prove, that ma^s Freewill
(being void of Grace) avails to nothing but to commit sin: yet does
Osorius so frame all his writing against Luther: as though Luther did teach
that man's Freewill could not so much as think an evil thought.

And from whence does he pike this quarrel? out of the words of Luthers
Article before mentioned, I suppose: But for as much as Luther does in the
self same Article openly profess, Luthers Artic. 36.
that Freewill of her own nature avails to nothing but to Sin, and that
all the imaginations of the heart do (of a certain natural inclination) rushe
headlong into evil: in what sense can yt man be said not to be able to think
an evil thought, which is always occupied in imaginyng evil? But I believe
he will press upon us with Luthers own words, wherewith he affirms that no
man of him self is of power to think a good thought, or an evil thought,
etc. Well, let us hear what conclusion this Logician will coin out of these
words.

Man's mind whether it think well or evil, Osorius a lyeng Rhethoritian and a
gross Logician.
does neither of them both of her own power.

Ergo, Man's mind of it self ca^ neither think a good nor an evil thought.

I do here appeal to your Logic Osorius. What kind of Argument is this? by
what rule make you this co^sequent? what? because the substance of the matter
does depend upon the first causes properly, will you thereupo^ conclude, that
the second causes do therefore nothing at all? Or because the freedom of doing
is restreined to the first and principal cause, to wit, to the only
Majesty of God, that therefore man's will is no cause at all, because it is not
free? and yt therefore it ca^ think no ill thought by any means, because it
does it not of her own strength and liberty, as though to do a thing
properly? and a thing to be done of her own proper power, were all one to say?
So then by this reason the Jews, which crucified the Lord of glory, shall be
said to do nothing, because all the outrage whatsoever they kept, was
determined before, by Gods unsearchable counsel. In like manner Pharao in
withholdyng the people of Israel, and Nabuchadonasor in spoylyng them, may be
said to do nothing, because the heart of the one was hardened by the Lord, and
because the other leadyng his army into Egypt, was constrained to change his
will in his journey, and bend his force against Jerusalem. Likewise neither
the Ship whiles she sayleth, nor the Pylote within the Ship, do any thing
at all, because their course whether it be fortunate or unfortunate, is not
always directed after their own will, but as the wyndes and the tides do
drive them. For what does Luthers disputation of Freewill enforce else, but that
he may refer all the order of doing to Gods free disposition only? Neither
does he dispoyle man of will altogether, which does only disable will of
freedom: Neither is it a good consequent to say, because man's will is denied
to be free, therefore that man is altogether destitute of will, because it is
not free, but always captiuate, bound, and an handmayde, as the which in
evil things is either always servant to Sin, or in good things handmayde
to grace, even as an Instrument or tool is always at the bestowing of him
that works withal. Man's Freewill is an Instrument of Gods Grace.
For what should let but Luther may as well call Freewill, by the name of a
tool, as Esaias does name the wicked by the name of Sawes in the band of the
Lord? and as well as in many places of Ezechiell those hearts are called stoany
hearts which the Lord does promise to soften and mollify with his grace? Esaias.


Ezechi. Cap. 11. 36.
And yet I will not much trouble Osorius herein. For whether will be free unto
evil, or be servant unto evil: it makes little to the present purpose, nor
will stand Osorius much in steed. This is undoubtedly true, that man's natural
strength (be it free, or be it bond) is more the^ strong enough to all
wickedness. So were all these storms raised against Luther needelesse also,
considering that he does so frankely oftentimes, and in many places profess in
plain words, that man's mind is always prone, and inclined to all evil
cogitations: considering also that he does confess every where, that to think
evil is as properly natural to man's will, as that of it self it neither can,
nor does acquainte it self with any thing else, but with evil thoughts. And
I think it is not so needful to stand much upon the name of freedom,
especially sithence we do agree upon the truth of the matter. And it may
happen that Osorius is deceived in doubtful co^struction of the word, or
rather deceaueth others therewith: taking the same in an other sense the^
Luther understood it. This word freedom is discussed and distinguished.
For whereas some things are said to be free of necessity in respect of
outward coaction, some free of necessity in respect of bondage: Will may right
well be called free after the first manner of necessity: as the which is never
constrained to will unwillingly that which it wills, be it good, or badd: For
compulsary will (as Augustine says) is no will. According to the latter manner
of necessity, man has never power over his own will so, but that (which way
soever it is carried) it always obeys his commandment of whom it is
carried, albeit it does always serve both voluntaryly, and willyngly.
Whereupon S. Paul discoursing upon the evil which he would not, but did it
nevertheless, says, that he did it not: but imputed the doing thereof to Sin
dwelling within him, and to the law of his members, the force whereof being
greater then his own strength, did draw him into bondage, though he strove
against it. And surely that is the bondage that Luther did mean according to
Paul's saying, Luther. Lib. de S^r^o Arb. Cap. 46.
when writing of bond will on this wise: Man's will (says he) is after this
sort common to use, as is a horse or a beast: if God do ride upon it, then it
wills and goes whyther God will have it: if the Devil sit upon it, then it
wills and goes whyther the Devil will have it: nor is it in his own choice
to run to either of those riders, or to get either of them: but the riders do
contend for the having and keepyng of him. etc. If Osorius do see any mean
betwixt these two riders, I would feign have him show it. He will say
perhaps, that betwixt these two there is a mean in will, whereby will is
able to apply it self to this, or to that; Augustine does make answer,
August.
that the very beginning of this applyeng, if it be toward good, arises not
without Gods good will and grace: if it be toward evil: then it springs
not but out of evil:: Even as Bernarde does teach that the whole beginning
must be ascribed to Grace.

In fine: to shut up the matter in few words, The power of doing wa^teth
not, but it ^^ the freedom of power that wants.
as concerning Luthers proposition, wherein he denies that Freewill is of
power to do good, or evil of it self. Two things seem worthy to be noted
here. The one concerning the power of doing, the other concerning the freedom
of power: If we enquire of the power of will, how effectual it may be to good
or evil of her own natural force: neither Luther nor any other will deny,
the property of will to be otherwise, but that it may will the things that
it wills: neither that the force of will is so altogether blotted out, but
that it may apply when it is applied either to good, or to evil: and that it
does so far forth not apply, by how much it is either destitute of Grace, or
aided by Grace, after none other sort, then as the horse does bear his rider
he trauerseth in his ryng, and runs his race, he sweateth under his rider,
he trauaileth his ground, is very nymble, chaufeth and champeth upon the
bridle, comes a loft, porketh out with his heels behind, he runs round
in his carryer backward and foreward, and performs all other qualities and
properties of his kind, which are subject to his senses. All which motions if
you respect the natural quality and force of the horse, seem to be not
altogether out of his own power: But if ye respect the liberty of motion, the
actiuitie thereof will appear to consiste not so much in the natural power of
the beast which is ruled, as in the power of the ryder, which does manage him.
Eue^ so ought we to Judge of man's will, whose natural inclination if you
regard, and what it may do of her own strength: who will deny, yt the
property of will is to will, but to be able to will, is proper to ability?
For of will it proceeds, that we will, but of ability it comes, that we
perform. So with our will we will, with our mind we conceive: and with our
ability we do perform. And, as Augustine says, August. de bono persevere.
Lib. 2. Cap. 13.
thinking we do believe, thinking we do speak, and thinking we do whatsoever
we do. And in an other place the same Augustine does confess: that nature may
be of power not only to do evil, but also to have faith, hope, and charity,
yet to have all these, he does affirm to come of Grace altogether. August. de
great. Christi contra Pellag. Lib. Cap. 20.
Wherefore we agree well enough together as touching ye ability of will. But
to let pass this treaty of ability: if question be moved touching freedom
of will, because hereupo^ hangs all our controversy (for neither do we
enquire here, what ye property of will is: or what will ca^ do properly? but
what every man may do, Luther de seruo Arb. Cap. 48.47.
or not do in all things, by the freedom of his own proper will) Luther does
answer forthwith, that the name of freedom seems to be a name of more
majesty, the^ that it ought, or may agree conveniently to any thing properly,
but to ye only Majesty of God, or to him, who^ the holy Ghost has made free
by grace.

Objection of the Defendours of Freewill taken out of the book of
Hyperaspistes.
But ye great Proctours of Freewill are wont to object, that in some sense this
is true in deed: That there is no power absolutely and fully free, but the
only omnipote^t power of Gods Majesty: yet nevertheless as we call Angels
immortal, men holy, wise, and good (though we do acknowledge God only to be
truly immortal, only wise, and only good) so nothing withsta^deth, but we
may call men after their certain manner free. I do Answer. Answer.
Angels in deed are called immortal, and that truly: because they obtained
that state of their creator at the first: besides that also, they never lost
that state of immortality wherein they were placed, although some fell from
the blessedness of immortality. But as for our freedom, the condition and
state thereof is of a far other condition and kind. For albeit man in the
beginning was created in the free estate of will through ye benefit of his
creator, which he might have reteigned still without any contradiction if he
would: yet did he loase the same freedom, and Paradise withal, by his own
default: so that he turned that blessed estate, into misery: and his freedom,
into bondage: that being out of Paradise now, by how much we are sequestered
from all felicity, even so far seem we to be cut of from all freedom,
without the Grace of the Redeemer. For ship wrack being once made of
universal blessedness, I can see none other remedy, but that freedom must be
drowned withal. Therefore the self same thing which does open Paradise,
being shut fast against us, must of necessity restore freedom again: which
can not by any means be brought to pass through force of nature, or through
any power of our own: It consists only in the Grace of the Redeemer. As our
Redeemer him self witnesses in S. John's Gospel. John. 8.
If the Son shall make you free, then shall you be free in deed. Notyng unto
us this one thing chiefly, by those words, the state of our bondage to be
such, as except it be renewed with Grace of the Redeemer, that in all this
nature of ours is nothing free. Moreover as concerning the usual manner of
speech: that men are called good, holy, and wise: In that men are called holy
and wise must be referred, not to their deseruyngs, but to grace wholly.
I know that men have been accustomed to be termed so. But what is this to
the purpose? The question here is not, by what name me^ are called, but of what
value every thing is in the sight of God. And yet do I not doubt at all, but yt
many men may be in their kind good, holy, and wise, and even so to be
esteemed well enough. But howsoever this holiness, godliness, and wisdom of
me^ seems in man's Judgment, yet is nothing whatsoever it be, if it proceed
not from the grace of God. (For what have thou, that thou have not received?)
After the same sort do I answer touching freedom, which being once lost
through Freewill, must of necessity stick fast cloyed in ye puddle of
thraldom, unless it be renewed again by Gods grace. Aug. Epist. 89. ad
Hillarium.
Whereupon August, very aptly, Freedom (says he) without grace, is no
freedom but co^tumacle. And as in this place August, denies that to be
liberty, which is severed from grace, so in an other place he will not grant
that to be named will, except it be conuersaunt in good things. August. de
sermon. Dom. in monte. Lib. 2.
Will (says he) is not will: but in good things, for in evil and wicked
things, it is properly called Lust, and not will. Wherefore if there be
neither freedom, where Gods grace is not present: nor will, where wickedness
is practiced: by what means then will Osorius mainteyne, that Freewill is in
evil things, whenas in that respect, there is neither freedom, nor will?
There is also in the same August. and in the same his Epistle to Hillary, that
may well be gathered and framed into an Argument on this wise.

The life of liberty is the perfect soundenesse of will. An Argument out of
the words of August. to Hyllary.


But in doing evil man's will is not sound.

Ergo, In doing evil man's will is not free.

For even so are we taught up Augustines words.

The life of liberty (says he) is the soundenesse of will, and by so much
every man is more free, by how much his will is most sound.

Albeit I will not strive much about the contention of terms. If any man be
minded to name the choice of will applyable toward good or evil, to be
voluntary, rather then free, he shall not err much in my Judgment. Neither
will I be offended, if a man do say (as Augustine does) that ma^s will is free
toward evil things, so that he hold the meaning of Augustine, as well as
the words. For I am of this mind, that when Augustine does name man's
Freewill, and couple it to grace: he calls it free in this respect, In what
sense Aug calls will Freewill. Will seems rather to be termed voluntary
the^ free.
because being free from all forcible constrainte, it be^deth it self through
voluntary motion that way, whereunto it is directed, be it to goodness through
Grace, or to evil, through natural lust. And in this sense, according to
August. meaning, ye Confession of Auspurgh does expou^de ma^s will to be free:
that is to say: yeldyng of his own accord. The self same do Bucer, and
Melancthou also: and this also does Calvin not deny: who does neither strive
much about this term of freedom, The Confession of Auspurgh.
and does learnedly also profess, that the original cause of evil, is not to
be sought else where, then in every man's own will. But as concerning Luther:
for that he does upon some occasion sometime express his mind in writing
somewhat roughly, wherein afterward he discovers his meaning in a more mylde
phrase of speech: it was not seemly in my conceit to rack out those things
only which might breed offense, cloakyng mean whiles those things
fraudulently, which do wipe away all mislikyng. He does set down in his
Assertion thus: That it is not in man's free power to think a good or evil
thought. Again in the same Assertion the same Luther does not deny, that all
man's imaginations of their own inclination are carried to all kind of
naughtynesse: and that Freewill can do nothing of it self but Sin. On this
wise with like heat of disputation rather, then of any error he calls
Freewill sometime a feigned or devised term, not to be found in deed any
where, making all things to be governed by vnauoydeable necessity. Which
vehemency of speech many men do cast in his teeth reprochfully now and then.
Caluinus contra Alb. Ph^gium. Lib. 5.
And yet in other places again exp^undyng him self, he does grant without
all Hyperbolicall speech, that in inferior causes Freewill can do somewhat,
and withal does franckely affirm, that it can do all things being assisted
with Grace. And why is he not holden excused as well for this, as snatched at
for the other? why do the adversaries shut fast their eyes, and blindfold them
selves willyngly at matter well spoken, and never look abroad, but when they
list to carpe and cavil.

Was there ever any so circu^spect a writer, whose latter diligence and more
attentive heedefulnes might not always amend some oversight escaped at the
first? either in Exposition, or Judgment of things? The more that Solon the
Sage grew in years, the more he increased in knowledge: and may it not be
lawful for us to increase understanding with our age likewise? Surely August.
could not excuse the errors of his youth, neither shamed he to confess in his
age, the oversight that escaped his pen in youth unadvisedly, and not only
to reform them by ouerlickyng them, (as the Bear licketh her whelps) but
also to revoke them openly, with an open, grave, and grayheaded retractation:
and to pray Pardon of his errors franckly: nor does in vain permit those
books to be prejudicial unto him, which he wrate being a young man, August.
de bono persevere and prosper Cap. 12 and^ 21.
saying very modestly of him self that he began then to write like a learner,
but not a^ grounded in Judgment. Neither was such perfection to be required in
Luther: who albeit uttered somewhat at the first in words, otherwise then
common custom of Schools were acquainted with, it had been the parts of
grave Deuines, not to prye narrowly into ye unaccustomed phrase of words so
much, as to sift out the substance of the doctrine, how agreably it accorded
with the Scriptures in truth, and sincerity. And if the matter would admit
some other interpretation, yet ought Assertion have been compared with
Assertion, and place with place: Finally consideration ought to have been had
of the intent and meaning of the writer: then also of the first original, and
scope of his doctrine, whereunto it tended, and what it emported. And if ye
would examine uprightly the opinions and assertions of me^, according the true
touchstone of Gods truth, and not sinisterly for eiudge them: whether opinion I
pray you seems in your co^ceite most sound, of those which do advance the
Majesty of Gods grace? or of those which do enhaunce the weakness of man's
nature? of those which do make men's merits, and works, the effects of
Salvation? or of those which do ascribe it to Gods free imputation, through
Jesus Christ? of them which do determine that righteousness comes by faith?
or of them which say it is obtained by the works of the law? of those which
spoil Freewill of all matter to glory upon? A comparison of Luthers Assertio^s
and the Papists.
or of them which do call me^ back to a true, and humble acknowledgement of
them selves? of those which razing out the everlasting and unchangeable
decree of Gods Predestination, do commit the successes of things to hap
hazard, and blind chance, and to free affection of man's will? or of them
which setting aside all chaunceable euentes of fortune, and all power of man's
will, do refer all things to the assured governance of Gods infallible
foreknowledge, guidyng all things after his own pleasure, in most stayed and
stable order? And yet does not Luther so root out all Freewill altogether, and
all chaunceablenesse of fortune, but that he does admit the use of them in
some respect: to wit in respect of inferior causes, although in respect of
higher causes, and in those things which concern salvation or damnation, he
believes surely, that no force of Freewill, ne yet any chaunceablenesse of
fortune do prevail any thing at all.

For as much as this is the chief ground of Luthers doctrine, The fruit and
commodity of Luthers doctrine.
what else may the well affectioned and indifferent Reader (I pray you) conceive
of this his Assertion, then that which may magnify the glory of God? extol
his omnipotency? may establishe the sauetie of the faithful, dependyng upon
the free promise of God through faith, and not upon the worthynes of merits
through Freewill? may terrify the wicked with a wholesome fear of God? may
restrain them from outrage: may comfort us against death with life yt is in
God: against misery, with grace: against infirmity with strength: and against
destruction with Gods mercy? may raise up the godly to love and embrace their
God? The fruit of all which things as the godly Reader may easily reap by
this doctrine, let us see now on the other side, what poison Osorius does suck
out of the fame, as one that sees nothing in this Assertion, Osorius Page 151.
but horrible wickedness (as he faith) shameless arroga^cie, detestable
maddnes, execrable outrage. And now would I feign hear how he will confirm
this proud affirmative so vehemently uttered. For (says he) this being
granted, I do say, that laws are abolished: decrees put to silence: sciences
rooted out, learning extinguished, peace and tra^quillitie disturbed, and utter
confusion made of all, right and wrong without all order. If Osorius require
this at our hands, that whatsoever his lauishe tongue shall rashly roaue at
large, be coined for an unreprovable oracle, the^ is this matter soon at an
end. But that world is gone long sithe^ce Osor. wherein this Pythagoricall
Proverb (...), was taken for a law. The man has spoke.
We think it not now enough to harken to all that a man will speak, but to
consider what, and upon what ground a man speaks. Well: and what say you
unto us at the length Osorius? That laws will decay, statutes be put to
silence, sciences rooted out, learning extinguished, tra^quillitie disturbed,
and right and wrong confounded together. Certes you have heard of this man here
many high and absurd speeches (gentle Reader) but hear yet much more
absurdity. Ibidem.
I say furthermore that hereupon does follow, that man is spoiled of sense,
bereft of advise, and deprived of reason, and driven to that pass, as no
difference may seem to be betwixt him and a stone thrown out of a man's hand.
And yet have you not heard all. Osori. crauleth forward still, and is come now
(as it seems) into some main plain, where he purposes to make us a course
of his harysh eloquence. I say also: that the holy commandments of God, his
precepts and statutes, his exhortatio^s and threatnyngs, rewards promised for
well doing, and punishment threatened for malefactors, were all in vain
prescribed to the posterity by Gods word. O Heaven, O Earth, O Sea of Hercules.
But is there any more yet? tush all these be but trifles yet. For over and
besides this ensues so heinous a fact, more horrible then tongue can speak, or
heart ca^ think, so unspeakably filthy, and so monstruously strange, that all
the rest being laid together, may in respect of this, be accounted scarce worth
the speaking. And what is it a Gods name? Osori. Page 152.
Forsooth that Luther or Melancthon, Bucer or Calvin, or whosoever were the
first fou^der of this doctrine, besides that he does thereby turn all states
and commonweals quite vpsidowne, he breaks yet further into such
unmeasurable impiety, as that he does imagine God him self (the most holy of
holy ones) and our most dear Father (to who^ no iniquity can by any means be
imputed) to be the author of all wickedness and cruelty. We have heard a tedious
Catalogue of heinous absurdities, which (as he says) must needs ensue upon
Luthers doctrine: And if it be not true. He requires us to make him a liar, as
that either Luther never spoke so: or else to teach him that Luthers doctrine
may well be maintained. As though there were any such pitthe in all this your
railing (M. Osorius) that might not easily be confuted; or any such weakness in
Luther, that might not much more easily be defended? yea and so defended as
that neither he may seem to have taught the doctrine of Necessity, without
good consideration, nor you able to deface ye same without great peril of
co^mittyng horrible sacrilege? I speak now of Necessity, not that
Necessity, that is called violent coactio^, but of that which is named of
undoubted assurau^ce, and absolute infallibility: not that Necessity which
the schoolmen call Conseque^ti^, but which is called Conseque^tia, or ex
Hypothesi. The manifold consideration of Necessity.
For Necessity is neither taken after one only signification amongst ye
Deuines, nor yet amongst ye Logicia^s and Philosophers, whereof of (I suppose)
you be nothing ignorant, at the least you ought not be ignorant thereof
surely. Therefore they that have employed their studyes somewhat more carefully
about ye scannyng of this matter, have defined Necessary after this manner: What
is Necessary.
to be such a thing, as can not be altered, a certain settled and firm
vnmoueablenes, which can not be changed by any means from that which it is.
Of this Necessary, Aristotle has se^ down two principal begynnynges: the one
internal, the other external. Then also distinction is made of this
Necessity, Two beginnings of Neccessitie,
which is moved force of the internal cause, and inward propriety of Nature:
So that some things may be called simply, and absolutely necessary: as God:
and those things which being changed do emply contradiction: as if a man
would say: that four were not an even number, that four and three, were not
seven in number: And this is called Geometrical Necessity, which will not
admit any change by course of nature. There is an other Necessity; called
Natural Necessity. Which albeit be of her self the beginning of her own
motion, yet it consists not in so simple and absolute an estate, but
follows only the usual course of her own nature: And after this maner^
fire is said to bourne of Necessity: The Sun is continually carried about in
his course of Necessity: which can not choose, but do as they do, according
to the propriety of their natural disposition: yet do they not follow their
natural inclination so absolutely, and vnauoydeably, but that God may hinder,
and alter their disposition, or make them cease from their natural operation.
Such a kind of Necessity to Sin, we say that man is clogged withal since
the fall of Adam, if the holy Ghost and Grace be absent: For of them selves
they can not but sin, albeit there is no let in their nature, but that they
may be helped or changed, and otherwise altered: as we see come to pass in
those that are regenerate in Christ. That Necessity therefore whereby wicked
men are said to be lead to sin, is not so absolute, and vnaduoydable, that
they can not choose but sin: for as soon as the holy Ghost, and the Grace of
Christ comes, this Necessity is utterly cut of. And thus much of that
internal Necessity.

But the Necessity that spryngeth from external causes is also divided two
manner of ways. Whereof the one is violent, Necessity of Coactio^.
and is called Compulsary Necessity: As when a thing is forced to move, or to
stir against her own nature. And this Necessity can by no means fall into
man's will: for it is impossible that will shall will any thing unwillingly. The
other is stable and infallible, or of the Hypothesis, or by reason of the
Consequence, which Logicians do take to be in Sensu composito, and not in Senfu
`Diuiso. Now this Necessity, called of the Consequence, is on this wise. As
when a thing may be true by occasion of the Necessary couplyng together of one
proposicion with an other, though the thing that is concluded for true, be not
Necessary of it self. And in this respect, we do affirm that all our actions
are done of Necessity, not by the force of the inward cause or else their own
nature, that is to say, if they be considered apart, and referred to their next
cause, to wit, unto will. Even so will being considered apart, in her own
nature from the externe beginning, to wit, Gods providence and foreknowledge,
it is said to be free in his certain kind, so that it is endued with a
certain facility to incline it self, to whether part it will, although it
be not able of her self to move and incline at all but unto that part, which
God did foreknow. Whereby you perceive Osor. in what sense this Necessity,
which we do affirm is not always absolutely tied to our actions, as
farreforth as they do proceed from our own will, but through the couplyng
and conioynyng of Gods Predestination with our works. Which thing to be even
so, the Deuines did seem to signify `Per Sensum Compositum and Necessitatem
Consequentiae.

A Description of Freewill, and the things apperteinyng thereunto after the
rules of Divinity, taken out of August. P. Lombard an^ others.
Five things chiefly to be considered in Freewill.
1. What Freewill is Will. Is a thing properly perteinyug to reason, whereby
man does liscerne good from evil, what is to be desired, or what to be
eschewed.

Free. Freedom is a thing properly perteinyng to will: whereby of voluntary
appetite without foreine coaction it may either will good or evil, but to will
good comes of Grace, which makes to will and to do.

The des^^^ption of Freewill talen out of Arg^na (...). l^b. 2. Did. 24.

Freewill is an ^^^initie of reason and will, whereby good is chosen through
the assistau^ce of Grace, or evil, if Grace b^ absent, or thus.

Freewill is a facuine of the Soul which can will good or evil, discernyng
them both.


2. In what things Freewill does consiste.
In God first and chiefly. Whose will is of it self simply and absolutely most
(...) from all bondage of (...) and all infeccion of sin, for God can ^ot of
his own nature sin: not because any force restrayneth him, but because of his
own nature he ca^ not so will, so that God is both holy of necessity, and yet
this necessity (...) Freewill from God in who^ all ^ccessitie joined with all
freedom is reliaunt.

In blessed Angels. Whose state and condition is this, that their will is made
steadfast and unchangeable in all goodness, not of them selves, but through
Grace.

In man's nature, and that four manners of ways according to the fourefold
division of man's state.
3. In what respect it is called man's Freewill. Not in respect of things
present, nor things past, because present things and things past be of this
quality, that being done they ca^ not be undone, nor things pa^. can be
revoked.

But is called Freewill in respect of things to come. And these be the things
that our Lombardines do affirm are in (...) power, but untruly, for ma^s
ability (to confess truth) is directed by gods everlasting decree neither is
it in ma^s ability to order chau^ceable things at his pleasure.

1. In the state of innocence. Whose freedom was once such which could both
sin and not sin. And in this sense the ancient writers must be
understood as often as they speak of man's Freewill, that is to say, of the
Freedom of man's nature.

2. In the state of blessedness. or of his heavenly country, as scholemen
term it, where man shall be endued with a freedom that can not Sin by any
means.

3. In the state of life after sin, and before regeneration by Grace. In
which state man has no Freewill to do any thing, but to Sin deadly as
Lombard says? and of this state means Luther writing of bond will.

4. In the state of life after sin, and after regeneration by Grace. In
which state man has freedom not to Sin except venial Sin^e as says
Lombard. But although Augustine and Luther do yield an ability not to Sin
after a certain sort: Yet in respect of actual Sin they do not except man
either from venial or deadly Sin. Because was never any man yet found
(Christ only except) endued with such (...) of Grace that had not in all his
ly^e Sinned, yea and that deadly.


4. Of what things Freewill takes his denomination.
1. From necessity or coaction which is called the Freedom of nature. This
Freedom the scholemen do attribute to me^ in all states. But this necessity
must be distinguished and proportioned by his principal causes, whereof

Some be called internal. As be the things which are moved of their own
nature and of inward operation: And those.

Are either simply and absolutely necessary as God and his holiness, and as
those things which b^yng changed emply contradiction, whereof the one party
m^st needs be true the other needs false: as four is not an equal number,
four and three are not sen^ in number: and this is called Geometrical
Necessity which alteration nature does not admit and this Necessity
perteyneth nothing to Luthers Disputation of Freewill.

Or be no^ simply and absolutely necessary, but after the common course of
nature, as ^^er does burn of Necessity. The Sin is always moved and other
such like, being natural things, which yet are not of such Necessity, but
may be ^indered by God and so cease from operation.

Some have external begynnynges: and of these there is two manner of
Necessities.

Either violent. Which is called the Necessity of external coaction: as wh^^
things are constreyned to move or to do contrary to their nature, as stones
and heavy things, as the schole men call Necessity in respect of the
consequence not of the consequence or it Sensu Diuiso and not in Sensu
Composito and from this Necessity the freedom of man's will is utterly
exe^pted.

Or stable and infallible by reason of the consequence not of the consequent or
in Sensu Composito not in Sensu Diuiso. This Necessity of the consequence not
of the consequent is to be understood, when a thing may be true in respect
of the necessary aff^^tie of proposition from proposition, although the thing
concluded be not necessary of it self: or true in Sensu Composito, which
otherwise is false in Sensu Diuiso, or false in Sensu Composito, which
otherwise is true in Sensu Diuiso, as if a man say, that white may be black
by distinction of contrary times it may be true, but ioynyng the times and in
Sensu Composito, it can not be true.

2. From sin or from bondage of sin, which is called freedom of Grace.
And this freedom is attributed to them only, which are made free by Grace.
Wherein if they mean of the imputation of Sin, it is true: but if they mean
of actual Sin, it is false. 3. From misery, which is called the freedom of
Glory, and this freedom had free will in the state of innoce^cie once, and
shall have the same much more perfect hereafter in the state of glory.
5. How much Freewill is empayred in man through sin. It is wounded in her
natural qualities, to wit, in Reason, in understanding, in memory, wit.
etc. Dispoyled altogether in things as be heavenly, and apperteynyng to God.

And this much well agrees with the doctrine of Luther.

Lombard. Lib. 2. Did. 25.


Sithence we have now laid this foundation for our better furniture to be able
to make answer: We will now address our selves to our adversaries
Arguments. Wherein although he observe no course, nor form of common
Disputation, let us yet help his lame Logic as well as we may. And first of
all, touching ye overthrow of Laws (wherewith because it lyketh Master
Osorius to urge this point chiefly before the rest) let us give our attentive
ears to his words, and mark well how cunnyngly he argues. Page 151. The
shameless and lyeng cavil of Osorius.
But I say (says he) that by this doctrine of Luther (whereby he does teach
that things are directed to their end by Necessity) that Laws are subverted,
Decrees put to silence: and right and wrong confounded together. And why does
he not add this much more also? that whole commonweals are overthrown? Well
go to. I do hear very well what you say Osorius. But I have not heard yet any
substaunciall Argument, whereby you prove this that you say to be true. Certes
there be at this present within Christendom many Nations, many Provinces, many
Kingdoms, many Dukedomes, many Cities and commonweals that favor Luthers
doctrine: Wherein I appeal to your own conscience (speak it if you can) have
you ever heard amongst all these (I say not of any one common wealth or City)
but of any one little Uillage, or Civil family, that has been any one jot
defrauded of the benefit of their Laws, or become less provident for the
common quiet of their country, by followyng Luthers doctrine? Although we have
not yet received from Spain and Portingall into our common wealth your bloody
laws of Inquisition, embrued with Chriscian blood, and do suppose also that no
discrete common wealth will ever receive them: Yet through Gods inestimable
providence we be not destitute of politic Laws, nor of honest sciences, nor
of vigilaunt Counselors. Wherein albeit our gross capacities may seem
unworthy to be compared to the fine and pregnaunt wits of Portingall: yet
howsoever they seem, we are by their direction sufficiently enough instructed
to discern betwixt the limittes of right and wrong, and not to confound the^:
neither have we ever confounded the^ as far as I know: what manner of hotchpot
you make of them in Portingall I know not. For as much therefore as common
experience teaching the contrary, does most manifestly convince you of open
lyeng, with what face dare you so boldly affirm? that through this doctrine of
Luther, Laws are subverted, Counsels put to silence, and confusion and
disorder of right and wrong to have entered in? Whereof you never saw any
proof, ne yet can tell a dream so much of any attempt practiced in any common
wealth. And therefore I marvel what kind of lesing you will coin at length
to make this cauillation of yours to carry some show of truth. I suppose verily
that (being disfurnished of proof and records, and found an open liar in
matter so evident) you will shrowde your self under some close covert of
Pelagius. To wit. That where the use of the law consists of two points
principally, that is to say, in aduancyng virtue, and in punishyng vice:
hereupon Osorius will frame an Argument after this manner and form.

Laws are ordained in vain, unless there be ability to perform them.
Osori. Argument.


But there is no ability to perform by the doctrine of Necessity which
Luther do threache.

Ergo, Laws are ordained in vain by Luthers doctrine of Necessity.

I do answer the Mayor proposition were true, Answer,
if this bondage or Necessity, which does prejudice ability, were natural,
and not of it own faultynesse, that is to say: If we had been created without
this ability by nature, and had not thrown our selves into this inextricable
Laberinthe of yelding, through our own default. But as now having heaped upon
our selves this Necessity of sinnyng voluntaryly by our own purchase, and
having made Necessity (as Augustine says) of a penal offense: for good cause
therefore laws are of Necessity established, which may by some lawful mean
reduce us to nature, or at least reteyne us in some couenable order of life:
Necessity of sinnyng is not to be imputed to God, but to our selves.
not ouerpassing this also withal: that where the Mayor treats of the
obedience of man's laws, in the Minor that Necessity (which Luther does teach)
ought not be referred to ma^s laws nor the discipline of external life, but
to the obedience of Gods law only.

Moreover, for that I have promised to help to underprop Osorius Logic,
which is of it self very ruinous, and ready to fall to the ground. I will not
refuse to frame by some order and form, the remnaunt of his allegations into
Arguments, that the Reader may more easily be instructed, what answer to
make to every of them particularely.

An other Argument of Osorius.
The freedom of man's will being taken away, the force of laws precepts and
rules of good life and all ordinances of Civil discipline and statutes do
cease.

The Necessity which Luther teaches does abolish all freedom of man's will.

Ergo, This doctrine of Necessity being allowed. Laws decay, good statutes
and ordinances, and all endeavor of good and godly life is extinguished.

Answer. Freedom taken two ways.
First in your Mayor proposition this word Freedom must be distinguished:
namely to be taken either as opposite to coactio^, or opposite to bondage: if
in the Mayor you understand of coacted freedom, then is the Mayor true. For
whosoever takes away freedom from man, does also dispoyle him of will. But if
you vnderst^ad of bond freedom, then even by this means is your Mayor clean
false.

Necessity to be taken two manner of ways.
Next we deny your Minor with Augustine, wherein also this word Necessity must
be distinguished. Which being divided into two parts, the one which is
called Co^pul^ary Necessity, the other which is said to be of the
Consequence, or ex Hypothesi, whereof the first ^euer any of our Writers did
deny, the other can none of all your Doctors deny: which consistyng of the
foreknowledge of God, The Necessity that Luther teaches, does take away
fortune and chance, but takes not away freedom from will.
by a certain immovable conjunction of causes, and byndyng Necessity to
things fore-ordeined by God, does utterly abolish fortune and chance: but does
not take away will, nor withstandeth the freedom thereof: as there is no
contradiction, but one self thing may be called both Uoluntary, and Necessary
also. For freedom of will is not taken away through Necessity, but through
coaction. As for example, when we say that God lives euerlastyngly, and
orders all things uprightly: we do confess that both these are peculiar to
Gods nature of Necessity, and not by any foreign coactio^. After this manner
in the book of Exodus Whereas Pharao did endeavor to stay the children of
Israel from departing out of Egypt, we must needs confess, that he did it of
Necessity, in respect of Gods secret appointeme^t: and in deed he neither
could will, nor do otherwise: Freedom is taken away by coaction not by
Necessity.
But in respect of his own inclination, which was the very peculiar and
nearest cause yt moved him to stay the^^o Necessity of coactio^ forced his
will to this unwillingly, but that which he did, he did uolu^taryly: and with
no less earnest willingness of mind did he bring to pass ye thing which his
greedy affection had willed before. Although a man may be constrained to do
somethyng many times against his will yet can he not be framed by any means to
will a thing yt he would not. For the will which wills not, is not now called
will, but vnwillyngnesse: nay rather nothing at all. And for the same very
cause, because there is no such thing at all in the course of nature, nor to be
found any where, therefore has it no denomination nor usual name of speech,
whereby it may be expressed in Latin: of the same sort also are the other
Arguments touching Arts and Sciences, whereof he cauilleth so much after this
manner.

If all things that happen be referred to the power of God and are done of
Necessity according to Luthers doctrine, Osori. Argument. Page 151.
which byndeth all the actions of men to Necessity.

It would hereupon follow that all Sciences should be overthrown, all endeavor
of man utterly frustrate, nor any industry of me^ (were it never so skillful
employed in husbandry, to byeng and sellyng, to traffic, to provision for the
family, to Surgery and Physic, or any other actions of man's life whatsoever)
shall profit nor be auayleable.

I do answer this to be most true, The Co^futation.
that the operation of all things ought to be referred to the will and
providence of God, as to the chief and principal cause: by which providence
all things are ordered of very Necessity. But this Necessity takes not away
ability to endeavor from men, but causes only that men's actions are not
chaunceable. For albeit the things that God willed, do necessaryly come to
pass: yet does man's will nevertheless yield her diligent endeavor, which will
the providence of God does not take away, but governs. In deed ma^s will
does work, yea and freely works: that is to say: works voluntaryly, not
coactly: yet it works so, as if God help, it works well, if God do not
help, it works ill. And yet whether it work well, or ill, it always
works of Necessity: neither does will employ her ability any io^e less
being governed by God, but rather is encouraged to work so much the more
earnestly, because the things come to pass necessaryly, whatsoever Gods will
has foreordeined to be done by the industry of man.

Certes this saying of Luther is undoubtedly true, that nothing happens in
all the actions of man's life, either well, or evil, either without Gods
knowledge, or without his will, or else without his direction. And yet because
the successes of those things are uncertain unto us, therefore followyng the
rule of our will and reason, and withal obeyeng the will of God (who
commands us to do our endeavor) we do apply all our diligence earnestly to
work, commending in the mean whiles both our selves, and the success of our
travail to the tuitio^ of almighty God: at whose especial commandment all
things come to their end necessaryly, and obey his direction of very
Necessity. Whereby you perceive that our endeavors and travails do nothing
less decrease or wax more dull to work, because they are foreknowen, and
directed by God: but our will is by so much more encouraged to work, because
we will obey Gods will, who commands to work. And therefore that Sophisme
of yours is altogether Sophistical and deceauable, not much unlike to that,
which we read in Origin in his second book against Celsus: where the
Sophister, to dissuade the sick body from counsel of Physic, Origene
against Celsus. 2. book
frames this Argument. If thou be Predestinate (says he) to recover health,
thou shall surely be hoale whether thou take Physic, or no: but if thou be
Predestinate to dye, the Physician shall both loase his labor, and thou cast
away thy money to no purpose. Whom the sick person perceauyng to be toward
Mariadge, with the like Sophisme (driuyng out as it were one nail with an
other) answers after this manner. If it be thy destiny to have issue of thy
body, thou shall have one, whether thou marry a wife, or not marry a wife: but
if thou be predestinate to be childlesse, thou shall surely be childies, though
thou marry a wife never so much. The deceit of this Sophisme lurketh herein.
Because our endeavors, Our actions must be guded by approved reason and not
uncertain certeinetie.
and Imaginations ought not to depend upon an uncertain certeintie, which may
be applyable to good or evil indifferently, or upon chaungeable adventure (the
success whereof we know not) but must be ordered by a direct assured rule of
reason. For albeit on the one side it may so come to pass, that he that
marryeth a wife shall have no children: yet on the other part, for as much as
it is impossible to have children without copulation of man and woman: therefore
that ought to be yielded unto, that seemed consonaunt to reason, not that which
ye Argument concluded videl. therefore he must not marry a wife. In like manner
fares it with the other Argument concerning the Physician. Although it may so
come to pass that no Physic may help me, yet because it is most agreeable to
reason that unless Physic be ministered, health will not be recovered, I
will follow herein the most approved rule of reason, and will not wilfully
throw my self by an uncertain Necessity of destiny, into that which seems
impossible, or at least less agreeable to reason. Wherefore as these assumptions
be false, thou shall in vain marry a wife, and thou shall use Physic in
vain: in like manner I answer that Osorius Argument is Sophistical, where
he argues that our endeavors are applied in vain, and that we do travail in
vain. Well: to go foreward to the other triflyng toys of this Sophister.

An other Argument touching rewards and punishments.
For as much as virtue and vice do proceed from out the free choice of will,
An other subtle Sophisme of Osorius is opened. Page 151.
it can not be, but that he which does bereave will of her freedom, must also
dispoyle the life of man of due reward for virtue, and punishment for vice.

Luther, by byndyng all things to Necessity, does bereave will of her
freedom.

Ergo, by Luthers doctrine it does come to pass, that neither punishment
shall be executed upon malefactors, nor virtue advanced with condign reward.

The very same Argument did Pelagius long ^ithence use against August. though
not in the self same words, yet all one in effect. I answer the parts
thereof. And first concerning freedom of will mentioned in the Mayor, how it
ought to be distinguished, has been declared before already. Then if in the
Minor you respect that kind of Necessity, which forces us to yield whether
we will or no, your Minor is false. As touching reward for virtue, and
punishment for vice: Celestius the Pelagian urged against Augustine in the same
wise. The Objection of Celestine the Pelagian against Augustine.
Man is not to be blamed (says he) for committing the Sin, which he can by
no means avoid. Augustine makes answer: Aug. Answer.
Nay rather (says he) man is therefore faulty, in that he is not without
sin: because by ma^s Freewill only it came to pass, that he should fall
into that Necessity of Sinnyng, which Necessity by his own will he can not
withstand. Whereby you perceive Osor. that Necessity of sinnyng is neither
utterly abolished from ma^s nature, and that malefactors are duly punished
notwithstanding for their offenses. By what reason may this be justified (will
you say) sithence the Judgment of our choice (whereby we fall into Sin) is
not free, but subject to thraldom. Be it as you say, but thorough whose
default this servitude came first is already declared. Again whether offense
be committed through free or servile choice of will, it makes little to the
purpose for the quallyfieng of the punishment, so that it appear to the Judge,
that the fact was committed of wilful and corrupt lust and affection. But you
will say again.

If the offense be voluntary.

Objection.
Ergo, the doing thereof consists in our own power.

For what soever is voluntary, seems to be within the compass of our
ability. I answer. Answer.
To will, we have in deed naturally in us: but to will well we have not: So
that ability to will is of our selves, August. upon the words of the Apostle
the^ 2. Sermon.
to wit: We are able to will, but to will well is not in the power of will:
for this soundenesse of will, Ada^ lost (when he had received it) through his
own abuse.

August. Epistle to Sixtus.
As touching rewards. I Answer. Albeit our deeds deserve not to be rewarded,
yet does God righteously reward the^ whenas he does crown his own gifts in
us. Neither does it follow hereupon, because God does reward good works in us,
that therefore those good works are our own, as proceedyng from us through our
own strength, and ability. But because he has vouchsaued to make those
gifts to be ours, and because he powers those good gifts into us, therefore
worthily are those good gifts rewarded as his own. And yet neither is this
reward given as due to desert, in respect of the worthynes of the work: but of
his gracious liberality, which he has bountyfully powered upon us undeserved
before, to make us obedient unto him.

Briefly, if this Answer, though of it self very plain and manifest, shall
seem but of small credit with you, I will bring you Augustine for an umpyer
betwixt us sufficient enough (I trust) who being long ago assailed with the
same Objections by the Pelagians, shall for the better maintenance of his own
credit, fully answer these cauillations of those heretics like unto your
self. For the Pelagia^s did object against him in this sort. If it be true,
that all things from the beginning are determined to their end by Gods
foreordinaunce and decree, Celestius the Pelagian against Augustine.
and that men's wills are directed by God: to what purpose are laws made? and
punishment ordained for malefactors? why are men rebuked, reproved,
reprehended, and accused? for what do we that we have not received? what
marvel is it if we be disobedient to God, when as he that commands to obey,
has not given will to obey?

Even as Augustine has answered this Objection long sithence, so let Osorius
content him self to be au^swered in as few words: August. de Corr^pt. and
great. Cap. 6.
For correcting of vice (says he) punishment is ministered for two causes.
First because no man is evil, but by his own default, for the evil that he
works, is evil voluntaryly and of his own accord. And although it ought
not to be doubted that ma^s will ought to be subject to Gods will, whom man can
not let to work what him best likes, for as much as when him lists, he
frames man's will to work after his will, yet here is no cause to the
contrary, but that man should receive due punishment for the offenses, which
him self commits wilfully, seeing that he is the worker of his own Sin,
for no man Sins against his will. The other cause why transgressors are
worthily punished, is because the trespassours either are regenerate, and such
being cleansed before, and falling again to their former filthe, of their own
accord, can not plead for defense that they never received grace: as men who
through their own Freewill, have made frustrate the Grace of God once received,
by their own wickedness: But if they be not regenerate, yet is that damnable
original sin worthily punished: that will through anguish of punishment may
conceive desire to be regenerate, if at least the man that is so chastized be
the child of promise. That God by outward using this mean of scourge vexation
and chastizement may by secret inspiration fashion and frame the will to
obedience. etc.

And thus much hitherto concerning laws and ordinances, for rewardyng virtue
and punishyng vice in Civil government. There follows now an other
absurdity, to wit, where he says, that by Luthers doctrine man is
altogether dispoyled of understanding; deprived of Judgment, bereft of reason,
and driven to that extremity, as to be no better then a natural stoane
thrown out of a man's hand.

Osorius Argument.
Osor. cavil Page 151.
Whosoever do attribute the orderyng of all things to absolute Necessity,
exemptyng freedom from will, do spoil men of their understanding, deprive
them of Judgment and bereue them of reason, and do tra^fforme them into brute
beasts and stoanes.

Luthers doctrine does bind men's actions and wills to Necessity.

Ergo, Luthers doctrine does dispoyle me^ of their senses and turns them into
stoanes.

Answer.
I deny the Mayor of this Argument. In the Minor I distinguish this word
Necessity. Lastly the Argument is altogether vicious: and that for two causes.
Either because Osorius thinks: Osori. double error.
That no Necessity at all byndeth things to be directed by the eternal
providence and ordinance of God: or else he supposes this Necessity to he
such, as must needs exclude all freedom of will. Both which are false. And
first touching Necessity. Luther and other ancient writers do learnedly
affirm: All things are subject to Gods providence.
That the actions of man's life are not subject to fortune: but herein they do
acknowledge the providence of God, which they assign to be the only and
principal gouernesse and guide of ma^s life, as which directs ma^s purposes,
boweth and bends his will, and orders all the enterprises thereof. Moreover
they teach the same providence to be such, as which is not whirled about
through blind and sudden motions (wherein no place is left to the happenynges
of fortune) nor such a providence as must needs depend upon inferior causes,
Chaunceable thinges^ Destiny fortune chance be excluded from being the causes
of actions.
or upon a necessary couplyng together of causes (wherein destiny is excluded)
nor such a providence as is unadvisedly and vncerteinly tossed to and fro,
according to the wandryng chances of fortune (wherein fortune and chance is
taken away) but such a providence, as consists in a certain assured steadfast
and permanent order, The order of superior and inferior causes.
workyng so in the mean whiles by inferior and mixte causes nevertheless,
not as though it were tied to those causes with any such necessary bond of
couplyng, that it may not possibly do otherwise by her own absolute and most
free motione, neither as though those causes could not possibly do otherwise,
but must of Necessity follow the direction of the same providence, whereunto
they be subject. Whereby it comes to pass, that Freewill being occupied in
these mean causes, Freewill is neither altogether bo^d nor altogether free.
neither cease to be altogether free (as being forced by no foreign
constraint, but guided by her own accord:) nor yet remains so absolutely
free, but that it is constrained whether she will or no, to yield to ye direction
of Gods providence, voluntaryly notwithstanding and not coactly. Whereupon
amongst the learned this Necessity is called Necessitas immutabilitatis aut
certitud^nis: Necessity unchangeable and of certeintie.
which though do not urge things with violent coaction, yet for as much as
nothing is in all the creation of nature of so small substance, as can be
without the compass of Gods knowledge, In respect of Gods providence all
things are done of Necessity and not by chance.
therefore albeit many things seem according to our capacities to be done by
chance, yet in respect of Gods providence (if we duly consider the original
and principal cause of things that are done) we shall find nothing done,
but which could not but be done, of very Necessity. I make have to the other
absurdities: to wit: to Osorius his most frivolous brabblynges. For in this
sort he crawleth from man's laws and civil government, to Gods laws,
arguyng as it were in this sort.

If will be nothing auayleable to good life, nor of it self can do nothing but
Sin: then are Gods laws commanded in vain: in vain also are exhortatio^s
and aduertisementes ministered: in vain are blessings and cursinges set down
in the Scriptures. Objection, An Argument taken from the precepts and
exhortatio^s of Gods law. Page 15^.


But no man will say that these are commanded in the Scriptures in vain.

Ergo, this doctrine of Luther is false and execrable, whereby he leaves none
other ability to Freewill, but only to sin, and whereby he binds all
things to necessity.

Answer. August. de gratia and libero arbit. Cap. 16.
This Mayor must be denied, being nothing else but a most manifest cauillation:
to wit: tendyng to this effect, as though God commanded us to do nothing,
but that we might of our own selves perform: whereunto Augustine answers
in this wise. O man in the commandment learn what thou ought to do, in
the punishment learn thy weakness through thine own default: In the prayer
learn from whence thou may obtain. etc. By the law of commaundyng, and
forebyddyng therefore according to Augustine, we come to the knowledge of our
Sin and infirmity, not of our own strength and power, yet is not the law
therefore commanded in vain. For to us that ask in the Sons name, and
acknowledge our infirmity, is Grace promised: which works in us both to
will, and to do: according as the same Augustine does record in the same
place: Let us remember that he does say: make unto your selves a new heart and
n^w Spirit, who has said. I will give you a new heart, and I will give you a
new Spirit. How is it then that he that says make unto your selves a new
heart, faith also, I will give you a new heart? Why does he command if him
self will give? Why does he give, if man be the worker? but because he gives
the thing that he commands, and helps him whom he has commanded that
he may do it? For through grace it comes to pass, that man is endued with a
good will, which was before of an evil will. etc. Therefore by this Argument of
Augustine appears that this word of admonition, exhortation, or of rebukyng
used in the Scriptures is as it were a certain mean, or instrument which the
holy Ghost does use in conuertyng the will of such, as are not yet regenerate:
and in beautifying the first issues of his good gifts in such as are
regenerate, that they may grow to a more rypenesse through Repentance, through
Faith, and through Prayer. And by what wrest of Logic does Osorius gather
ability of Freewill out of the holy ordinances, seeing Augustine does in so
many places so directly gain say him, but especially in his 2. book against
the two Epistles of Pelagius, August. against the 2. Epistles of Pelagius Cap.
10.
writing in this wise. I can see nothing in the whole Scriptures, given by God
in commandment to man, to prove that man has Freewill, that may not be
found either to be given of Gods liberality: or required to set forth the
assistaunce of his grace. This much Augustine.

Briefly to knitte up the matter in a word or two: if you will know to what
end, commandments, couenaunts and exhortations are delivered by God. Learn
this out of S. Paul, if Augustine cannot satisfy you. That is to say: Because
after ye knowledge of good and evil is once received, we are therefore under
the law of Necessity, and because also we are under ye law, Why the
Commandments of the law were ordained out of S. Paul. Romans 3.5.
whether we be able, or not able to perform: the law speaks unto us of
Necessity, that if we be able to perform them, we should ly^e by them: and
that if we despise them every mouth should be stopped, and all the world be
culpable before God. And withal that such as are not yet regenerate in Christ,
understanding how much is commanded beyond their ability and power, may flee
to prayer, and seek for the Mediator, and call upon him for assistaunce of
Grace: on the other side, such as the holy Ghost has endued with more
bountyfull gifts of his gracious liberality, may with more earnest bent
affection, yield them selves thankful to God, who has given them strength to
be able to walk in his ways. Whereby it is come to pass, Man's infirmity
does not take away the Necessity of the law, The Necessity of certeintie does
not diminishe man's endeavor.
that neither the Necessity of the commandment is made frustrate by our
imbecillitie, nor man's endeavor any thing weakened by the Necessity of
infallible certeintie, nor yet freedom or will disabled by Gods providence,
all which you do most falsely report to ensue upon the doctrine of Luther. I
come now at ye last, to that great and most heinous matter, the very chief and
well-spryng of all the other absurdities. To wit: Wherein Luther makes God
to be the Author of all mischief, and charge him with unrighteous dealyng,
in this Argument for sooth. For where as Luther does attribute the successes of
all things, The foreknowledge of GOD does not take away freedom from man.
be they good be they evil to God as to ye chief and principal original, and
does conclude all things under the absolute Necessity of providence, hereupon
the adversary does gather three moustruous inconveniences.

The first, that by this means men have not freedom upon





Osorius Argument.
God does not take away freedom from man's will, nor is Author of evil: but
every man is Author of his own evil. Neither is God injurious to any man, in
executyng his punishment upon him for his offense.

Osorius. Page 152.
Ergo, Luthers doctrine is wicked and heinous, which teaches absolute
Necessity of doing good or evil by the foreknowlede of God, and whereby he
imagines God to be the Author of wickedness.

Answer.
There are extant in the Scriptures many famous and notable testimonies touching
the truth of Gods Praedestination, and foreknowledge of things to come: which
neither Osorius nor all Portingall are able to gaynsay. Of the truth of Gods
Predestination and foreknowledge
Whereupon Necessity of all the actions which we do, must needs ensue, in
respect of the Hypothesis, as Schooleme^ term it. But as touching his
glorious assumption of the heinous inconveniences concurraunt withal: that is
most false. For first neither does the freedom of man's will perish so, but
that men may always willyngly, and voluntaryly choose that, which they will.
Neither is any man charged with such Necessity, as the force of co^straint may
compel him to do that, which he would not: How things may be termed
chaunceable.
And it may come to pass, as is mentioned before, that the things which be
Necessary upon the Hypothesis, being done without the same Hypothesis, may
seem to be chau^ceable, and not Necessary. And by what means then is will
bereft of freedom? unless paraduenture, because God (seeing man's will
inclinable to all wickedness) does not restrain it when he may, for this
cause he may be said to take away freedom from will. But this withstandeth our
disputation of Necessity nothing at all. For although this freedom be helped
to good, yet remains the same nevertheless free to wickedness, in the sense
spoken of before. But he might have helped (you say.) In deed nothing was more
easy. For what ca^ not his omnipote^cie bring to pass without any difficulty?
but what then, I pray you? Ergo, God is unrighteous because when he could give
grace he would not: Truth in deed, if god did owe this grace to any man of
duty: but by what law will you auerre that God was bound to give this grace
of duty? First, God did at the first creation endue the whole nature of
mankind with Freewill: So also if he did suffer mankind aftewardes to be
directed by the same Freewill, I pray you what unrighteousness was there in
him hitherto as yet? But ye will say, that this Freewill is spoiled, and
ineffectual to work spiritual good things: through whose default I pray
you? through Gods default? or man's default? If it were ma^s default: for what
cause then is God accused, as either unjust for not geuyng assitau^ce, or
cruel, for punishyng the Sin, which every of us do commit of no coaction,
but of our own voluntary will?

But besides this he charge GOD to be the original cause of all mischief.
Luther falsely accused to make GOD the Author of wickedness.
If that be true, then must this needs follow, which were execrable to be
spoken: that wicked me^ are unrighteously damned, as whom him self had created
to the end they should be damned, and so does punish them for the offenses,
whereof him self was Author, and procurer at the first. For this is Osorius
objection. Luthers assertion defended against the cavil of Osorius.
For remedy whereof, I perceive that I had need to go circumspectly to work:
least God be disabled in any thing that is due to his omnipotency, or that
more be ascribed to his power, then is agreeable with his Justice. Moreover as
there want not testimonies in the Scriptures, which in utter apparaunce may
seem very well inclinable to either part: so I think it not amysse, to use
herein some aid for the better discovery thereof: Besides this must be had no
small consideration of the simple and unlettered multitude, who once hearing
God to be named the Author of wickedness, and not understanding the matter
aright, will forthwith interpret thereof, as though it might be lawful for
them forthwith to rush into all disorder whatsoever, and that they are unjustly
punished, if they do the evil which God does both will and cause to be done.
Which kind of people I wish to be aduertized, when they hear the direction
and orderyng of all things good or evil to be ascribed unto God, An
admonition to the Readers.
that they Imagine not these words to be so spoken, as though God were willing
to have iniquity committed: That is to say, as though GOD were either
delighted with wickedness, or as though wicked men when they do wickedly, did
therein accomplish Gods will simply and absolutely. August. Enchirid. 100.
And yet neither may this be denied in any wise, yt of the general mass of
all the creation, any one thing ca^ be without the compass of Gods Divine
foreknowledge, or done without his will: albeit we must needs confess with
Augustine that many things are done against his will. Now therefore encombred
(as it were) betwixt these two whirlepooles, how shall we say that he does
either will Sin, which he does forbid and punish? or that he does not will
sin, whenas nothing can be done, God not being wittyng and willing thereunto?

To be the cause of Sin properly ought not to be imputed to God.
Surely as touching Sin, God ought not to be named the Author of Sin
properly: Neither (as Ambrose truly writes) can iniquity issue from thence,
whence flows all righteousness. And yet can not God be excluded from the
direction and rule of Sin altogether, unless we may think that somethyng
may chance in man's life, which the almighty eye of God either sees not, or
that his will wills not. Ambrose of the calling of the Gentiles the second
book the last Chapter.
If he do not see it, where is then his eternal foreknowledge? if the things
which he sees, be done without his knowledge and will, where is his
everlasting omnipotency, which works all in all? and wherewith he is said to
do all things that he will in heaven and in earth? What shall we say then?
Co^mittyng of sin can neither be without the knowledge of God, nor without
his will altogether and by what reason.
If God will not have Sin, why is sin committed, and so wonderfully
ouerflowyng? If he will have sin, how may it be defended that he is
righteous? for after this sort reasons Osorius, as though the righteousness
of God could not be excusable, if God may be supposed either to will Sin, or
to be any cause or procurour of Sin.

Albeit this drift of Osori. whereby he concludes yt God wills not sin,
because he is righteous, may be in some respect yielded unto: Will to be
distinguished in God.
so yt, it have relation to ye same will of God, which has discovered it self
unto us in his express law, which will ye Schoolmen term Voluntate^ sigui,
or if he argue on this wise.

God is righteous.

Ergo, He is not a Sinner.

God is righteousness it self.

Ergo, He can not sin.

This Argument would hold well enough.

But this other Argument can not be good, to say: Osor. Drift.
God is righteous and the founteine of all righteousness.

Ergo, God can not will Sin in any others without prejudice to his own
righteousness.



As though God could not will Sin in some respect not sinnefully, with that
most secret and unsearchable will, wherewith he order^in, and sweetly
disposes all things in heaven and in earth, not empayring in the mean space
any ioate of his own righteousness at all? It is no repugnancie to Gods
righteousness to will sin in some respect without sin.
Nay rather what if even for the self same cause, because he is righteous,
some kind of actions do sometimes burst out, which being committed of men, in
respect of man's nature are Sin: but in respect of God, are not Sin, but
punishementes of Sin, powered fromout his most just Judgment? for it is not
the least office of Justice to punish sin by sin: nor is it by and by
necessary to Judge alyke of the causes them selves, whenas one self same
action does proceed from diverse causes: unless the causes be altogether
correspondent in action. When the Magistrate does execute the offendour, he is
both the cause of his death, and does willyngly cause him to be executed: not
because he delights in his death, but enduced only by necessity of doing
Justice, he does in that respect both rightfully, and necessaryly minister
Justice. But if a private man, or a Russia^ should willyngly put a man to
death, he should be deemed a murderer. When the parent does chastize his
unthrifty child with the rod, he does the same rightfully, yea if he did it
not, he should Sin. But if the brother should beat his brother, or the
servant his fellow servant, the same could not but be culpable. Wherefore in
all manner of actions regard must be had, not only what is done, but how it is
done: There is many times great diversity in causes of oneselfe same action.
so must the end and causes also be considered, which being in number many
times many, and diverse, and not all of one nature, do nevertheless concur.
For it may be (as it does oftentimes come to pass) yt in causes being
co^currau^t in one actio^ may be great diversity. So that one self same cause
may be in one kind of actio^ wicked, and in another actio^, mere
righteousness. It may so come to pass that a man at a time may commit
robbery, or fall into some other heinous wickedness: where if you seek for
the very cause of executyng that action, you may rightly impute it to the
frayltie of man's nature: If you seek the procuryng cause that drove him to
consent, no doubt it was his wicked thought, and corrupt mind, which is
altogether replenished with sin: neither is it to be doubted but that Sin
is engendered out of the corrupt will of man, without the which (as Anselme does
witness) no wicked action is committed. Anselm. de casu Diabo li. Cap. 19.
Whereby appears at the length, that because no uncleanness can be found in
the will of God, therefore his most sacred nature can by no means be defiled
with Sin. But if you be desirous to learn from whence this corruption and
euillnesse of the mind, and imagination does proceed, Calvin him self whom
you accuse very grievously, shall answer you in his own behalf. Calvin
against Pighi. Lib. 5.
This corruption of mind (says he) comes partly by the procurement of
Satan, partly by the frayltie of nature, which man did defile by his own
voluntary fall. Whereupon, he says, when the cause of evil is sought for, we
ought not to seek it else where, then in our selves: but the whole blame thereof
we must lay upon our selves.

Luthers and Caluines doctrine true and agreeable touching the cause of Sin.
You will say then, and how then will these words of Calvin agree with
Luthers doctrine? seeing Luther makes God the Author both of good and evil,
and Calvin makes man the cause of evil? Nay rather by what means can you
forge unto us such a crafty devise of iarryng, in so uniform an agreement of
Judgment, betwixt Luther and Calvin? Calvin supposes that the cause of
evil ought not to be sought for else where, then in man. Luther teaches that
no righteousness ought to be sought for else where then in God only. And where
be these fellows now, which either go about to make man excusable, or God
culpable of unrighteousness by any means? for to this effect te^deth the whole
force of Osor. brablyng against Luther: as though God could not will sin by
any means, but that the glory of his Justice should by and by be blemished.
And because man's will imaginyng or doing wickedly at any time, can not imagine
or do evil without Sin, therefore Osorius dreameth forthwith that it fares
in like manner in Gods will, which is most untrue. For nothing withstandeth at
all, but that many causes of semblable affections may concur oftentimes, Gods
will is not to be measured by the affection of ma^s will, wherein Osorius does
err.
all which nothwithstandyng may not altogether power out semblable force of
operation, after one and semblable sort. And therefore this is no good Argument.

God according to his secret unsearchable will, does sometimes incline the
wills of men to commit horrible mischiefs, and after a certain manner
wills Sin.

Ergo, God may be justly accused of unrighteousness and iniquity.

Which Argument applied in the behalf of man's nature, might seem to be of
some validity perhaps in the opinion of men. But to transpose the same from
men to God, It can not hold. And why so? because there is great difference
betwixt things whereof God is the Author, and things whereof man is the doer.
For even Sins them selves and wickedness, as they come from God are
scourges, yea and that most righteous, and whatsoever is decreed either by his
covered, or discovered will, it is in this respect both holy and righteous,
because the will of God ought always to be accounted for the very foundation
of all righteousness. Upon which matter let us hear what Augustine speaks in
his third book De Trinitate, even his own words. The will of God is the
chief and principal cause of all kinds of actions and motions. Aug. Lib. 3.
de Trinit.
For there is nothing done which proceeds not from that unsearchable and
intelligible wisdom of the most mighty Emperor, according to his Justice
unspeakable, for where does not the almighty wisdom of the highest work as
it wills? which reaches from one end of the world to an other mightily, and
orders all things sweetly, and does not these things only, which being in
daily practice, and by reason of common use are not much marked or marueiled
at, but things also passing all understanding and capacity, and which for
the rareness of use, and strangeness of success, seem marvelous: as are
Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon, earthquakes, mo^sters, and ugly deformed
unnatural shapes of creatures and such like: Of the which no one thing comes
to pass, without the will of God, though it seem to be otherwise in the
Judgment of many persons. And therefore it seemed good to the pha^tasticall
Philosophers to ascribe such unkindly operations to other causes being not
able to discern the true cause thereof, which in power surmounteth all other
causes, to wit, The will of God higher then all other causes.
the will of God: wherefore besides the will of God, there is none other
principal cause of health, sickness, reward, punishment of blessings and
recompenses. This is therefore the only chief and principal cause, from out
the which do flow all things whatsoever: and is it self without beginning, but
endures without endyng.

Let us now gather the Arguments of Augustine into a short abridgement. If the
will of God be the sovereign and principal cause of all motions: what
remains but that Osorius must either deny that Sins are motions: or yield
unto this of necessity, that the same motions are not done without the will of
God: which will nevertheless must be adjudged clear from all reproach.
Moreover if the same motions, which are on our behalf Sinful, be
punishementes for Sin: What should let, why that eue^ the self same sins
should not seem to proceed after a certain manner from God, without any
prejudice of his Justice at all? none otherwise truly, then when as God is
accounted the creator of monsters, Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon,
impassable darkness, untimely byrthes, and yet notwithstanding no ioate of his
majesty and integrity empayred.

An Objection out of the Psalm. Answer.
But we are urged here with an Objection out of the Scriptures, where it is
said, that God is not a God that wills iniquity. Answer. As though Luther
did not perceive this saying of the Prophet well enough? or that he were so
impudent at any time, as that he would contrary to the Prophet deny that sins
raunge immoderately against Gods will? We rehearsed a little erst out of
Augustine: that somewhat may be done against the will of God, which
nevertheless ca^ not happen without his will: Against Gods will and without
Gods will.
In the one part whereof, the unsearchable wisdom of his Divine counsel is
plainly discernable: in the other ye thing that is naturally wicked and
displeasau^t in Gods eyes: So that ye thing, which is of it self and in
respect of it self naturally evil, may become good in respect of Gods
ordinance, and in respect of the end whereunto it is directed by God. The
work of our redemption from sin and death, is a good work of Gods mercy.
But man should never have stood in need of this rede^ptio^, unless death and
sin had happened. Therefore death and sin could not execute their malice,
without the foreknowledge and ordinance of God. So also no less notable is the
work of Gods Justice in executyng his just wrath against Sinners: which
severity of Justice had nevertheless never expressed his wonderful
brightness: if sin had never been committed.

But here I suppose Osorius will not deny that men rushe headlong into
wickedness and Sin, if not by Gods providence, yet by his sufferau^ce at the
least. For it may be, that many things may happen by a man's permission, in the
which he that did permit them may be blameless notwithstanding.

I hear you well and answer to the same, that it is not altogether nothing
that Osorius does allege in deed, and yet this allegation of his
comprehends not all. For first I demand what if Osorius being a Bishop do
suffer Gods flock committed to his charge to starve by defraudyng the^ the
necessary food of the word, whom of duty he ought to cherish with all
diligence and care? What if the Shepherd do willyngly suffer ye maggotte to
pester the sheep? or what if the Master should suffer the servant to perish,
whose perplexity he might have releued by puttyng his hand to in time? may not
we justly accuse Osorius of fraud for not feedyng? or can Osorius acquit him
self by any slipper devise of negligence in this behalf? If in common
conversation of life, the man that will not repel injury when he may, be
adjudged in every respect as blameworthy as if he offers the injury him
self, by what means can God (who^ you say does permit sins to be done)
either deemed be excusable in respect of this sufferaunce only? or how can you
charge us as accusing him of injustice? because we say that he does not only
permit, but also will sin after a certain manner. Which thing Augustine does
very well declare. If we suffer (says August.) August. against I^lia^ the
Pelag. Lib. 5. Cap. 3.
such as are under our correction to do wickedly in our sight, we must needs
be adjudged accessaries to their wickedness. But God does permit Sin to
raunge without measure even before his eyes, wherein if he where not willing,
surely he would not suffer it in any wise, and yet is be righteous
notwithstanding. etc. Wherefore your allegation of bare Sufferaunce does neither
help your cause, nor disaduantageth ours any thing at all.

But go to: let us somewhat yield to this word of yours Sufferaunce, whereupon
ye stand so stoughtely: yet will ye not deny, but that this Sufferaunce of God,
is either coupled together with his will, or altogether sundered from it: If ye
confess ye will and Sufferaunce be joined together: how can God be said then
either to suffer the thing which he wills not, or to will the thing, whereof
him self is not after a certain manner the cause: but if you sunder will from
Sufferaunce, so that Gods Sufferaunce be made opposite to his will: That is to
say, contrary to the determinate counsel of God, in bringyng any thing to
pass: Surely this way your bare Sufferau^ce will not be sufferable, but
foolish, false, and ridiculous. For neither can any thing be done without Gods
Sufferaunce, but must be done by his will: and again nothing sounds more
against the conuenience of reason, that any thing may be done with his will,
otherwise the^ as him self has decreed it to be done. But if so be that ye
set Gods Sufferaunce opposite to his will, namely to that will, wherewith he
vouch safeth and accepts any thing, verily it may so be, that some one thing
may be executed by Gods Sufferaunce, yet altogether against his will: so that
we forget not in the mean space, that this Sufferaunce is not idle and
fruitelesse, but altogether effectual: not much unlike the orderly
proceedings in Judgments, whenas the Judge delivers over the trespassour
to be executed: it is commonly seen that the Sufferaunce of the Judge, does
work more in the execution of the offendour, the^ the act of the executioner,
and yet the Judge is not altogether exempt from being the cause of his death,
though he be clear of all blame in that respect. And therefore to make you
conceive our meaning more effectually Osorius, you may understand by the
premises: Gods will taken two manner of ways. The secret will of God that is
usually called his good pleasure. Gods will discovered in his word is termed,
Voluntas Signi.
That the will of God, is to be taken two manner of ways, either for that
unsearchable will, not manifested unto us, wherewith things may happen
according to to the determined decree of his purposed counsel, whereunto all
things are directed: And in this sense or signification we do affirm that
God does will all things that are done, and that nothing at all is done in
heaven or in earth, that he would not have to be done. Or else how should he be
called Omnipotent, if the successes of things be other, then as he has decreed
them? Secundarely the will of God may be taken for that, which by express word
and commandment he has revealed unto us, and which being done he accompteth
acceptable in his sight. And in this sense. The faithful and godly only do
execute the will of God, even that will, wherewith he can not will nor allow
anythyng, but pure and good. After this manner is that will fully disclosed, and
ensealed unto us in his Scriptures, wherewith God is said to be a God that does
not will Sin.

According to that former will which is hidden from us, and is nevertheless
always just, and discovered unto us but in part by his word, as there is
nothing done without his providence and foreknowledge: so in this sense we do
affirm, that he wills nothing at all, but that, which is of all parts most
pure, and most righteous, be it never so secret. For even as it is hidden from
the knowledge of all men, what shall come to pass, by the purposed
appointement of God: so shall nothing come to pass, but that which he has
decreed upon before: neither should any thing at all be done, if he were
altogether unwilling thereunto. Finally to conclude in few words, all
whatsoever concerns this present discourse. God is not cause of evil
according to his will revealed by hi^ word.
God can not be said to be properly, and truly the very cause of sin,
according to that will, which he would have to be revealed unto us in his
Scriptures: And yet if the co^currau^ce of causes must be derived from the
first original, surely God ought not be excluded altogether from the orderyng
and appointment of sin. From whence if we respect the mean and second
causes, it is undoubted true, that mankind does perish through his own
default. For no man living sins unwillingly. But if we turn our eyes to
the first agent, and principal cause, by ye which all inferior causes have
their mouyng. Then is this also true, that all second and subordinate causes
are subject to the eternal providence and will of GOD. Gods will can not be
exempt altogether from the orderyng of causes.
And therefore both these may be true. That man's destruction comes through
his own default. And yet that therein the providence of God bears the sway,
without any prejudice at all to his Justice. Ma^s, destruction comes of
himself and yet not without Gods providence.


But this providence notwithstanding is altogether vnslayned: for albeit Gods
everlasting purpose be said to be the cause of our sinnesiull actions, yet are
those Sins in respect of Gods acceptaunce, meare righteousness. For GOD in
most upright disposed order does by Sin punish Sin. And therefore with those
Sins (in that they are scourges of Gods Justice) God does worthily execute
his just Judgment against me^, which although his pleasure be to use otherwise
according to his unsearchable counsel, either to execute his Judgment upon
the reprobate, or to manifest his mercy toward his elect, neither is he
injurious to ye one in exactyng yt which is due: neither culpable in ye other
sort in forgeuyng that, which he might have exacted. These two things therefore
especially be to be believed to be inseparable in God (though ma^s capacity ca^
scarsely atteine hereunto) the first. That there is no wickedness with God.
Secondly. That God has mercy of whom it pleases him to have mercy, and does
harden their hearts, who^ he wills to be hardened. Certain actions in
respect of man may be sins in respect of God may be righteous.


Now that we have spoken sufficiently in the defense of Gods Justice, and
acquitted it clear from all quarellsome accusation: to return again to our
former question. God is the cause and not the cause of sins, in sundry
respects.
If Osorius do demand now, if God be the cause of Sin? Because I will
protract no time: I answer in two words. That in several and sundry
respects, it is both the cause, and not the cause. Now let us see, how this
will hang together.

First, I call him the cause, not because he distilleth new poison into man, as
water or other liquour is powered into empty caskes from somewhere else: for that
needs not: for every man ouerfloweth more then enough already with faultynes
natural, though no new flames of corruption be kyndeled a fresh: but because
he forsakes our old nature, or because he withholdeth him self from renewyng
us with grace: Because nature being not helped waxes daily worse and worse of
it self, without measure, and without end: Whereupon Augustine debatyng of
man's induration, speaks not unfitly on this wise. August. de Praedest. and
great. Cap. 4
But as touching that which follows: He does harden whom he will. Here the
force of man's capacity is overwhelmed with the strangeness of the word. But
it must not be so taken as though God did begin to harden ma^s heart, which
was not infected before. For what is hardness else then resistaunce of Gods
commandments? which who so thinks to be the work of God, because of this
saying: He does harden whom he will, let him behold the first beginning of
man's corruption, and mark well the commandment of God: the disobedience
whereof made the heart to offend, and let him truly confess, that whatsoever
punishment befalls him sithence that first corruption, be suffers it
righteously and deservedly. For God is said to harden his heart whom he will
not mollify: so is he said also to reject him, whom he will not call, and to
blind them, whom he will not enlighten. For whom he has Predestinate them
has he called. etc. How blynding and hardening is to be taken with God.


2. Moreover after this withdrawyng of Grace, this also follows thereupon.
That God does righteously minister occasion of sinnyng in the wicked and
reprobate, and maruelously enclineth the hearts of men, not only to good, but
also to evil: If we may believe the testimony of Augustine. Who in his book De
Libero Arbit. and Great. alledgyng certain testimonies out of the Apostle. Aug.
de lib. Arb. and great. Cap. 21.
Where it is said that God gave them up to vile affections. Romans 1. And again,
he delivered them up unto a reprobate mind. 2. Thessa. 2.
And in an other place. Therefore God does send them strong delusion that they
should believe lies. By these and such like testimonies of Sacred Scriptures
appears sufficiently, that God does work in the hearts of men, to bend
incline and bow their wills, whereunto him lists either to good, according
to the riches of his mercy, or to wickedness, according to their own
deserts: to wit, by his Judgment sometimes revealed in deed, and sometimes
secret: but the same always most righteous. For this must be holde^ for
certain, and unshaken in our minds. That there is no iniquity with God. And
for this cause when ye read in holy writ that me^ are deceived or amazed, or
hardened in heart, doubt hereof nothing at all, but that their sinful
deseruyngs were such before, as that they did well deserve the punishment that
follows. etc. The premises considered, and for as much as God does use the
peruersenes of men (will they nill they) to these purposes and ends, whereunto
he has decreed them, may any man be doubtful hereof, but that God ought not
by any means be excluded from the disposing of sins?

3. Besides this also, whereas the holy Ghost misdoubteth not to speak in the
Scriptures, after this usual phrase of speech, to wit. The true cause of
sin is properly in man not in God.
That God does harden men's hearts: does deliver up into reprobate minds: does
dazell with blyndnesse: does make ears deaf: does lead into error: and such
like. How shall we say, that sins do happen now without God? Albeit neither
do we say that God is therefore properly and simply the cause of wickedness,
whenas we are of our selves more then enough the true and natural cause of
wickedness. Be it therefore that the will of man is the cause of sin: but
seeing this will must of Necessity be subject to the will of God, and be
directed by the same: surely it may not be lawful to exclude God from the
direction and disposition of sins. If Osorius shall think him self not yet
fully satisfied with this answer, he may be resolved again if he will with
this. That the whole cause of sin is resiaunt in man him self, and in his
corrupt will: but the cause wherefore sin does become sin, must be ascribed
to Gods good ordinance: in the one whereof is sin, and the punishment for
sin, as Augustine makes mention. Out of the other affections be ordained, yt
such affections as be, may be wicked: which affections notwithstanding are not
in the guidyng cause it self, but are by him guided to some good purpose and
end: of which doctrine let us hear what August. does him self testify and
profess. August. Enchirid. Cap. 95.
It is out of all controversy (says he) That God does well even in suffering
all things whatsoever: yea even in the things that be wickedly done: for eue^
those he suffers to be done not without his most just Judgment: now
whatsoever is just, the same is good surely: Therefore albeit the things that
are wicked in this respect that they are wicked be not good: yet that not only
good, be, but evil also, is nevertheless good. For if it were not good that
wickedness should be, surely the almighty goodness it self would by no means
permit it to be done, who without doubt can as easily not permit the things
that he will not, as he ca^ easily do the things that be done. If we do not
firmly believe this, the grou^dworke of our faith (wherein we do confess that
we do believe in God the Father almighty) is in great hassard. For God is not
called omnipote^t for any other cause in very deed, but because he is able to
do what he will, the operation of whose Divine will the will of no creature ca^
hinder or prejudice by any means at all. etc. This much Augustine. And because
I will not be tedious, I argue upon Augustines words in this wise.

An Argument out of August.
Every good thing does proceed from God as from the Author and guider thereof.
But it is good that wickedness be.
Ergo, God is the Author and directer that wickedness comes to pass.
But here some Julian of Pelagius sect and with him our Portingall Prelate
Osorius will brawle and cavil: That those deeds of wickedness are committed
through the sufferaunce of God forsakyng them, and not by his omnipotent power
workyng in the^: meaning hereby I am sure: That God does permit wicked things
to be done in deed, but by his power forces no man to do wickedly. August.
against Iulyan the Pelagi. 5. book Cap. 3.
Against such persons Augustine does mightly oppose him self even to their
teeche, prouyng those things to be done by Gods power, rather then by his
Sufferau^ce, and for more credit voucheth a place of S. Paul. Who knittyng
those two together: to wit, Sufferaunce and Power, writes after this manner:
What and if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, did
suffer with long patience the vessels of his wrath prepared to destruction?
etc. Romans 9. Afterward produces many examples and reasons taken out here and
there of the Prophetical Scriptures, to make good his Assertion Achab was
Deliued over to give credit to the lyeng mouths of the false Prophets.
First, in that he believed a lie, you perceive that he sinned. 1. Kings, Cap.
12.
Moreover in that he was given over not without cause, you conceive the
punishment of sin. I demand of you now, by whom he was given over? you will
answer of Satan: neither will I deny it, though it seem rather that he was
deceived by him, then delivered over. But go to. Who did send Satan? but he
which said, Go forth and do so, unless Osorius do suppose that to send forth,
and to suffer, be all one, which besides him no man else will say, I suppose.

By like Judgment of God, Roboam is said to be driven to harken to sinister
Counsel, because he should refuse the counsel of the Elders. And from whence
came this I pray you but from him of whom it is written in holy writ? 1.
Kings 12.
For it was the ordinance of the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which
he speak by the mouth of his Prophet. 1. Kings. 15.12.

The like must judged of Amasias, who had not fallen into that peril if he had
harckened to Ioas the king of Israel, now what shall we allege to be the
cause why he did not harken to the good counsel of Ioas? Here will Osorius
run back again after his wounted manner, to Freewill, or to Satan ye mouyng
cause. 2. parillipo, Cap. 25.
And this is true in deed in respect of the second and isntrumental causes.
But Gods sacred Oracles being accustomed to search out the sovereign and
principal cause of things, do raise them selves higher, and do answer, that
this was wrought by God him self, who did not only suffer him, but of his
determinate counsel directed him also thereunto, because he would avenge him
self of the king, for his abominable Idolatry.

1. Paralipo. 12.
When David caused the people to be nombred, I know that Satan is said to
provoke him thereunto, as we read in the Chronicles. But let us mark what the
Scripture speaks else where. And the wrath of the Lord being kindeled against
Israel, he stirred up David to number his people. 2. Paralipo. 24.
2.Sam. 24. And nothing withstandeth truly, but that both may be true.
Neither is it against co^uenie^cie of reason (as Augustine truly witnesses)
that one self wickedness may be a punishment, and scourge of sin upon the
wicked, by the malicious practice of the Devil, and by Gods just Judgment
also, seeing it skilleth not whether God bring it to pass by his own power, or
by the service of Satan. Esaias the Prophet cries out in his Prophecy. Esaias.
63.
O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our hearts
from thy fear? And in Ezechiell GOD speaks by the mouth of his Prophet.
Ezech. 14.
And if the Prophet be deceived I the Lord have deceived him.

Let us consider Job him self the most singular pattern of perfect patience,
Job. 1.
whom being turmoyled with infinite engynes of Satan's Temptations all men will
confess to be plagued by the horrible malice of Satan. True it is, will you
say: and with Gods sufferau^ce withal. Be it so. But I demand further, who
made ye first motion of Job, when God said on this wise? Have thou considered
my servant Job? And wherefore did God make this motion first. But that it may
appear that the Enemy is not permitted only, but made a Minister also to make
trial of man's patience? Furthermore after that he was robbed and spoiled of
all his goods and Cattels, and thrown into extreme poverty, I would feign
learn who stale those goods from him? That did the Caldeans and Sabees will
Osorius say, I am sure: which is true in deed. Yet Job does not so acknowledge
it: But liftyng him self up higher, and entryng into a more deep
consideration of that sovereign providence, which orders and disposes the
service of all the works of his creation at his own pleasure, professes
earnestly, that none else dispoyled him of his goods, but he that gave them.
Job. 1.
The Lord gave (says he) and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the
Lord. etc.

But that wonderful force and unmeasurable power of Gods wisdom, and
providence, disposing all things according to his everlasting purpose, and
with outstretched compass spreadyng it self far, and wide, abroad
throughout all degreees and successes of things, The means of Gods providence
is notified by example.
is not discovered unto us by any one thing more notably discernable, the^ in
the death of his son Jesus Christ: in that most innocent Passion of all
other, ye most innocent death (I say) of our Savior Jesus Christ: In ye which
as there were many causes going before, and the same also not a little differyng
each from other, yet amongst them all was there none, but was not only joined
with Gods sufferaunce, but was long before also foreordeyned by his will,
decreed by his wisdom, yea and ordered almost by his own hand. For
otherwise, in what sense is he called The Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world, whenas they were not yet created that should kill him? and when as
yet were no sins committed by mankind, which might procure Gods wrath. If
God from the furthest end of eternity, in his everlasting foreappointed
wisdom and determination, had decreed upon nothing that should cause those
things to come to pass afterward, through vnauoydeable Necessity?

Out of those matters heretofore debated and argued, two things may you note,
Osorius, whereof the one concerns Luthers doctrine, and is true: the other
touches your suggestions and is false. For as to the first (wherein Luther
does discourse upon Necessity, against the mainteynours of chance and
fortune) ca^ no more be denied by you: then Gods providence in government of
the present time, and foreknowledge of things to come can be any ways
deceaueable. On the other side, where as you do with so gorgeous colors and
glorious titles blaze forth the beauty of man's Freewill, ioynyng in league
herein with the old Philosophers, ancient Masters of ignorance, and
especially Cicero, bendyng your whole force to overthrow the doctrine of
necessity, what else does your whole practice herein? the^ the same which
August. did long sithence worthily reprehe^d in Cicero? To wit: Whiles you
strive so much to make us free, you practice nothing else but to make us
horrible blasphemours, and withal endeavor to undermine the vnpenetrable
Castle of Gods foreknowledge. For who is able to foretell things to come,
which he never knew? or preuente the assured certeintie of successes of things,
without the utter subversion of the infallible providence of Gods
foreknowledge? Wherefore I would wish you to be well advised Osorius, least
whiles you think to molest Luther with your outrageous barkyng, for affirmyng
an infallible. Necessity flowyng from above, from out the founteine of Divine
operation in direction of things: ye fall your self headlong at the last in
this co^bersome, Not to strive against Luther: but to war against God
himself.
gulf to be adjudged not (...), but plainly (...): and being not able to
endure the doctrine of Necessity, ye entangle your self unto such an
inextricable maze of impiety, as that ye shall be thought to practice the
aba^donyng of the vndeceueable certeintie of Gods most Sacred Scriptures out of
heaven, after the example of that your fine Cicero, whiles ye affect Cicero to
much in the nymblenesse of your style. For what else can be gathered out of that
detestable discourse of Cicero? Cicereos discourse, against Gods providence is
detestable.
(as August. calls it) or out of this execrable opinion of Osor? (if he will
be ye man he seems for). How can those things be avoided, which God does know
shall come to pass most assuredly? but that Necessity must be granted by the
doctrine of providence: or Necessity being excluded, Gods providence also be
rent asunder withal? For after this manner does Cicero dispute in his books De
natura Deorum. Cicero de nature. deor. lib. 2.
If things to come (says he) be foreknowen, then it must needs follow that
every thing must proceed in his due order: but for as much as nothing is done
without some cause, therefore must a due order and knittyng together of causes
be granted of Necessity. Whereupon must needs ensue, yt all things yt are
done, are performed by vnauoydeable Necessity: If this be granted (says he)
all Civil society is rooted out, Laws are established in vain: correction,
praising, dispraysing, good counsel are ministered in vain, neither any
ordinance devised for the advancement of virtue, and punishment of vice
serves to any purpose at all. August. de Ciuitat. dei. 5. Book Cap. 9.
Now because these heinous and dangerous absurdities are not tolerable in any
weal public. Therefore (says Augustine) this man will not yield, that there
should be any foreknowledge of things to come. So that by this means he
forces the Reader into these inconveniences to choose one of these two: either
that man's will is of some force, or else that things must be determined upon
before of Necessity: being of opinion that they can not be both at one time
together, but that if the one be allowed, the other must needs be abolished.
If we lean unto Gods foreknowledge and providence, then must Freewill have no
place, on the other side if we mainteyne Freewill, then foreknowledge of things
to come, must be banished. So ye whiles Cicero, being otherwise a man of
wonderful experience (as August. says) endeavors to make us free, does bring
us wtin ye compass of sacrilege as horrible robbers of Gods foreknowledge: and
being ignorant him self how to unite this freedom and foreknowledge
together, rather suffers God to be despoyled of his wisdom, then men to be
left destitute of Freewill: which error Augustine does worthily reprove in
him. Aug. de Ciuitat dei lib. 5. Cap. 9.
For it is not therefore a good consequent, because the well orderyng and
disposition of all causes is in the hands of God, that man's Freewill therefore
is made fruitelesse altogether: for that our wills them selves being the very
causes of human actions, are not exempt from that well disposed order of
causes, which is always unchangeable with God, and directed by his
providence. And therefore he that with his wisdom does comprehend the causes
of al things, the same also in the very causes them selves; could not be
ignorant of our wills, which he did foreknow should be the causes of al our
doyngs.

Go to now. Let us compare with this blind Philosophy of Cicero, the Divinity
of Osorius in all respects as bussard-lyke. For as Cicero does uphold the
freedom of man's will, by the overthrow of Gods providence and predestination,
and contrariwise by the overthrow of man's Freewill, does gather and establish
the certeintie of Gods providence, supposing that they can not stand both
together: In like manner our Osorius imaginyng with him self such a perpetual
and unappeasable disagreement betwixt Necessity in orderyng of causes, and
man's Freewill, that by no means they may argree together: what does he mean
else, the^ pursuyng the platteforme that Cicero before him had builded in the
couplyng of causes, but to come to this issue at the length, either to
establish the doctrine of Necessity with Luther? or agreeyng with Cicero,
utterly to root out the foreknowledge and providence of God? Aug. in the same
book and Chap.
for if to choose be the property of will, then are not all things done of
Necessity, according to Osorius opinion. Again, if not of Necessity, then is
there no perpetual orderyng of causes, after Ciceroes suppositio^. If there be
no perpetual order of causes, neither is there any perpetual order of
things, by the foreknowledge of God, which can not come to pass, but by the
operation of causes precedent. A subtle Sophisme practizyng to persuade mere
absurdities.
If the perpetual orderyng of things, be not in the foreknowledge of God,
the^ all things atteyne not ye successes, whereunto they were ordained. Again
if things atteyne not the successes, whereunto they were ordained, then is
there in God no foreknowledge of things to come. Let us compare now the first
of this subtle Sophisme with the last.

An execrable conclusion.
The choice of man's will is free.

Ergo, There is in God no foreknowledge of things to come.

Let Osorius advise him self well, what answer he make to this Argument. If
he hold of Ciceroes opinion, what remains but he must needs condemn us of
Sacrilege as Cicero does, whiles he endeavors to make us free? But I know he
will not hold with this in any case: and in very deed, Ciceroes Argument ought
not to be allowed, for that he does not discende directly in this Argument from
proper causes, to proper effects. For whereas Freewill is mainteyned in the
one proposition, this is no cause wherefore it should be denied that things
are done by Necessity. As also this is not a good consequent likewise, because
Necessity is taught to consiste in an unchangeable orderyng of causes, and in
Gods foreknowledge, that therefore nothing remains effectual in our Freewill.
The suttletie of the Sophisme is disclosed.
And why so? because agreeyng herein with Augustine, we do confess both, to
wit: As Well that God does know all things before they be done: and that for
this cause ye things foreknowen are done of Necessity. August. de Ciuit. Dei
Lib. 5. Cap. 9.
And that we also do willyngly work whatsoever we know, and feel to be done
by us, not without our own consentes.

But you will Reply. That Luther contrary to Augustines doctrine both leave
man's life altogether destitute of Freewill, tyeng all our actions fast bound
in the chains of vnauoydeable Necessity. I do answer. As Luther does not
defend every absolute and vnaduoydeable Necessity, Luther does neither teach
every Necessity absolutely, nor take away freedom from all men.
but that which we spoke of before, of the consequence: No more does he take
away all freedom from will, neither from all men: but that freedom only,
which is set contrary and opposite to spiritual bondage: no nor yet does he
exempt all men from that freedom, but such only, as are not regenerate with
better Grace in Christ Jesus. For whosoever will inueste such persons with
freedom, is an utter enemy to Grace.

And no less false also is all that whatsoever this cou^terfaite Divine does
now ground him self upon, and has more then an hundred times urged touching
this opinion of Necessity. For in this wise he brauleth against Luther and
Calvin.

If the things that we do, are done of mere Necessity, and decreed upon from
the furthest end of eternity.

Surely whatsoever wickedness we do commit, as not lead by our own
voluntary motion, but drawn by perpetual constraynte, is not to be adjudged
for Sin.

Which triflyng Sophisme we have utterly crushed in pieces before, by the
authority of Augustine. Neither came ever into the minds of Luther, or
Calvin to mainteyne any such Necessity, which by any co^pulsary external
coaction should enforce will to commit wickedness unwillingly. For no man
sins, but he that sins voluntaryly. Albeit none of our actions are
destitute of a certain perpetual direction of the almighty Lord and
Governor, yea though neither the sins them selves can not altogether escape
the provident will and foreknowledge of God: Yet is not the perverse
frowardness of the wicked any thing the less excusable, but that they ought
to receive co^digne punishment according to their wicked deservings: for
whosoever has voluntaryly offended, deserves to be punished. And therefore
herein Osorius frivolous Divinity, does not a little bewray her nakedness:
that whereas debatyng about the matter of sin, he seems not to have learned
this lesson yet out of Augustine, that sin and the punishment of sin is all
one. August. de Nature. and Great. Cap. 22.
And therefore mainteynyng one lie by an other, does conclude as wisely: that it
is not agreeable to equity (sithence men are Instruments only, and God the
worker of all things) that they should be condemned as malefactors which are
only Instruments, with as good reason as if the sword wherewith a man is
slain should be adjudged faulty, and not the person that slew the man with
the sword: Osorius. page 152.
Which I my self would not deny to be against all reason, if yt matter were
as Osor. would apply it. But who did ever speak or dream, that men were
Instruments only in doing wickedness? and that God is the Author and worker
of all mischief? These be ye words of Osorius, not Luthers nor Caluines.

An answer to the false divinity of Osorius.
That wicked men are Sawes and Instruments many times in the hands of God for
the punishment of sin, this not Luther only. but Esaias also, does boldly
confess. Go to. And will you therefore conclude that men are nothing else, but
instruments, and tools only? very wisely I warraunt you: deriuyng your
Argument from the proposition Exponent, to the Exclusive: nay rather
maliciously wrestyng and peruertyng all things from the truth, to slanderous
cauillyng. August. does sundry times witness that men's wills are subject to
Gods will, and are not able to withstand it. Aug. de Correp, and great. cap. 14.
For as much as the wills them selves (says he) God does fashion as him
likes, and when him lysteth, and that our wills are no further auayleable,
then as God both willed, and foresawe then to be auayleable. August. de
Ciuitat dei. lib. 5. Cap. 9.
Whereby you see, that Gods almighty power does work in our wills, as in a
workeshoppe: and when he purposes to do any thing, that then he does neither
tra^spose our wills otherwise, or to other purposes then by ye service of our
own wills. And yet does it not therefore follow, ye men's wills are nothing
else then Iustrumentes, and tools only of Gods handyworke, as ye thing that of
it self does nothing but as it is carried, and whirled about, hither and
thither without any his own proper motion, through the operation of the agent
cause only. Truly Augustine says very well. Aug. de peccatis meritis. lib. 2.
Cap. 5.
We do not work by wishinges only (says he) least hereupon cauillation
arise that our will is effectual to procure to live well. Because GOD does not
work our salvation in us, as in insensible stoanes, or in things which by
nature were created void of reason and will. etc. In deed God does work in
the wills and hearts of men, and yet not rollyng or tossyng them as stoanes, or
driuyng and whirlyng them as things without life, as though in enterprising
and attemptyng of things, the minds and wills of men were carried about by
any foreign constraint and Divine coaction, without any voluntary motion of the
intelligible mind. And therefore Osorius does hereof friuolously, and falsely
forge his cankred cauillation, and maliciously practizeth to procure this
doctrine of Luther? to be maligned: As though we did devise man to be like unto
a stoane, or imagined God to be the only Author and worker of mischief, Oso.
Caui^.
because we do teach that men's wills are subject to Gods will, as it were
secundary causes.

Certes if that ^ August. writes begrau^ted for truth: That Gods will is the
cause of things that are done. August. in his treatise upon Genesis against
Manichaeus. lib. 1. Cap. 2.
Why should the same be less alowable in Luther, or not as false in each
respect in Aug. since they both speak one self sentence and be of one
judgment therein. Neither is it therefore a good consequent that Osor. does
fantasy: The only will of God to be so the cause of sin, as though man's
will did nothing reproueable for sinnyng, or punishable for deseruyng. For to
this end tends the whole cutted conclusion of all Osorius brabblynges. But if
you have no skill to know the nature of a distinction as yet, you must be
taught, that it is one thing to permit a sin voluntar^ly, an other thing to
commit a sin voluntaryly. Whereof the first is proper to God, the other is
peculiar to men: the first may be done without all offense, the other can be
done by no means without wickedness. Whereas GOD is said to will sin after
a certain manner, the same is said to be done according to that will (which
they call Gods good pleasure) neither evil, nor without the truth of the
Scriptures. And yet it follows not hereupon necessaryly, that God is the
only and proper cause of sin: How causes are called only and proper causes.
No: for this is accounted the only cause, which excludes all other causes
besides it self: So is that cause called the proper cause, which does respect
only one end, yea and that also the last end, in respect whereof it is
accounted to be the proper cause. Whereas therefore sin is ye last end not of
Gods will, but of man's perverseness, we do affirm that it is not done in
deed without Gods will, but that man is the proper cause thereof, and not God.
For if the causes of things must be proportioned by their ends, surely sin
is not ye last end of Gods will, in respect that it is evil, but in respect
that it is ye scourge and plague of sin, and to speak Paul's own words:
Romans 3.
The showing forth of Gods righteousness, and the fear of God, then which
end nothing can be more better or more holy. And where is now that iniquity,
and cruelty of God, Osorius, which by misconstruyng Luther wickedly and
maliciously, your fruitless Logic takes no fruit of, but which your
deuilishe Spirit and slanderous cursed fury does corrupt. But that I may not
seem to stand to much upon refutyng this toye, lettyng slip many things
here in the mean whiles, which make nothing to the purpose, nor conteyne any
other thing almost in them but vain hautynesse of speech, Tragical
exclamations, madness, feeuers, frensies, spittyngs, reproaches, horrible
co^tumelies, wherewith this unmannerly Divine has most filthely defiled whole
papers, I will come to those places, which carry a certain show of less
scoldyng and more Scripture. After this manner the vermin crawleth foreward.

Page 154.
But that ye may perceive how illfauouredly your Doctors have interpreted
those testimonies of Paul, which you have heaped up together, I think it
expedient to disclose the meaning of Paul. And that this may be done more
orderly, it behooves to note diligently to what end Paul gathered all those
reasons together.

It is well truly. This cruel scourgemotto^ weried thoroughly with whippyng poor
Luther miserably, and unmercifully buffetyng him, does now at the length hyde
his rod under his gown and begins to creep to high desk, and will teach
somewhat (and God will) out of ye Scriptures, so that we shall need nothing
now, but a Camel to dance, whiles this Assehead minstrell strikes up his
drum. And therefore harken in any wise you blind buzardly Lutherans, you
caluish Caluinistes, and you foolish Bucerans, since you be so blockish by
nature, that of your selves you can conceive nothing of the Apostles doctrine
ye may now at the last (I warrant you) learn of this Portingall Thales the
pure and sincere Interpretation of Paul's discourse, touching the
Predestination of the Gentiles, and the reiection of the Jews, whereof he
debateth in all those his three Chapters. 9.10.11. The understanding whereof,
because neither Luther himself, nor any of all the rest of Luthers School
were able to conceive: it is good reason that we not only attentively harken
unto, but also without controlement believe this new pyked caruer, not of
sentences only, but a planer of words also, whiles he do lay open before our
eyes ye very natural meaning of that place, to be sensibly felt, even to the
uttermost tittle thereof.

And for as much as there be two things chiefly handled by Paul in these
three chapters. Paul's meaning expounded according to Osorius.
First, wherein he reioyseth with the Gentiles for that their calling and most
prosperous knowledge of the light of the Gospel. Seco^darily, wherein he
lamenteth the lamentable fall of the Jews, and their most sorrowful blindenes,
and taking occasion hereupon, does forth with enter into a discourse of faith,
and the infallible certeintye of Gods promises. For whereas that blessedness was
promised to the posterity of Abraham, here might some scrupule have troubled
his mind, as there wanted not of the Jews some that pyked hereout matter to
cavil upon, as though God had broken the promise that he once had made, as one
that having obliged himself before with so many couenauntes, and promises to
this generation, did now contrary to his oath cast them of and despise them. S.
Paul valiauntly impugning the disorderous reproaches and cauillations of these
with sundry forcible reasons, does fortify this his defense with iiij.
Arguments chiefly. First, that this promise of the blessing was made in deed
to Abraham, and Israel, and to their posterity: but this promise in as much
as is spiritually to be taken, did not so restrain it self only to that
external Family alone after the kindred of the flesh, as that it noted not
under the same fellowshyppe and kindred of Israel, the Gentiles also, such
especially as were endued with like sincerity of faith. He adds furthermore,
Romans 9.
that albeit the same promise did concern those Gentiles chiefly, which joined
themselves to Christ, yet the same was not so wholly translated to the Gentiles
(the Jews being forsaken) but that a great portion of these also (remnaunts as
it were of that lamentable shipwreck) being preserved: should be partakers of
the same promise and blessedness together with the Gentiles.

Romans 10.
In the third place that it came to pass through their own villainy and
unbelief, and not of any inconstancy on Gods behalf, that this promise of God
did so much fail them but that they did exclude themselves rather from the
benefit of Gods promise.

Romans 11.
Lastly that neither this reiection should continue so for ever, but that it
should once come to pass (as the Apostle prophecieth) that the fulness of the
Gentiles being accomplished, the whole nation of the Israelites recovering at
the length the former grace of their ancient promise, should be restored
again to the benefit of their former blessing.

Uerily I do confess, that this interpretation of Osorius is not altogether
amiss: wherein I see nothing yet false, or newly devised: moreover nothing
spoken of here, that has not long sithence been spoken, yea and with a far
more plain lightsomnesse by our expositors: The disposicion of Paul's
discourse of predestination and election after the interpretation of the
faithful.
for we being long ago sufficienly enstructed in Paul's school, have
understood well enough without Osorius schooling, ye that promise was peculiar
to the seed of Israel, being the children of promise, and not to the Children
after ye flesh: Moreover neither are we ignorant hereof, that that blindenes
happened not to all Israel but in part only, not of any inconstancy on Gods
behalf, but that they fell themselves from true righteousness, by their own
default, as people following the righteousness which came not by faith, but
flattering themselves in observing the works of the law. Furthermore that
which Thapostle does prophecy shall come to pass concerning the restoring
again of that whole nation at the length: as we all heartily wish for, so no
man (I suppose) is so blockishe, but does understand sufficiently, all
whatsoever Paul has spoken of this matter by his own writing, though Osorius
did never interpret it.

Osorius. page 152.
And again touching the examples of Isaac and Jacob set down by Paul, whom
Gods election would, should be preferred before their brethren, though elder in
birth in the division of the Fathers patrimonye? We are neither ignorant, nor
forgetful thereof: whereupon we do nothing disagree from Osorius in conceauing
the same thing under the types and figures of those persons, and do profess
in as many words, that neither the prerogative of kindred, nor works, nor yet
the law, but that Gods election, calling, and grace does make the true
Israelites. Forasmuch therefore as our expositours in all these points of
doctrine, have nothing at all hitherto swarued from the truth of Paul's
doctrine, or your interpretation, what corrupt exposition is that at the length
of these our Interpretours, wherewith you are so much offended? forsooth, (say
you) because they do not sufficiently enough conceive the very end, whereunto
Paul did refer those arguments. Go to then. since you provoke us hereunto.
Let us first see what arguments those be of Paul: then to what end they be
applied: Because the Jews did challenge to themselves a title of righteousness
through the obseruaunce of the law, which nevertheless they did not observe in
very deed, partly (because swelling we pride for the Nobility of their
race,) they did promise unto themselves a certain peculiar election with God
before all other nations) Paul entending to treat very sharply against the
insolent arrogancy of them, does argue against the^ with most forcible
arguments, taken out of holy Scriptures, namely. That the substance of Gods
election neither did hang upon the works of the Law, neither upon the roialtie
of race, not yet upon ancient of parentage, but did depend upon the only
freemercy of Gods compassion and Faith of the Gospel. And to make the same
appear more evidently, he puts forth unto them the example of Isaac and
Ismaell, Examples of Isaac and Jacob. Ismael and Esau.
whereof the one though by birth were younger, yet obtained through grace to be
the first, and was thereby advanced to the dignity of inheritance, where as
they both were general issues of one, and the same father Abraham, though they
had not both one mother. And to avoid ye danger of scrupule, that might
ensue, by reason of the two mothers, he does yet confirm the same with a more
notable example. Namely the example of the two brothers that were twins Jacob
and Esau who issuing of one Father, of one mother, and one birth, and before
they had done any thing good, or evil, God did translate the honor of
birthright and blessing to ye younger, to bear rule over the elder. And whereof
came this? but from the free gift of election, whereas before there was nothing
in the Infantes (being not yet borne,) that might either deserve to be
advanced, or to be rejected. If you respect the worthiness of their works,
what had the seely infantes done before they were borne? but if this whole
matter did depend upon the determination of Gods unsearchable counsel, what
reward here do men's works deserve? namely whereas God spoke to Moses in
playnest manner of speech. Romans 9.
I will have mercy on him on who^ I will show mercy, and will have compassion
on him on whom I have compassion. Whereunto agrees the testimony of Paul
immediately uttered by the same spirit, It is not of him that wills nor in
him that runs, but in GOD that shows mercy. Again alleging the example
of Pharao, with semblable reason confirms the same by the example of Gods
severity, The example of Pharao.
that he debated before of his freemercy.

And this is the very order of the argument in Paul's discourse, which neither
Osorius himself will deny. But it must be diligently considered, to what end
Paul applied those reasons: for herein consists the whole pithe of our
controversy. And whereas Luther, Calvin, Martyr, and their companions be of
opinion, that Paul undertook this Disputation for this end^ that by setting
down examples of Gods liberality, All reward of merits excluded.
and severity, he might make manifest that the only free mercy, and eternal
Election of God, according to the purpose of his good pleasure, did make the
true Israelites, without any help or respect of works or endeuours^ Osori.
does very stoughtly withstand these fellows, not denyeng mean whiles Gods
Election nor Gods calling, ne yet his Grace, as he says: but will not grant
this notwithstanding, that the Election of the faithful consists in the
freemercy of GOD, without special respect of works. For this is the whole
force of this Prelates Divinity, Let us hear his own words, as they be.

Osorius. Page 155.
This therefore (says he) do we gather out of this place of Paul, that neither
dignity of parentage, nor work, nor yet the law, does make true Israelites,
but Gods Election, his calling and his Grace. But let us see, whether this so
notable mercy of God powered upon us without all our deservings, is geauen us
without any respect of works? No: it is not? etc.

First because I do not sufficiently conceive Osorius, what you mean by this
that you say, mercy powered upon us with out deserts, and yet not geauen
without respect of works. I would have you open your meaning more distinctly.
If God do power out upon his faithful mercy, without merits, as you say, what
other choice then do ye want in those that are elect, then the very same,
which consists of Gods mere mercy and good will only, without merits? But
this you think not in any wise sufferable nor to be uttered: for this reason
as I suppose.

If Gods Election should consiste of mercy only, Mayor.
without any choice of such as are chosen: Gods Judgment might be adjudged to
be chaunceable and unadvised.

Let us join hereunto the Minor.

But fortune and unadvisedness are not to be imputed to Gods Judgment. Minor.


For we hear out of Paul. Not by works, but of him that calls who says
that the elder shall serve the younger.

Let us now conclude a Gods name.

Ergo, Gods election stands not by his mercy only, Conclusion.
with out some choice, that is say: without some especial and discrete regard
of some one thing in the person that is elected, which was not to be found in
the person that was rejected. For in this manner does Osorius both define and
conclude.

After sundry ridiculous vain glorious speeches of his Rhethoricall bravery,
and unprofitable scoldyng, least he might not seem to be a Rhetoricia^ only,
or a lean Logicia^: he has now pyked somewhat out of the Rules of Sophistry,
wherein he behaueth him self nevertheless none otherwise, then an Owl
amongst Nightingales. For the very principal and special point of that
Art, he either atteyneth not aright, or touches surely very coldly. Which
may be easily and plainly perceived Osorius by this your own form of arguyng.
And I call it plainly your own, because no creature ca^ more nearely resemble
his Sire: wherein you do neither define rightly, nor divide orderly, no less
foolishly heapyng together false things, in steed of true things in your
manner of arguyng: proceedyng from the effects to causes: and as Crabbes crawle
backward, so do you for the more part set the carte before the Hoarse. First,
Election what signifies after Osorius logic.
Whereas you say that this word Election does signify some special regard,
whereby some thing may be judged to be in the persons that are Elect, that
wanted in the reprobate. If you define Election in this wise, surely we can not
allow of it. For although no man ought to dought, but that God according to his
incomprehe^sible wisdom, even from the beginning, was not ignorant of the
contrary dispositious of all and every thing, and the differences betwixt the
faithful and the reprobate: yet is not Election opened sufficiently hitherto
as yet according to the nature of the word. These be the effects of Gods
foreknowledge, and do follow Election, but make not Election: For even as fire
does not therefore warm, because it should be whote, but because it is whote:
and as a wheel does not therefore run round, that it may be round, but
because it is round. As August. August.
makes mention: even so the faithful were not therefore chosen, because they
were like to live virtuously: but they were chosen in Christ, because they
should live virtuously, being thereunto predestinate by God, not for the
worthynes of their works (that were for seen should be in them before as
Osorius does dream) but according to the good pleasure of his will: If we list
to give credit more to Paul, Ephesians. 1.
then to Osorius: So has he chosen us (says Paul) in Christ before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy (not because we were holy) and
unblameable. etc. What can be more plain then this? And yet does he not stay
there, nor so express the last manner of Election. Whereupon he adds
forthwith: The ordina-Glose upon the 1. chap. to the Ephe.
According to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace. If Gods Election stand according to the purpose of the free will of God,
by what means will Osorius justify, that Election comes according to his
foreknowledge of works to come? As though Gods Election and foreknowledge did
depend upon our Actions, Whether Gods Election do depend upon our actions to
come.
and not rather our actions upon his Election and foreknowledge?

Page 256.
Therefore Osorius does deal falsely, whereas he defines the purpose of God to
be a Judgment preordinated before, whereby God does ordeyne some unto glory,
and others some unto destruction, according to the choice of those things,
which he does see will come to pass. First, in that he calls it by the name
of Judgment, I see no reason at all, why he should so do: How Osor. does
define the purpose of God.
for as much as Judgment is properly executed in sins before committed: but
Purpose concerns things to come and preuenteth them. Again if we must speak
after the proper phrase of speech, whatsoever is done by Judgment, must
needs be confessed to be righteously done and according to deserte, not
according to Grace. But whereas ye Election and Predestination of God (which I
think Osor. would gladly express by this word, Purpose, for this word
Predestination, he dare scarce meddle withal, as not worthy the finesse of a
Ciceronian) proceeds from grace and not from works, by what means may any
sentence be given upon works yt were never done? or how will Osorius say, that
Election comes by Judgment given upon works, which Paul affirms to be
ascribed to Grace, and free mercy only? all merit of works being excluded.

He says that in the everlasting counsel of God, Page 156.
all things which are, which have been, and which shall be, are all as if they
were presently in the sight of God, so that in executing his judgment, he
needs not to regard the things themselves. I do confess, yt all things
whatsoever are, be open and present to the foresight of God: as if they were
presently and openly done, but what will Osorius conclude hereof unto us?
forsooth he does conclude hereupon, that God has already determined, according
to the diversity of men's actions foreseen by him before: after this manner.
To wit. The cause and reason of Election according to Osor. and the new
pelagianes.
That whom God does foresee will co^temptuously despise his benefits, those
he has excluded from Paradise: contrariwise whom God does foreknow will behave
themselves in this life dutifully, and virtuously, those he has mercifully
chosen to everlasting life as worthy of his mercy. To impugn this crafty
cauillacion, I perceive I shall be pestered, not with Osorius alone: but with
Pelagius, and with the whole troop of the Pelagians, for this heretical
school chattereth not upon any one matter more, then in maynteining this one
heresy. But Paul alone shall suffice at this present to refell all the rabble
of them: The force of the Argument tends to this end at the last. The crafty
cauillation of Osorius, Page 156.


The wonderful quicksited mind of God, did thoroughly perceive even from the
beginning, what manner of life every person would lead, as well as if the view
thereof had been laid presently open before him.

Ergo, Gods purpose was applied according to the proportion of every man's
works and life forseene of God before, to choose the good to salvation, and to
judge the wicked to damnation.

Answer.
This argument is altogether wicked, and tending altogether to Pelagianisme. And
the conclusion merely opposite to the doctrine of S. Paul. For if the
difference of eternal election, and reiection, do depend upon works foreseen
before: Then does the Apostle Paul lie, Romans 11.
who affirms that election is of Grace, not of Works: Romans 11. and again in
the 9. Chapter of the same Epistle. Romans 9.
That the purpose of God might remain according to election, not of works:
but of him that calls. What? and shameth not Osorius to affirm, that which
the Apostle does deny? If it were expedient for me to ruffle Rhetorically
again, with a Rhetoriciane. You see Osorius, how great and how champaine a
plain lies open for me to triumph upon you, and such craue^s as you are with
like force, and in far more weighty matter. What tragical exclamations,
could I bray out here? what quartaine fevers, what outrages, frensies, madness,
dronkennes? impieties? impudencies? yea what whole Cartloades full of raylinges
and reproaches frequented by you, and pretely pyked out of your Cicero, could I
now throw back again into your teeth? and spitt even into your own face? But
away with these madd outragies of railing, and this ca^ckred botch of cursed
speaking, worthy to be rooted out, not of men's manners only, but to be razed
out of ye writings and books also of christians: the contagious custom
whereof being frequented by you, to the noisome example of the world. I do
verily think unseemly for the dignity whereunto you are advanced, neither
would I wish any man to enure himself unto the like, after your example, namely
in the debating of so sacred a cause, where the controversy tends not to the
reue^gement of injury, but to the discovery of the truth: where skirmishe must
be mayntayned, and conquest purchased by prowess of knowledge, and Gods sacred
scriptures, and not by outrage of railing: And therefore to return our
treatise to ye right tracke of ye Scriptures, leaving all bypathes aside, the
Apostle does deny that election springs out of works: What answer you to
ye Apostle Osorius? you will vouch that old rotten ragge, worn out to the hard
stumps by your schoolmen, to wit, that the works that were foreseen: are
the cause of predestination, not those which are done but which are to be
done, Works foreseen, are not they which are done, but which are to be done
according to the schooleme^.
for so do the schoolmen expound, and distinguishe it: but this will be
proved many ways both frivolous, and false by sundry reasons.

First if this be true which you did erst confess, and which Pighius does
every where inculcate, that of all things whatsoever, nothing is to come, or
past, but is as it were present in the sight of God: Again if there be no
diversity of times with God, because his knowledge comprehends (as you say)
all things past, present, and to come, as though they were present in view:
how can his election, or reiection spring out of works then, that are yet to
be done? Works foreseen are in no respect the cause of Gods election.
If they be present: in what sense call you them to be done in after time? but
if they be to come, and to be done in after time: how call you them present?
or how do these things agree together, that there is nothing to come in
respect of the foreknowledge of God, and yet that election must be believed to
issue from out the foreknowledge of works to come?

2. Again, in what respect soever these works are taken, The second Reason.
whether in respect of God or of men (which your schoolmen do distinguishe
into works done, and works to be done) they vauntage the^ selves nothing by
this distinction, but that ye question will continue as intricate, as at the
first. For whereas all good works, which either men work, or shall work, do
proceed from God: the question reboundeth back again from whence it came
first: to wit: Why God according to the same purpose, should give good works
more to one, then to an other? if the performaunce hereof did arise of
foreseen works, and not rather of the determined will of him that calls,
which is not limited by any conditions of workyng.

3. Whereas the Scripture does manifestly declare, The third Reason.
that we are created and elected to good works: it appears therefore that
good works are the effects of Predestination.

But the effects cannot be the cause of that, whereof they were the effects.

Ergo, works can not be the cause of Predestination.

But if they allege that not works, but the foreknowledge of works, in the
purpose of God, be the cause, out of the which the Grace of Election ensues,
and is governed: surely neither can this be agreeable to reason. For God did
also foreknow the evil will of the reprobate (as there is nothing in the
world, that his unsearchable purpose did not foreknow) even as well, as he
foreknew before the glory of the elect that should come: yet did he not
therefore choose unto glory some, because he foreknew the^, nor did choose all
things, which he did foreknow: but whatsoever his Election had predestined,
it is out of all doubt, that the same were all foreknowen.

The fourth Reason.
4. Again the foreseen pety works (which they make to be the cause of
Election) are either our own, or properly apperteynyng to God. If they be
Gods, and not ours: where then is the freedom of our choice? any merits of
works: But if they be ours, that is to say, in the direction of our own
wills: then is that false, that Paul teaches. God it is, that works in us
both to will and to work, declaryng hereby: that we are unable to will, or to
attemp any thing that good is, without Gods assistaunce.

The fifth reason.
6. The fifth reason is this, whatsoever is the cause of ye cause, is worthily
adjudged the cause of the effect. If the foreseen works of ye faithful be
the cause of Predestination, certes they must needs be the cause of
Justification also: which is directly opposite and adversary to the doctrine
of Paul, and the Grace of Christ.

The sixth Reason.
6. Works as they issue from us, are things uncertain: But Gods Election is a
thing always certain, and permanent: Now by what reason will Osorius prove
then that things being of their own nature certain and unchangeable, shall
depend upon things transitory and variable. Not but foreknowledge (says he)
of things that are foreseen, does stand in a certain permane^t and
unremovable assurance. Neither do I deny this. And therefore when the
foreknowledge of God has established things in such a Necessary and
vnaduoydeable assurance, which will be changed by no alteration, what should
move him to gnaw so greedely upon Luther for teaching such a Necessity of our
works?

7. When as God did regard the people of the old Testament as a Damsel naked,
polluted, and adulteress. etc. The seventh reason. Ezech. 1.16.
Again in the new Testament, Corinth. 1.
where we are hear the vile things and things despised in this world, and
things which are not to be had in estimation with God. Moreover whereas
according to the testimony of August. August. ad Simplicianum.
Gods Election is said to have ouerpassed many Philosophers notable for their
virtue. and famous for the commendable conversation of life, does not the thing
it self declare sufficiently? yt the whole exploite of our salvation is
accomplished, not of any desert of our works that were foreseen, but of his
only bountyfull benignity, and most acceptable free mercy?

8. Moreover, what shall be said of Infantes, The eight Reason.
who are taken out of this world as soon as they are Baptized? what shall we
think of the thief hangyng on the Cross? and others the like? who having
lived most abhominably, were yet received into the kingdom of Christ by holy
repentance only thorough faith, whenas they had done no good work at all,
were either any works to come foreseen in these persons? which were none at
all, shall we Judge, that they wanted Election, because they wanted works
foreseen before?

2. Furthermore, the 9. Reason.
whereas this seems to be ye only scope of Paul's Epistle, to extol and
advance the free mercy of God, by all means possible, surely this scope is
utterly overthrown and rooted out, if the whole action of free Election must
be decided by merits of works foreseen before. Which matter moved Augustine
so much, that to prefer knowledge of works, Aug. retract lib. 1. cap. 19.
yea of foreknowledge of faith either, before the Grace of Election, he
adjudged matter of all other most intolerable.

10. Lastly, The 10. reason.
because Osorius does so scornefully loathe our (...) innouations (as her
terms them) as newfangled devises of rascallike abiects, to make it evident
that we are not altogether destitute of antiquity, to justify our Assertions
to be true, we will join with us herein the Judgment of Augustine, who
excludes foreseen works altogether from the work of Gods Election. For
these are his words most expressly set down. Aug. contra Iulia. pelag. lib.
5. cap. 3.
And least peradventure the faithful should be thought to be Elect (says he)
before the foundation of the world, for their works that were foreseen, he
proceeds and adds thereto. But if Election come by Grace, then comes it
not now of works: Or else Grace now is not Grace at all. etc. What say you
moreover to this? August. ad Simplici. Lib. 1. Quaest. 2.
that in an other place he does utterly deny that choice was made of the
younger to bear rule over the Elder, through the very foreknowledge of any
works at all. etc.

Which matters being thus set in order, what remains? but that we encounter
with our adversaries arguments, wherewith they endeavor to revive the ancient
heresy of Pelagius, and hale it out of hell again. For as those old
heretics did teach, that man's will was so farforth free, as yt every man was
elected for the merit of their works foreseen before by God: none otherwise
do these our new Pelagians jar upon the same string, or not very much unlike,
treading the track of their forerunners the Archheretiques, referring all
things in like sort to works foreseen before, least something may seem to
be found altogether without recompense in the behalf of our most bountiful
and sovereign God. And amongst these notable Champions, rusheth out this
courageous ringleader Osorius, and gives a proud onset against the kingdom of
Grace, and has so disposed the whole force of his battery, that the majesty
of Freewill may not by any means be endamaged, trustyng chiefly to this
Target of proof before mentioned, arguyng on this wise.

Osori. Argument.
If election did consist of freemercy only (says he) without respect or choice
of any the things that God did foresee, he might be worthily accused of
unadvised and rash dealyng.

But now whereas God according to his vnpenetrable counsel does determine all
things advisedly in a certain well disposed order.

Ergo, Gods Election does not consiste of his mercy only, without respect or
choice of works which he foresaw would be done by the faithful.

Answer.
To answer these things brieflye. If Osorius senseless judgment were not
thoroughly overwhelmed: with heddinesse, and rashenes, he would not skatter
abroad such black and thick clouds (to use Augustines words) and such crafty
cautels of confused disputations: We do know and confess (Osorius) that God
does never any thing at all adue^tures, nor unadvisedly. Yet does not that
rash imagination therefore follow, which you have as rashely conceived in
that blind den of your intoxicate brains, to wit that works foreseen
before, are the cause of Election. Moreover Gods Election is neither therefore
decreed upon without cause, nor yet therefore guyded by blind chance, though
it hang not upon the choice of works afterward to be done. But Osor. being a
very natural Philosopher, and very Ethicall seems to have sucked this gear
rather from Aristotle, the^ out of Christ's Testament, Aristot. Ethic. Lib. 3.
Cap. 3.
who teaches in his 3. book of Ethickes that Election (which he calls
understanding Appetite) is ever occupied about good or evil: And because in
human actions, where choice is made betwixt two, or more things, preeminence
is granted to one of the^, according to the difference of good and evil: like
as in common musters, the Soldier that is most valiant: in Maioralities and
Baylywicks, the richest Citizen: in choice of wives, the most beautiful, in
schools of learning, the most expert in sciences, are usually more esteemed
and preferred foremost: the same surmyseth our Osorius to be betide with the
Election of God, and his sacred decrees. But here a distinction ought to have
been made betwixt Gods choice, and man's choice: and the causes thereof likewise
ought to be distinguished. And therefore in this place especially Osorius does
notably bewray his singular ignorance, disputing of those things: which like
an unskillful Sophister he can neither rightly divide, nor duly define.

But here perhaps some question will be moved: The Fallax from that which is
not the cause to the cause.
whereas God and nature do nothing without cause: what other cause else could
there be here, if God did not make choice of the faithful, and of the
Reprobates according to the proportion of their works foreseen before. But
this reason can no man discuss better then Paul himself: who after many his
blasphemous persecutions of Christ, obtaining mercy at the length, and yealding
ye reason of this great mercy, does franckly confess that it was the only
clemency of God, and not any works foreseen in him before: to the end, that
he might be a president to others of Gods mercy stretched out toward them
which would believe. To be short: if the natural cause must be thoroughly
searched out: which are the very foundation of Gods predestinat^on: the Apostle
Paul does knit them up altogether into iiij chief places, 4. Causes of
Election or Predest. by Paul.
first GODS POWER: has not the potter power of the clay. 2. GODS PVRPOSE or
GODS GOOD PLEASVRE, for he does use both these speeches. 3. GODS WILL. Rom 9.
Ephe. 1. Romans 9.
He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and will harden whom he
lists. 4. GODS MERCY OR LOVE. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy. Romans 9. So yt you see plainly that
here is no mention made of works at all, but that there be other much more
weighty causes which will deliver God clear of all Rashness and
vnaduizednes, though foreseen works have never any place in the counsel of
God.

Osor. 2. argument.
I come now to the other arguments of Osor. For after this sort does this
lumpish logician cavil against Haddon that beautiful blossom of Bucer out of
the 2. of Tim. 2.

The argument.
If any man purge himself from these he shall be a vessel of honor unto the
Lord, that is to say, predestined unto honor, and sanctified. page 153.


Every man is of power of his own Freewill to purge him self.

Ergo, Every man is of power of his own Freewill to be predestinate, and made
a vessel to honor.

The Mayor must be understood, that Paul treated not of the cause of
predestination, Answer.
but of the execution and effect of predestination. Neither does the words of
the Apostle tend to this end, to express the cause of predestination but to
admonish us by the effect of predestination, how we ought to esteem of the
worthiness and unworthiness of persons in the congregation according to ye
saying of Christ: by the fruits you shall know them etc. Then the Minor is
false, for that which they infer upon these words of Paul, as though it
were in the power of our own will, to make our selves vessels of honor, is
not well concluded: for it lies not in the will of ye doer, but of the caller,
not in the clay, but in the potter, who is of power to fashion the ^lay,
whereunto him lists: into a vessel of honor or of dishonor. Furthermore
neither is our ability to be decyded by any hypotheticall proposition, no more
then if a man would conclude up on this hipotheticall proposition. The
Adversaries object resolved.


If you do this or that, or if you believe you shall be saved.

Ergo, to do this or that, or to believe, we are of our selves sufficient enough.

And why then does the Scriptures use this phrase of speech that men purge
themselves: if we have no power of our own selves to purge our selves? forsooth
because God does work in men, not as in stocks and stoanes, which are not
moved of any their own feeling or will. When God works in men, he does so
temper their minds and wills whom himself does regenerate, that they
willingly undertake whatsoever they are commanded. After this mauner therefore
are they said to to purge themselves by this very will, not which is proper
and peculiar to their own nature, but which is poured into them by grace. And
by this means at the length, such as are regenerate, are made afterward Gods
together workmen: and of their own accord lead a virtuous and holy life.
Finally God in his Scriptures commands to purge our selves, when
notwithstanding it is he alone that purges. So does he command the people of
Israel by the mouth of his Prophet Moses to sanctify themselves, Leuit. 20.
whereas he witnesses of himself in an other place that it was he that does
sanctify the people. Numer. 11.
So also, he commands us to believe: Marc. 1.
when as notwithstanding Faith is the gift of God, and not our own, nor is the
cause of our predestination but the effect.

But let us proceed farther to your challenge Osor. wh challenge you have
vndertake^ to justify out of ye depth of Divinity: The reason of the
adversaries touching the mercy and justice of God, and the cause of the same,
expounded and confuted.
namely that there is nothing in gods eternal election but is accomplished
upon certain conditions of reason and judgment. And ye suppose that the
reason of Election, is not to be sought else where, but from the foreseen
works of the faithful and reprobate. And that if we grant not this, that
then ye think that our assertion of predestination cannot be justified, but
that many things will ensue thereupon not only erroneously false, but also
absurd to be spoken, and incredible to be believed. First, because Gods
justice cannot be acquired of just reproach of parcialitie, nor his mercy
(which is retched to all me^ indifferently) cleared of unrighteous dealing. You
cry out afterward that it is both against right and reason that he should
save a very few in number, and condemn an innumerable company besides to
destruction. Moreover even in this choice it self, when consideration is had,
why he should choose these, and why he should reject the others, the thing it
self does seem not to be clear of special acceptyng of persons, nor of a
certain extreme cruelty. etc. All which with others ye like sithence be but
weak sproughtes, budding out of the sauadge woodbyne of the adversary, and not
issues of the true stock, will be so much the more easily cut of with the
Razour and Axe of the truth, and utterly rooted out with the unvanquishable
force of Gods scripture. The respect of merits are directly against Gods free
power.
Therefore first: Let us hear what discourse he makes of Gods Justice and
mercy against the Lutheranes. For whereas Luther and all good men of Luthers
opinion do profess, that the regard of merits is directly contrary to Gods
liberty and power, as touching his Election and Predestination. Osorius on the
contrary part does enforce all his might possible to prove, that it is not so,
using these Arguments especially.

Page 156. 157. Osori. Objection.
Whereas we were all wrapped up in one brake of perdition, so that being ones
defiled with sin we became all most worthy of everlasting destruction, for
our natural hatred against Gods law, engraffed fast within the nature of our
bodies subject to the outrage of lust: God in who^ neither any rashness not
unrighteousness can fall, being a most just Judge toward all men
indifferently, could not of his unvariable equity, with singular cleme^cy so
embrace some, as he must hate others: unless there were some cause or reason
to enduce him to exte^de his mercy to some, and to execute Judgment against
other. But God now does perceive the whole cause thereof, to consiste in the
manner of living, and works: not the works which were already done, but which
God foresawe should be done. For what is there that the wisdom of God, in his
infinite knowledge does not comprehend even as it were present, though the
same be to be done in the uttermost minute of ages? And by this reason, it may
be, that God (according to the several conditions of men) did of his clemency,
elect them to eternal life, who^ he foresawe would be obedient to his
Commandments: And on the other side did exclude them from the fruitio^ of
his kingdom, which he foresaw would unthankfully despise his heavenly
benefits. And by this means (says he) Gods Justice may right well be
defended, all the defense whereof stands upon mercy, which otherwise ca^ not
by any means delivered from due reproach.

What a mockery is this? Answer.
as though if God should follow his own liberty and will in ye order of
Predestination, without all works foreseen before, his Justice could not
stand inviolable, nor guarded safe enough from all slander or suspicion of
unrighteousness. I demand then: what if God out of this huge lump hadd
chosen no one man at all (which he might lawfully have done if him lysted)
what if he had duly Judged to deserved damnation the whole mass of mankind,
which did altogether deserve his indignation and wrath? (to speak Augustines
words) could any man condemn him of injustice. August. de not. and great. Cap.
5.
Go to. May not he that owes nothing to any man, of his own mere
liberality lawfully exempt undeserved out of this corrupted and lost mass
who^ him lists? or have mercy on who^ he will have mercy? could not he
indurate and reject whom he would without respect of meritorious works
followyng, whenas there was matter more then enough ministered by their former
deserts, to condemn all to destruction? As for example. Admit that a man
have two debtours, whereof the one is indebted unto him in an exceedyng great
sum of money, the other owes not so much by a great deal: and the
bountyfull creditour vouchsafe to forgive the greater sum to that first: I
pray you, is there any just cause here, for the other to grudge against the
creditour? If he do, shall not his mouth be forthwith stopped with that
answer of Christ in the Gospel? Math. 12.
Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine own? is thine eye evil,
because I am good? The very same does that place of Paul seem in my simple
capacity to emply, where treatyng of the Election of the you^ger, and refusal
of the elder, and of hardenyng Pharaos heart withal, he does annexe immediately
unto the same, what shall we say then? is God unrighteous? Romans 3.
making this Objection against him self as under the person of Osorius after
this manner.

Arguments.
If God did not work after the proportion of foreseen works and deservings.

Ergo, God may seem to be unrighteous in his Election, and should offend
against Justice distributive.

Both the propositio^s of the arguments are denied.
This Argument the Apostle does forthwith deny, saying: God forbid, and withal
renders a reason of his illation negative, namely that both propositions be
Justifiable in God. Both, that God is not unrighteous. And also that God
according to the equity of his Freewill, does take mercy on whom he will have
mercy, not in respect of any man's deservings, but of his own free
bountyfulnesse, benignity and mercy. And therefore for the better establishyng
of this his defense, he does forthwith cite the same words that were spoken to
Moses. I will have compassion on whom I have compassion, and I will show mercy
to whom I do show mercy. So that hereby you see (good Sir) that to the work of
Election and Predestination, the Apostle judges Gods will only (though there
were no cause else) matter sufficient, to acquit his Justice free from all
flaunder and reproach: that in my Judgment now, the defense of Gods Justice,
which you have placed in Gods mercy, seems more aptly applied to his will.
All the defense of Gods justice does consist in his will.
For as he can will nothing but yt which is most righteous, so nothing is truly
righteous in deed, but that which proceeds from the will of GOD. So that
now it shall not be needful at all to be inquisitiue (according to the
counsel of Augustine) after any other principal causes besides Gods good
will, Aug. de Trinit. lib. 3.
considering that no higher cause can be found of greater importance.

Objection of a Sclaunderer.
But what can be so well spoken, but that some will be found somewhat
scrupulous without cause? and will not in most brightest Sunneshyne see without a
candle? Therefore this cauillyng colcouerthwart creeps yet foreward. If it be
true (says he) that Gods Election is directed by his will only, in allowyng
or making hardharted whom he will, and that no man ca^ resist his will: It
seems then that Pharao and others who of indurate contumacy of mind are
wicked, whereas in that their wickedness they do execute the will God: that
they are not the cause of their own wickedness, nor that they can choose but
do the wickedness, whereunto they are violently thrust necessity: If it be
so: what just quarrel can God have then against those (whom him self has made
to be stiffenecked). wherefore he should condemn the^? To be short. The
substance of the Objection is for the most part knitte up in this Argument.

If God do harden men's hearts: then should not Pharao be the cause of his own
Sin, The argument of the Adversary.
considering no man can resist the will of God.

Or to reduce this consequent into a Sillogisme.

No man has just cause to blame him, Mayor.
whom him self enforces to offend.

God does justly find fault with sinners. Minor.


Ergo, God does compel no man to sin, nor does make them endurate.
Conclusion.


I do Answer. An Answer out of S. Paul.
First, even by the self same Objections, wh the Apostle under the person of
the Cauiller did oppose against him self: Is there any unrighteousness with
God? why does he yet complain of man? who is able to resist his will? It may
appear most evidently, that Paul was fully resolved there, that as well
Election, as reiection, did depend altogether upon the very will of God,
without all man's deservings: For otherwise there had been no place to make
this Objection. For if they only should be chosen that did deserve, and they
likewise should be only cast away which did not deserve: what reasonable man
might murmr at this? when Gods Justice rewardyng every man according to his
deservings, did now leave no cause to move man to be offended, nor gave any
stumblyng block to the Apostle, to enter in this kind of Objection.

But let us now draw near to the answer of the Apostle it self, The Apostle
does answer two manner of ways.
which seems to me to be two manner of ways. The one in respect of the
person: whereby he stops ye mouth of the murmurer. O man, what art thou that
pleadest against God? The other in respect of the thing, whereby he does
express the very cause it self, perswadyng it by a certain similitude of the
Potter and the clay. For as the Potter in making his vessels does not regard
any desert on the clayes behalf Even to Gods purpose in the government of his
Election is at liberty, and free from all respect of works, and is directed
by the only will of the maker. And for this cause Paul does make this
comparison betwixt this Election of Grace, Romans 9. The similitude of the
Potter. Romans 9.
and the power of the Potter: Does the thing formed (says Paul) say to him
that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter power over the
claye to make of the same lump one vessel to honor and an other to
dishonor? And yet GOD has much more power over men then the Potter over ye
clay. In deed ye Potter has power to fashion his vessels as him lists. If
God were not able to do the like with his creatures, then were the Potter of
more power then God. For the Potter is able to fashion his vessels, yea to
break them and fashion them a new after his own will: And shall God then be
bound to our merits and regulate his Election by the measure of our
deservings? Take this Argument if it may please you.

S. Paul's Argument against foreseen works.
The power that the Potter has over his vessels, the same power has God over
men.

The Potter is of power to make vesseles to honor, or to dishonor, as him
lists, nor is bound to any worthynesse of the Claye.

Ergo, God is of power to dispose his creatures after the bounty of mercy, or
measure of his Justice as him lists without all regard of deserte in his
Creatures.

The answer of this Proctour and others.
To this Argument the adversaries make this answer, that they do not take away
power from God, and that they are not able so to do, neither did ever mean
any such thing, but that only power, which he putt of from himself. And
albeit there is nothing that his omnipote^t power cannot bring to pass, yet
would he nevertheless be no more able, then was be seeming to his Justice. And
because it is horrible to condemn any man without deserte, by the same reason
it stands not with equity, to defraude good works of their due reward. And
therefore it behooves Gods Justice to yield this of Necessity, that whom God
would have to be saved, the same he should have chosen for their good works
foreseen before, and the Reprobates he should destroy, for their wickedness:
for otherwise if he had no consideration of works, his Justice could not be
constant, and unchangeable. And therefore this Trifler does conclude upon the
premises. That the Lutheranes assertion is false, that in the work of
Election and Reiection choice or respect of works, is merely opposite and
contrary to the liberty and power of God. etc. The confutatio^ of the
adversaries answer.
But this objection is to be encountered withal on this wise. That it is one
thing to treat of Election, and an other thing to treat of Gods judgment. As
concerning Gods judgment it is true, that no man is damned unless he have
deserved it through wickedness of sin: and that no man is saved, unless same
cause be found in him, which may be imputed unto him for salvation. But it is
not so in Election, and Predestination, which is accomplished by Gods Freewill,
without all respect either of former works, or works to come afterward. Or
else what means the Apostle by speaking of gods free Election when he says
Not of works but of him that calls: Romans 9. August. de Praedest. and great.
Cap. 7.
Whereupon let us hear what Augustine writes. Saying this, not of Works
(says he) but of him that calls was spoken, touching that the Elder shall be
in subjection to the Younger. For he does not say of works past: but when he
spoke generally of works, in that place his meaning was as well of works
already done, as of works that were to be done: to wit works past: which
were none at all and works to come which as yet were not. etc. Works
therefore have both their place and time, Election depends not upon faith in
our works: but faith and works depend upon Election.
but in Election they have neither place nor time, neither is there any thing
effectual in Election, besides the only will of God, which neither hangs
upon Faith, nor upon Works, ne yet upon promises: but Works, Faith,
promises, yea and all other things whatsoever do depend upon Election. Neither
is Gods Election proportioned after the quality or quantity of our works,
but our works rather directed by his Election, none otherwise, then as ye
effects do depend upon ye cause, and not contrariwise ye cause upon the
effects. And yet in the mean time, God is not unrighteous. Neither does GOD
therefore offend in Justice distributive, if he have mercy on whom he will have
mercy: or if he do harden whom he will harden. And why so? because he owes
nothing to any man, for whereas all men are borne by nature the children of
wrath altogether, why might not God according to the purpose of his will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy? and again cast them away, whom him listed?
leaving them to their natural filthe and corruption, to wit: not having any
compassion upon them? Whereby all men may thoroughly perceive, as well the
reprobate, what the cause is that they are rightfully condemned, as the elect
also, how much they be indebted to God for this his so unmeasurable mearcye.

These matters being so clear your foolish consequent then (whereby you
wrestle so much for ye upholding of works against ye Election of Grace, The
stinolous cauillation of Osorius his overthrow.
as though if God did not work Election for the merit sake of the works
foreseen, that then his Justice could not possible be acquitted, nor defended
fro^iust accusation of slander) is utterly fond, faynte, and not worth a
rush: for if it were true, then is not Election of Grace: but of works: yea
Paul spoke foolishlishly also, saying: that the remnant are saved according to
the Election of Grace, and according to the purpose of the Grace of God, Romans
11.
and so should he have spoken more aptly in this wise, that the remnaunt were
saved according to the Election of works. And how then shall God be said to
have mercy on whom he will have mercy? and so harden whom he will harden?
Romans 9.
if that he will nothing, but that which is due of very right, nor does
receive any to mercy, unless it appeared that he rewarded them both according
to their works forseene. But what kind of duty can that be called, which is
freely given? or what kind of mercy is it, which is not poured forth upon
any, but such as do deserve it? If it be of Grace (says the Apostle) now is it
not then of works, or else were Grace no more Grace. Romans 11.
Whereunto Augustine does further annexe. Not of works done already (says he)
but where the Apostle uses this general phrase of speech. Aug. depredest.
great. Cap. 7.
Not of works there he does mean this to be spoken both of works past, and
works to come etc. Whereof let Osorius be well advised lest whiles he
immagine in his mind under the color of purging Gods Justice of due reproach,
to escape the iutte of a moulehill, he break his neck over a Rock by putting
Gods mercy out of doors: for what place will there be left for mercy? or what
office will Osorius assign unto her? If Gods Justice do measure all things
by line and level of his foreknowledge of things to come? For Osorius in this
disputation, of Election, Osorius taken tardy as Enemy to Grace.
and of the purpose of God, calling back all things to the foreknowledge of
things which God does perceive will came to pass, Osorius does not in words
only profess, but with the whole bent of his skill practice yt overthrow of
Grace. Go to. And what be those goodly works (good Sir) which God does
foresee shall come? If they be good and righteous, what is more agreeable to
equity, then that the works which be good should be worthily embraced and
accounted praise worthy? But if they be evil: that then also they should even
of very right be forsaken? And what shall become of Mercy in the mean space?
but that she sit mute in a corner with her hands in her bosom, and like a
dumb stock play mumme budget in Osorius Stage of merits.

But here forthwith will Osorius raise up his Bristles, and merueile it is but
that we shall hear him belching out again in most beastly braying noise,
Fevers quartanes, tertians, furies, woodnes, frensies, helhoundes, botches,
shamelessnes, and what soever outragies else he has sucked out of the old
tragical devises. Osori. page 257.
What (will he say) have I ever spoken or imagined any thing of Gods mercy
otherwise then becomes me? what kind of foolehardinesse is this? what
unmeasurable and disorderous kind of liyeng? Do I thrust the grace of God out
of doors? with what face dare you a^ow this upon me? where? when? in what
place? in what phrase of words? to whom? in whose presence? in whose hearing?
in what book can ye approve that I ever uttered any such thing? who have
always most reverently esteemed of the Grace of God, and do yield every where
so much to Gods mercy, that I have affirmed that in Gods mercy only the whole
protection of Gods Justice does consiste which if were not otherwise fortified
with the aid of mercy, could never be free from reproach: And how is it that I
am so suddenly accounted a changeling fugitive, a traitor to Gods grace and a
cutthroate of mercy.

I do hear you well (good Sir) surely these be smoothe words that you
speak. But may I be so bold (by your leave) as to cite your own words
before the Inquisition, and to rack the same after the manner of an Inquisitour,
to see, whether ye approve the same man in deed, which you so boldly pronounce
to be in words: you say that ye diminish not so much as the value of a myte of
Gods grace, and that you do not so exclude Gods mercy out of doors: but that
ye rather conclude all things under her, as under the most especial: and only
fortress of all other. Go to then. Let us take a taste both of your self and
your doctrine. And forasmuch as there be iiij. things, in the which all our
salvation and doctrine is chiefly contained. The sum of Christian doctrine
does consist in four things chiefly.
Namely Election, Vocation, Justification, and the Glory of immortality:
forasmuch also as the whole purporte of the sacred Scriptures and the general
profession of Christian doctrine do consent in this one thing, above all
others: that the whole hope and confidence of our Salvation consists in no
one thing else, but in the only mercy of God promised unto us: in all these now
would I feign learn how much Osorius wisdom does yeald unto mercy whiles he
ascribes so much to Gods Justice.

Election and Predestination.
First as touching Election and Predestination: if works foreknowne do bear
the whole sway here, and that Gods Election falls upon no man, but whose
whole course of life being known before, has made not unworthy of this
honorable dignity of Election, what place I pray you then, is left here for
mercy? seeing this whole work of Election seems to be ascribed to Justice
rather? For as Justice vouchsaffeth none but the good, and such as deserve it,
even so Grace and mercy do relieve none for the more part, but abiectes,
outcastes, and such as are altogether unworthy thereof.

Vocation and Conversion.
Moreover as concerning Vocation, and Co^uersio^: if the ability of man's
Freewill be such (according to this new Master Doctor) that it may not only
work together with God, but may also as well prevent the grace of God, by some
good motion, as follow it: and that Grace is none otherwise either offered unto
us, unless we put forth our wills thereunto before, or that it is not
otherwise effectual in us, but whiles we stand fast to our tacklyng, and hold
fast the help, offered unto us, yea and increase it with our own strength: and
that no man is helped of GOD, but who that both willing, hopyng, and prayeng,
does make him self apt thereunto: truly, whosoever teach this doctrine, let
them set never so glorious a face toward the blazyng of mercy in words, yet
in very deed they be nothing else but very Rebels to Gods Grace: or at the
least manglers and spoylers of the best part and power of Gods Grace, whiles
they attribute part to grace, and part to Nature.

The same is also to be adjudged of the work of Justification from the which
though you seem not to exclude the Freemercy of God altogether, Justification
and life everlasting.
yet do you gelde the most forrible parts thereof surely, and yield them over
to works flowyng from out the fou^teyne of Freewill: wherein also you make
such a myngle mangle, that ye will neither grant only faith in the work of
Justification, nor only Grace on the work of Election by any means.

Lastly, what shall we say of the reward of Glory? Glory of immortality.
for if our works, being wayed in the righteous ballaunces of Gods Judgment,
shall procure us life or death (as Osorius writes. Page 145.) Again if the
righteousness only, which consists of well doing, does purchase Gods favor
to mankind. Page 142. What soppe I pray you shall be left for mercy here to
deal withal? or what shall remain at all wherein the Grace of God may be
exercized?

If these be not your own words Osorius deny them, Osori. does cover an Enemy
of Grace under a glorious praising of virtue.
if you dare: but if they be: with what artificial Argument will you persuade
us not to account you for an enemy of Gods grace, whiles ye sight so much under
the banner of his Justice? Yet will not I be so captious a co^ptoller of your
words, as to call you by the name of an enemy of Grace: though in very deed I
dare scarsely think you, to be in any respect a sownde friend thereunto:
hitherto verily as yet have you declared your self no better. And the same
even your own writings do more then sufficiently denounce against you: in yt
which it is a wonder to see, how lavish and prodigal you be in the aduauncyng
of the praises of Justice, for the amplyfieng whereof you can scarce find any
end: but in the mean time toward the commendation of Mercy so sparyng a
niggard, and hardelaced, that ye seem either not to conceive of the
wonderfully Majesty thereof sufficiently, or else very ungratefully not to be
acquainted therewith: saving that ye begin now at the length, to preach
somewhat of the excellency thereof also, Romans 9.
taking occasion of these words of Paul: What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid: for he says to Moses. I will have
mercy on him, to whom I do show mercy, and I will have compassion on him, on
whom I have compassion. In yt which place (say you) Paul does render a Reason,
Osori. page 157.
Wherefore no man ca^ by any means accuse God of unrighteousness: And do
annexe hereunto a conclusion agreeable enough to your defense. For the defense
of Justice (say you) consists wholly in mercy. And again. But the mercy of
God does acquit his Justice free from all reproach. Which reason of yours
Osori. although perhaps might be allowed in some respect: yet does it not
exactly and substauncially enough discuss ye natural meaning of the Apostle,
nor sufficiently answer the Apostles question. Which will evidently and
plainly appear either by the Apostle him self, or by Augustine the Expositour
of the Apostle: if we will first note before, the mark, and state of the
question diligently and truly.

The scope whereof Augustine affirms to be this. That the Apostle may lay open
before us, that the Grace of faith ought to be preferred before works, not to
the end he might seem to abolish works, but to show that works do not go
before, but follow grace: August. ad simplicia. Lib. 1. Quest. 2.
and to make the same more apparaunt, he alleges amongst others, the example
of Jacob, and Esau: Who being not as yet borne into the world, having done
nothing worthy either to be favored or to be hated, but that equabilitie of
estate had made each of them equal with the other, and betwixt who^ was no
difference of natures, or deseruyngs, which might procure aduau^cement of the
one, before the other: Finally whenas by orderly course of birth, and right of
first birth, the elder might have challenged the prerogative of honor before
the younger: The meaning of Paul opened by Augustine.
Almighty God using here his unsearchable Election, did make this difference
betwixt them (whereas was no difference of works or merits) as that for
sakyng Esau, (who by no merit after the rule of Justice had deserved to be
rejected) he gave the prehemine^ce to the younger: turnyng the common order of
nature vpsidowne, as it were, that whereas the younger are wont to be subject
to the elder, now, contrary to kind, the elder should become servant to the
younger. Whereupon when the Apostle saw, what scrupule might arise in the
imagination of the hearer or Reader thereof: he puts a question under the
person of one yt might argue against it: whether God had done any thing herein
against equity and right? or any thing that he could not justify according to
Justice distributive? whereunto him self aunsweryng immediately, does with
wonderful vehemence detest that slanderous cavil, and withal acquiteth God
free from all accusation and suspicion of unrighteousness, and this not without
lawful authority of the Scripture, What (says he) do we not read spoken unto
Moses on this wise? I will have mercy on who^ I do take mercy, and I will have
compassion on who^ I have compassion? Besides this also, addyng forthwith the
example of Pharao, he does conclude at the length on this wise. Therefore he
has mercy, on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

But if our captious accuser will yet persiste in his obstinacy, as though it
sufficed not for God to do what it pleased him: he does confute him with a most
manifest Argument of like comparison on this wise. The Potter fashionyng his
vessels either unto honor, or to dishonor, or to what purpose seems him
best, does not offend at all. And shall it be less lawful or God, to show his
power upon his own creatures, then for the Potter upon his Chalk or Clay?
Therefore whether God be willing to have mercy, or to indurate any man, he does
nothing herein, but that which is most lawful and most agreeable with equity.

You perceive therefore Gods Justice sufficiently enough desended I suppose:
which in all his works ought by good right be mightly defended. But how it is
defended, is now to be seeen. Osorius urges stoughtly that Gods Justice
stands not otherwise to be defended but only in respect of his Mercy: The
defense of Gods Justice consists not in any thing else the^ in the only mercy
of God according to Osorius.
which albeit might be granted after a sort, yet is not altogether simply and
absolutely true, and the reason thereof is pyked out of Osorius credit rather,
then out of any Argument of S. Paul. Whereas Paul seems to refer all this
whole defense of Justice not to mercy, but to only will of God, Saying God
takes mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will. Albeit I will not in
the mean whiles deny, but that the Election of the faithful does consist upon
mercy alone, yet surely the defense of Election is not vpholden, but through
the will of God only. Likewise also albeit the castyng away of the Reprobates
do proceed from the only Justice of God, yet will no man say, that the
defense of this reiection consists in Mercy, but in the only will of God.
And therefore it is the only will of God, which does defend Mercy in Election,
and Justice in reiection. For otherwise how could this come to pass, that the
only Mercy of God should defend his Justice either in the Reprobate? (in who^
scarce one sparckle of Mercy is discernable) or else in the Predestination of
the faithful, wherein appears no execution of Justice? therefore what is it
then, that may defend Justice in these, and Mercy in those other, but only the
purpose of Gods will only? whereof S. Paul makes mention: God takes mercy
(says he) on whom he takes mercy, and hardens whom he will harden. As who
neither rejects of Mercy, nor yet takes compassion of Justice: but executes
both, according to the absolute good pleasure of his will.

Esau. Jacob.
Let us make this more manifest by examples. Whenas God is said to hate Esau,
and to love Jacob, being not yet borne: both which had done as yet nothing
worthy to be loved, or to be hated: what kind of mercy can you show in the
hatred of that one, which may defend his Justice? or what kind of Justice in
the love of the other, which Mercy (as you say) may deliver clear from all
reproach? It follows hereupon therefore, that the whole defense of Justice
consists not in mercy alone, but that the only will of God rather does
acquit, not only the mercy of God, but his Justice also withal, from all
accusation of unrighteous dealyng.

The hardenyng of Pharao.
Be the same spoken likewise touching the hardenyng of the heart of Pharao. Which
being decreed upon in the secret counsel of God, long before any drop of
mercy was extended unto him: how then do you refer ye Justice of his
induration, to Mercy only? But you will say: God did call Pharao to faith and
obedience: Osorius. Page 158.
but when as he did despite that so great bounty, and like a wild Colte would
licentiously raunge out of all order, it was agreeable not only with Gods
severity, but with his mercy also to scourge him with most just plagues
according to his deserte, that so by his example, othersmight be reclaymed to
do their duty. I do know ye sundry singular Presidentes of Gods clemency and
calling were ministered unto him in deed, but as all those tokens of Mercy be
outward means, The confutation of Osori. Objection.
which God uses in the outward calling of men, so the same do appertain to
calling only, and touch Election and Reiection nothing at all: nor do in this
respect express any defense of his Justice: for to admit that the hardening of
Pharao, and the casting away of Esau did happen most righteously: yet this
Justice is not therefore defended against the quarelling adversary, because
they did abuse the lemty of God afterward: And why so? because they were
first rejected from God, before any Mercy (which they did abuse) was powered out
upon the^. And these things thus alleged by me, do not tend to this end, as
though I were of opinion, that this Justice of their reiectio^ were boyd of all
defense: for it has her certain peculiar and most just defense: The chief
means wherewith Gods Justice may be defended.
but not that whereof Osorius does dream. If we seek for the right defense of
Gods Justice: what can be more Just the Gods will? which apperteining to God,
as his own properly, and effectually (as the Deuines do term it) can do
nothing of her own nature, but that which stands with equity and Justice,
neither stands in need of an other defense. For what soever God does decree
upon, though it be never so far hid from our understanding, yet is it of it
self defensible and absolutely perfect enough. And therefore S. Paul seeks no
place of refuge else where against the most terrible assaults of the adversary,
then the will of God: which he accompteth the strongest and surest fort of
defense. Where he says, God takes mercy on whom he has mercy, and will
ha^den whom he will. Romans 9.
He does not say he does harden that person on whom he takes no mercy: but he
does harden whom he will. And again he that has predestined us through
Jesus Christ according to the purpose of his will: He says not of his Justice.
Ephesians. 1. having in deed no one thing of greater majesty to allege for, his
defense against the adversary, then the only will of God, and wherewith alone
the Adversary might be thoroughly satisfied.

But Osorius will take exception, An other exception of Osorius, confuted.
and say that this will ought to be upright and agreeable to it self. Who is
either ignorant hereof? or who can deny this? But I demand likewise of
Osorius: whereas we confess that this will is most righteous, and lawful,
whether in Reiection, Mercy, do sufficiently acquit this Justice of Gods will,
against the quarelling Cauiller? or Gods will rather. As for example. If a
vain babbling Sophister or some capciouse busibody do demand of you what the
cause should be that Esau was forsaken without all desert of evil fact
committed? and why also Paraoes heart was hardened, before that Moses was sent
unto him? why the ears of the Jews were stopped that they might not hear,
before the Prophet opened his mouth unto them? All which things considering
you cannot deny were wrought by Gods most righteous Justice, by what means
will you defend his Justice herein? you will say perhaps, that God did
therefore forsake, and cast them off, because he forknew by their wickedness
that would ensue, what they should work in after time. But he will tell you
here: that this proceeded not here of Mercy, but of Justice wh does render to
every man according to his desert: so that now the defense of Justice may not
seem to depend upon mercy by this means, Osorius. page 158.
but upon Justice it self? Not so (say you) but I do affirm that the defense
of Justice hangs wholly upon mercy which will acquit it clear from all
Reproach. I do see what you do affirm, but I do not see yet how this will stop
the mouth of the cauiller: for in this wise will this wrangler replye (if so be
that God were pleased with Jacob, of his own mere mercy, how could it be then
that he should be displeased with Esau, by mean of the same mercy? for it his
wickedness that was yet to come, were laid unto his charge, then did this
reiection now belong to his Justice, not to his mercy? but if the same his
offenses not yet done were pardoned through mercy: by what means then is he
said to be rejected?

Certes how this manner of defense delights you Osorius, I know not: sure I
am that S. Paul took a far other manner of course, treating of Induration
and reiection, alleging none other argument in the defense of Gods Justice
against the Adversary, then the only decree of Gods deuyne will: what art thou
o man (says he) that do contend against God? Do thou not hear the Lord
himself declaring the reason of his Election in the prophetical scriptures? I
will have mercy on whom I have mercy. And to make the same more evident S.
Paul debateth the matter after this manner. Therefore (says he) God does take
mercy on whom he takes mercy, and does harde^ whom he will harde^: As though
he might say, God in choosing or refusing his own creatures, is tied to no
Necessity, neither is there any law to ye contrary, but yt he may according to
his good pleasure, do therein what himself likes and lusts. If he dochoose
thee, you have great cause to be tha^kfull unto him for it, If he cast thee of,
you have no just cause to quarrel with him therefore: for he does yt no wrong. Thy
God he is, and thy potter, what art you to contend with him? a weak man with thy
most mighty God: a lump of clay with ye potter: for this is the effect of your
Argument. The reason of Osorius touching the cause and order of predestination.
Surely God wills nothing that he wills without most just and righteous
reason: but in such sort, that this very will cannot seem to proceed from any
else where, or otherwise be defended in the order of predestination, but of
works foreseen, and of the foreknowne well using of good gifts, as the
schoolmen do say.

Which saying how false and frivolous it is, shall be declared both out of
Augustine, and more notably out of S. Paul, Aug. ad simplici. lib. 1. quest. 2.
for these are the words of Augustine discoursing upon Esau, If so be (says
Augustine) that God did therefore predestinate Esau to become vassal to his
younger brother. because he did foreknowe that he would work wickedness, then
did he also predestinate Jacob to become Lord of his elder brother because he
did foreknow taht his works would prove good. And therefore the saying of the
Apostles is false. Not of works etc. And imediatly after enterlacing many other
things between. If you will once grant (quoth he) that a man may be chosen
or refused, for the thing that as yet was not in him, but because God did
foresee what would be in him, it follows hereupon that he might have been
chosen for the worthiness of his works which God foresaw would be in him,
though as yet he had done nothing, and this saying, that they were not yet
borne, will not prevail thee at all, where it was spoken, And the elder shall
serve the younger: to declare hereby that it was said, Not of works because
as yet he had wrought nothing at all. etc. But to let pass August. Let us
hear what Paul himself speaks. Who debating very largely upon this point
of Predestination, does amongst other at the last break out into this speech,
touching the same. Romans 9.
If God willing on the one side to show his wrath, and to make his power
known has with great sufferaunce and lenity borne with the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction, and on the other side do make known the riches of his
glory toward the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared to glory. etc. Let
us more exactly ponder the words of the Apostle, The words of Paul expounded.
where he says, that God was willing, therein you hear first that God does
will, and withal, the cause and reason why he wills, ye perceive expressly
set down afterward. But he is said to will wrath, yt is to say, willing to
show the severity of his Justice: Where I pray you? or toward whom? what?
toward all creatures indifferently? Certes this might he have done according
to his Justice: but this would he not do for his mercy sake. Toward whom the^?
Toward the vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction. Where you hear the
name of a Vessel, you do withal conceive a Potter, because no vessels are
made without the Potter. Moreover where this word Prepared is annexed, thereby
forthwith comes to remembrance the will of the Potter not the will of the
thing fashioned. For it stands not in the power of the port it self, to
fashion and form it self after it own will, but the fashioning thereof
rests in the will and purpose of the Potter. For if any sense or feelyng at
all were in earthen vessels, would any vessel fashion it self into a vessel
of dishonor? if it had power to fashion it self by any means into a vessel
of houour? whereupon it follows consequently, that the order and disposition
of fashionyng, rests wholly in the will of the Potter, and not in the will of
the vessel.

Now therefore as concerning the will of the Potter, left any man shall think
that his will is unadvised, nor directed by equity and reason: The Apostle
does forthwith set down the cause, therewith the mouth of the slanderous
backbyter may be stopped. To show (says he) the riches of his glory toward
the vessels of mercy which he has prepared unto glory. etc. He does not say:
because God foresaw the good works of the godly, and the evil doings of the
wicked, that these were therefore ordained to damnation, those other chosen to
salvation: but he says, that those are prepared to destruction, whom he would
have to be vessels of wrath, and the others to glory. And yet this
notwtstandyng neither unadvisedly, nor contrary to equity. Wherein if any man
be desirous to know ye reason, or the Justice of God in his predestination, let
him hear Augustine herein. The whole mass of mankind was subject (says he)
to one state of perdition rightly deseruyng the scourge of Gods Justice:
August. ad simplici. Lib. 1. Quaest. 2.
which whether be executed, or pardoned, proceeds not of any unrighteousness
in God. Now it pleased Gods good will of his mercy to make a choice of some of
these, and to relinquish other according to his Justice. If you require a
reason hereof, the Apostle does not hyde it from you: To make known (says he)
the riches of his glory toward the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared
unto Glory. etc. Wherein the principal and first cause of doing, is joined
together with the last end thereof. In the mean space many means are
enterlaced betwixt these two. For even as the will of God does not otherwise
prefer his elect to the honor of glory, but as it were through many
tribulations, so neither does he execute the severity of his Judgment against
the Reprobate by and by, In Predest. the first cause must be coupled with the
last end.
but by long sufferau^ce, much lenity and tolleration of their wickedness.
But as the afflictions of the elect is not the cause of their salvation, so
neither the lenity and long sufferaunce of the wicked, is the principal cause
that moves God to exercize the severity of his Justice against them. And
therefore are they called Vessels: the one sort vessels of wrath, the other
vessels of mercy prepared either to destruction, or to salvation first, and
before either God did with patience endure the wickedness of the one, or with
tribulations exercize the Faith of the other.

To conclude therefore in few words briefly: I come again to the Argument that
was proposed, which albeit he choppeth together without all order of teaching:
yet in my conceit, a man may briefly reduce it into this form. For out of
these words of Paul, wherewith God is said to have borne with the vessels of
wrath in much lenity, Osorius does gather his cutted Sillogisine with a
wonderful dexterity of wit.

Gods divine Justice did scourge none, Osori, page 158. 159. 160.
but such as with much lenity he did bear withal first.

Neither are any destitute of Gods mercy, but such as forsake it being offered.

Finally salvation and the mercy of GOD is extended







The answer to Osorius conclusion.
To answer in one word. If this subtle Sophister do mean hear of Judgment,
or of execution of condemnation, I will grant him his whole consequence. For
who did ever deny this, but that God does exercise his lenity toward the
most abominable rascalles, yea long and very much, and in much patience does
allure them to repentance? and again yt no man is damned but who that
perishes through his own default, without all unrighteousness in God? But if
he mean of the cause of Predestination: We deny his antecedent. For whereas
that most sacred purpose of the Divine Predestination, and Reprobation, does
issue and spryng from out the only will of God, being in deed most
unsearchable, yet most righteous: And whereas also men are first fashioned in
the same will, as in Gods workeshop, to be either vessels of wrath, or
vessels of mercy, before that any lenity or mercy do appear to be extended
toward any of them from God, by what means then will Osorius affirm That
the defense of Justice consists wholly in mercy, and that there be no
vessels of wrath, but such as will not be vessels of mercy? Page 161.
Or how will he charge Luther with accusing God of unrighteousness? who by all
means possible does continually enforce with August. that there is nothing in
God, but that is most righteous, though it appear unto our capacities never so
much past all findyng out. Nay rather why should not Osorius be duly reproched
for this matter? whose whole bent enforces nothing else, but that Gods Justice
can by no means else be defended, but by the works of men known before?
which how void is of all truth, we have already declared, both out of S.
Paul, and out of Augustine, sufficiently enough, as I suppose: That in the
mean time I slip not over by the way that other saying of Paul, where
making mention of veselles, he does not say, yt they were fit or meet
vessels, but vessels formed not ready or apt vessels, but vessels
prepared and fashioned either to dishonor or to honor. Whereby you may
perceive that this whole action consists not in any ye workema^shyp of the
Potter, nor in the good or evil usage of Gods gifts, but only, and wholly, in
the secret purpose and will of the maker.

But Osorius does deny this that God did fashion any vessels unto
destruction. Osori. page 161.
How shall we know this to be true? Forsooth by the words of the Apostle. For
he does not say the vessels which God him self did form unto destruction,
as he spoke a little afterward of the vessels of mercy which he prepared unto
Glory. Go to. And what mystery I pray you pyke you out of this? Forsooth, that
ye may understand that godly me^ are predestined to glory through the will
and mercy of God, and that wicked me^ every one through his own voluntary
default are thrown out into condemnation. etc. I hear you Osorius. And I do
answer, that this is true in deed that you Reply, that no man perishes at
all, but who so perishes by his own procurement and default. But what is this
to ye purpose? Sithe^ce Paul in this place does not treat of the execution of
punishment, but raising him self far higher, debateth upon the very cause
and end of Predestination and Reprobatio^. Now as concerning the execution of
comdemnation and condemnation it self, if we search for the cause thereof.
Surely the same is neither one nor alone: but in sundry and diverse respects.
If you require the inward cause, and which in deed is peculiarely to be
assigned in man: it is Sin: If you require the outward cause, in respect that
it is the punishment of Sin, the cause of the destruction of Sin, is Gods
Justice. You will say then, what? will you make GOD the cause of destruction
and condemnation? Yea surely good Sir, in that sense that I spoke before. For
why not as well, as when the murderer his hanged, if you respect the outward
cause of his death, ye will not deny, but the Judge was cause thereof, but if ye
behold the inward cause, he that is executed (being guilty of his own fact)
can charge no man with his death but him self. (...).
But you will say, although the Judge do punish the malefactor, yet did he
never so form the malefactor to the end he should be hanged. And no marvel.
For he does occupy the place of a Judge only, who has no other authority at
all against any such person, unless he have committed some offense worthy of
Judgment, for he is but a Judge, he is not a Creator. But the matter fares
far otherwise in the most sacred Majesty of God, The office of a Judge and
of a creator far diverse.
who has absolute and full power over his creatures, not only to punish,
after they have committed offense, in the nature of a Judge: but also to
determine upon his creatures, before any their deservings, what him pleases
in the nature of a Creator, to frame them to dishonor, or to call them to
honor as him lysteth. Therefore as he is a Judge, he does punish Sinners in
deed: but as he is a Creator, he does fashion his Creatures according to his
will, even as the Potter does fashion his Pottes. And to this effect tend those
words of Paul If God willing to show forth his wrath, and to make known his
power toward the vessels of wrath. etc. Romans 9. Osori. page 161.
But you will say GOD has not fashioned vessels of wrath: nor has formed any
person unto destruction. Why then let us likewise imagine that ye Potter does
not make some Uessels to dishonor, but all to honor rather. But sithence that
all Uessels are not framed by the hands of the Crastesman to beauty and
dignity, but some applied, and made to serve for more base and vile uses,
according to the testimony of Paule^ By what means then will the similitude
alleged be aptly applied to God, to wit, if that God may not do toward
his Creatures the same that the Potter does to his Vessels? But now will you
hear this Argument finely contrived with a merueilous nimblenes of wit?

The Argument of Osori. out of S. Paul
Paul does not say: the Vessels which he fashioned unto destruction, as he does
in the same place speak of the Vessels of mercy, which he did prepare unto
glory.

Ergo, It may be understood thereby, that wicked men are not thrown into
destruction by Gods will, but for their own wickedness.

The answer with an explication of S. Paul.
As though both might not be granted together namely: yt wicked men are thrown
into destruction by Gods will, and yet nevertheless not without their own
desert? But the name of God (say you) is not expressed in this place. And why
so? because the Apostle speaking of the vessels of wrath, does say that they
were fashioned unto destruction, but does not say, that God did fashion the^
unto destruction. Surely here is a very niece point of desca^t: Go to, Admit
this also that gods name is not expressed, yet have ye not taught us yt it is
not understood here. No, (say you) for so much as nothing could more vary
from the mind of the Apostle, Osori. Cavil upon the words of Paul.
nor be more repugnaunt to the most mild nature of God, then to conceive, that
God should himself frame vessels unto dishonor, seeing that no man runs
headlong into ruin: but through his own voluntary blindenes. And who did ever
deny this? yet does this nothing more exclude the will of God, from fashioning
his vessels as him lists: As on the other side neither does the will of God
receive unto mercy those, that have offended: so that nothing withsta^deth now,
why the vessels of wrath should be less deemed to be fashioned unto
destruction, by the will of God, and withal that themselves also do procure to
themselves their own destruction, But why did not Paul (say you) set down
this matter in express words? which God himself did form unto destruction:
which he would surely have done, if he had thought that God had been the
Author of destruction. Truly I will ask you a question in as few words
Osorius, why the Apostle did choose rather to say, ( Vessels Fashioned to
destruction) then leaving out the word Fashioned, to say Vessels of
destruction? for this would have accorded far fitter with your exposition, if
so be that he thought that the Vessels did perish without the will of God.
Again, why did he call them Vessels, and not? creatures rather? why did he
annexe this supply, to wit, Wrath? finally why did he bring in God himself
willing to show forth his wrath against the Vessels of wrath? but that you
should understand that all those circumstances are to be reduced to the most
sacred will of God, even as to the working hand of the Potter. For first as I
said before when you hear this word Vessels thereby you understand the Potter:
Secondly when you hear this word Fashioned, Fashioned.
therein the hand of the Artificer is conceived: Thirdly when you hear
Fashioned unto destruction therein appears the certeinty of Gods will in his
Predestination. Whereas the Vessels do perish, it is their own fault, but where
it is said that they are Fashioned thereunto, this surely is not proper to the
Vessels, but does note a certain other higher cause, and a more plain,
demonstration of the creator for Vessels are not wont to be Fashioned of any,
but of the craftesman, as I suppose: what man is so mad to say that Vessels
made, are made of themselves? namely to their own dishonor, and not formed
thereunto by the workman rather: and I marvel greatly that Osorius having any
sense or feeling in him at all, cannot quickly conceive the meaning of the
Apostle, either by the comparyng of the text together, or by the manner and
order of speech: namely since the matter it self does so disclose so many
manifest reasons to discuss the doubtful signification of the words.

The will and purpose of God the first cause.
First, you will not deny but that this will of God, wherewith he had decreed
both to show his wrath (that is to say the severity of his Justice) and his
mercy also, was even from the beginning. This will then being once determined
upon by God, could neither by any means be made of none effect, nor again by
any means made discernable, unless it were poured out upon some matter,
Election and Predestination.
whereupon it might work. And even here does that wonderful Election of God
display it self at the first, wherewith (before the foundations of the world
were laid) he had predestined them whom he would should be saved, and
rejected the^ who^ he would have damned. Next unto this Election, immediately
ensued the Creation: Creation.
wherewith the almighty Creator with a most singular excellency, and exquisit
workmanship did form all vessels out of one self lump of Clay, and yet not
those all ingenerall appointed to one end. For some vessels he made to serve
to show forth his mercy, Calling according to his purpose.
some other to show forth his Justice. These things being thus established,
immediately after Creation ensues Vocation or Calling: and the same two manner
of ways: according to his purpose, and not according to his purpose: Vocation
according to purpose.
whereof the one is lynked with Grace making acceptable: the other is void of
Grace: though not altogether, yet destitute of effectual Grace. And hereupon
do issue Blindness, Rebellion, Hardenesse of heart, Infidelity, Breach of
the Law, Execution of Justice, not by force of any coaction, but by reason of
the sequel or consequent. For ye grace of God once denying assistance, what
soever remains in man is naught else, but the seed of the Serpent, or some
incurable Fistula, wherewith man is deadly poisoned. Again out of the other
Vocation, which is according to purpose, springs Faith a will to obey,
forgeuenes of Sin, Justification: Faith. Justification.
and such like inestimable treasures: not ensealed into us by nature, but
fra^ckly given us from above. Now out of that Infidelity, and execution of
Justice, arises the destruction of the Reprobate: of the which Paul treats
here, which is not without the special will of God, Or else in what sense does
he say, God was willing to show his wrath? and yet not without their most due
deserving neither: as on the other side Salvation and Glorification do spring
of Faith and Justification, for as much as in them, the co^mendatio^ of his
Justice, in ye other, ye dignite of his mercy does show forth their bright
beams to ye inestimable glory of gods majesty, The Glory of God, the last end.
who is the chief and principal end and foundation of all works.

Wherefore forasmuch as God was willing to show both, as well his wrath, as
also his mercy: and this his will could by no means be accomplished, unless
there were some upon whom, both his wrath, and his mercy might make his power
on each part discernable: hereupon then is no small stoare of proof ministered,
whereby may be perceived, from whence as well the destruction of the reprobate,
as the Salvation of the elect does proceed. And first of all your self do not
deny, that godly persons are predestined unto glory through the only
bountifulnes of God. I demand now whether this self same mercy of God have
predestined to glory all creatures generally, or not all? I attend your
answer. If you will say all without exception, where then are the vessels of
wrath? what shall be come of this saying. God willing to show his wrath upon the
Vessels ordained to destruction? Finally what shall be thought of that saying of
Christ? Many are called but few are chosen. If so be that all are received by a
general Election: how can this Election be made frustrate and ineffectual? or
what kind of Reiection can there be then? But if you will not say all, it
follows then, that there must be some Uessells of reiection of Necessity,
as well as of mercy: to wit: by like agreablenesse of contraries. Or else how
shall a man understand that some vessels are Predestinate to Glory? unless by
the same Argument ye confess that some vessels were also rejected to dishonor,
which being agree upon I demand further, of the reprobation of them that are
forsaken, whether do ye think that the same proceeded from the secret purpose
of God: or of themselves? if from the^ selves? how shall this appear? for
as much as Election, and Reprobation also, are not separated by any distinction
of the Creator, or distaunce of time, and were both together before the
foundacions of the world were laid: as appears most manifestly by the
examples of Jacob and Esau, and sundry other semblable examples.

Page 161.
But Osorius will coin us here some strange Oracle, to wit. That GOD did
create the nature of the vessels in deed, but not the very vessels of wrath,
as which took their original from Sin and infidelity, and not from God the
Creator. And who did ever deny this to be true? Go to. What monster do these
great bellyed hills Calue out at the length? Forsooth a very wonderful
conclusion.

God did not create wickedness.

Ergo, He did not not form the vessels of wrath.

But that this creeppled curtoll of Osorius may stand upright: upon his legs
let us help here Osor. haltyng Logic once again. For in this wise shall it
be able to craule upon his feet.

Osori. Objection. page 161.
Only wickedness brought to pass that they become vessels of wrath.

God did not create wickedness.

Ergo, GOD does not create vessels of wrath, but every one makes him self a
vessel of wrath thorough his own wicked will, by cause he would not be made
the vessel of Mercy.

Answer.
First, the Mayor is not to be granted simply and absolutely. For if this must
be yielded unto for a truth, that only wickedness does make the vessels of
wrath, why should not this also be taken for matter confessed, upon equal
relation of contraries? to wit, that virtue only does make the vessels of
mercy, and withal that it consists in the ability and power of every good
body, that will not be a vessel of dishonor, to become a vessel of honor.

Moreover where it is said that wickedness does make the vessels of wrath, is
not agreeable with the truth. David did committ against his own soul not one
wickedness alone: no more was Saul being a persecutour clear of his proper
wickedness also, yet the same David (notwithstanding his wickedness) was a
vessel of Election. Answer, Whether vessels of honor be made of wickedness
only as of the first cause.
Be the same spoken of Mary Magdalene, of the thief: finally of many of Gods
Elect, whose horriblenes of Sin did not make the^ vessels of wrath
notwithstanding.

Besides this also, if it be true that Osorius speaks: That wicked men do not
make them selves vessels of wrath, but through their own will and wickedness.
Tell us a good felloshyp, what offense hadd Esau committed being the vessel of
wrath, not by any action of life, but being borne even so by nature? Be the
like spoken of Ismaell: Cain the ma^quelier became worthily abominable in the
sight of God, by the murder of his own brother: but before this murder
committed, and before any privy grudge conceived, what had he done when in his
first oblation, both him self and his oblatio^ was rejected? Judas Iscariotes
had not yet betrayed his Master, whenas he was both the vessel of wrath, and
called also the Son of perdition. The Pharisees had not yet uttered any toke^
of hatred against Christ, when they were called of John Baptist ye generation
of Uipers. What shall I say of Pharao? Pharaoes Reiection proceeded not of his
Rebellion, but his Rebellion rather of his reiection,
Whose destruction if we behold, even worthily and deservedly laid upon him by
the Lord, who may dought it that his own Rebellion deserved that he should be
rightfully punished? but if we respect the secret former determination of the
Divine reiection, and induratio^ which was before in the secret mind of God.
It is out of all question, that the same induration proceeded not of the
rebellion of Pharao, but that his Rebellion sprang out of his induration
rather, as succeedyng thereupon.

Wherefore if we interpret of the wrath of GOD to be a punishment of Gods severe
Justice, A double consideration of the Vessels of wrath.
we deny not, but that the same falls upon none, save such as through their
own wickedness have deservedly procured their own destruction. And this
wrath of God in deed as it is always righteous, so does it always follow,
but never go before the ungodliness, which is either peculiar to every person,
or is parcel of the inheritable infection of the first father Adam. But if
under this vocable Wrath, that will and decree of the highest God be noted,
wherewith those are secluded from Election, which are called the vessels of
wrath. Then is Osorius raungyng Fable both false and absurd, wherewith he
would seem to persuade, that it is a very easy thing to be changed from
wooden and earthly vessels, into vessels of silver and gold, if we will our
selves, and that it is in every man's own power to be made a vessel of wrath
or a vessel of mercy as him lists. As though Gods will were of no force at
all to determine upon matters, but as it is regulated by man's will. And as
though it were also as necessary then to be made a vessel of mercy, whenas man
is not willing to be made a vessel of wrath. But such a vessel does never
display his lightsomnesse in the house of God, as I think (Osori.) But to what
purpose then belongs that saying of Paul. Romans 9.
It is neither of him that wills nor of him that runs, but of God that
takes mercy: If Gods everlasting decree be of no more force in these matters
to determine upon any certeintie, but such as must be guided by the raungyng
rule of man's will: which is as much as according to the old said law Quite
against the hear. Albeit I will not deny in ye mean time, that we are not
able to discern truly betwixt the vessels of wrath, and the vessels of mercy,
but by good or evil works, that we see to be in them. Yea it comes hereby
many times to pass, that such as sometimes seemed in their own conceits to
be them selves the vessels of wrath, being afterward endued with better
Grace, do in process of of time feel the contrary. But this hangs not now
upon the cobbwebbe of man's will, but depends wholly upon Gods Election: which
being always agreeable and stable in it self, is never changed, how variable
soever the motions of men are. Therefore if this be the very meaning of Osorius
words, his Judgment is commendable enough. But it is one thing to be adjudged
somewhat in the opinion of men, Osorius, and an other thing to be directed by
the unsearchable counsel of God.

Cauilles of the adversaries.
What then will some man say. Did God create his cretures to the end to destroy
them? did he create his creature to wrath and destruction? Is it credible that
his will is to harden the hearts of any to wickedness, whose will is to have
all saved? or that he who has predestinate his creatures to glory, can cast
the^ into destruction? And can it be possible that he, who does testify of him
self in the Scriptures, which will not the death of a Sinner, but rather that
he live and be converted, shall now alter his nature and will not the life, but
the destruction of a Sinner? whenas also all things are good that God has
created, can he hate the work of his own hands? yea not only after he has
created it, but also before he has made it? I am not ignorant Osorius of
these and such like your not absurdities, but cauilles rather, which you are
wont to thrust upon us now and then.

To the which to make a plain and distinct answer. First, An answer to
Osorius Cauils.
the nature of causes it self must be considered. Then must a plain
distinction of Gods will be opened. For when question is made of Gods will, the
Scripture does not speak thereof always after one manner and phrase of speech,
nor express the same every where after one only signification. Sometimes this
name of will is taken in a most large and ample signification, Gods will taken
two manner of ways.
for that which Gods decree has determined shall come to pass in all matters.
As in that place of Paul. God does take mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
does indurate whom he will. etc. And again. Psalm. 113.
God did what soever he would do in heaven and in earth. And in an other
place. Because it seems so good in thine eyes O Father. Luke. 10. Luke 10.
And this will, seruyng in each respect to as many purposes, as the
foreknowledge and essence of God, Gods will is the beginning and rule of all
things.
does both go before all other mean and secondary causes in order of time, and
of it own power also does dispose all things (good Sir) not as though it
would enforce them, against their wills, by any outward coaction, but does so
dispose and order things with a certain secrett power, as yt through their
voluntary and serviceable yeldyng, they atteyne at the last to the same
purpose, whereunto the will of God did first and chiefly foreordeyne and direct
them. Whereby it comes to pass, that though the will of God of it self make
no persons evil properly, yet that wicked persons notwithstanding shall
accomplish the will of God, How wicked men do the will of God.
if not according to the event and success properly and absolutely, yet by
accidental means. So that on this wise, albeit the destruction of the wicked
proceed from the voluntary corruption of man, not from Gods will as from the
nearest cause, yet do not those wicked persons fulfill their wickedness without
Gods will. For in as much as it is a due scourge and punishment of sin, man
is not punished therewith without Gods will. Again by this word will is
signified sometimes that, wherewith God (by his express word) does notify him
self to be delighted, to be well pleased, and which is acceptable in his
sight. Of which sort are all things which be naturally good and commendable.
In which signification, God is said not to will wickedness, nor to will the
death of a sinner: I. Thessa. 4.
And of this will speaks the Apostle. This is the will of God, your
sanctification. And this will the faithful only do perform properly and
simply.

We have spoken now of will, we must now create somewhat of ye order of causes.
The order and process of causes.
Wherein this is to be noted above all other. To wit that ye first causes
have always relation to the vttmost ends, and the mean and concurrau^t
ends, and effects to the mean and middle causes. Forasmuch therefore as the
will of god yt is to say the decree of God is the original of all causes, we
must then seek out, what the last end is which may be answerable to this will:
Romans 9.
now ye same is sufficiently discovered by Paul If God (says he) willing on
the one side to show his wrath and to make his power known, do with much
sufferaunce and lenyty bear with the Vessels of wrath prepared unto
destruction: and on the other side to make known the richesse of his glory:
toward the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared to glory. etc. By which
words who does not easily perceive that the last, The place of Paul to the
Rom 9. expounded.
and principal end of Gods workmanship does consist in this, not that wicked
men should perish, but that the Larges of his heavenly mercy should more
mightily increase in the salvation of his faithful. Now because this could not
be brought to pass by any other means, unless there were some on the
contrary part, upon whom the severity of Gods Justice might be exequuted: it
seemed good therefore to the Almighty Creator of all the creation in this
unspeakable Workshop of the whole world) to dispose his vessels to several
uses, not all unto honor, nor yet all unto dishonor, but some he made
serviceable instruments of his Justice, other some meet instruments of his
mercy: not yt he created his creatures to this effect, as to the final and
utmost end of his purpose, that they should perish: but because he had so
determined with himself in his secret counsel before the foundations of the
world, not to have mercy upon all, therefore it could not othertherwise be, but
that such as should be forsaken of him, being forsaken and yielded over to
themselves, should fall away of very necessity. For Gods grace withdrawing
assistaunce, man's imbecility must withal needs fall to the ground: and
Nature being now overthrown, Gods Justice could not but execute his office,
and punish grievously of very necessity. And hereof comes the destruction of
the reprobates and persecutors of his people: The cause effecient.
ye efficient cause whereof consists truly in every of their own corruption,
The cause deficient.
but the cause deficient in the will of God.

And therefore we ought not to Judge alyke of the causes of Election and
Damnation. For although these be certain branches of predestination, and
concur altogether in one kind one original and one end, yet do they differ
notwithstanding in the manner. The fountain and original of them both is the
decree of God and the end is the glory of God. And yet is not Election to life
everlasting of the same sort that reprobation to destruction is. How the causes
of Election and damnation do differr and agree betwixt them selves.
For he has chosen by making, he does reject not by doing somewhat, but
rather by forsaking. And in the salvation of yt Godly, yt whole cause is so
wholly shut up in God, as yt besides him no person nor cause can come betwixt,
that may challenge any interest in the title of Election and Salvation. But yt
matter goes otherwise in the destruction of the reprobate, for albeit such as
perish are not damned at all without the will of God: yet besides this will
also, yt obstinate rebellion of man's will thrusts it self in, whereby they do
worthily procure to the^ selves deserved Damnation. For God does neither so
cast of those whom he does cast away, as one that did enforce them to commit
filthiness, but forsakes every such one and yeldeth him over to his own
guiding. Now Freewill being nothing else but fraylty, and feeble weakness it
self unable to defend the brickle inclination of nature, against the
monsturous assaults of insatiable lust, yeldeth it self coward captive to
every storm of subtle Te^tation. By means whereof if comes to pass, that
man's life being left void of the help of God, as a ship destitute of a Pylot,
tossed to and fro with outrageous wyndes and waves of the Sea, which of her
self she cannot withstand, How Gods will does behave it self in the Elect.
does easily drive it self upon the Rock of damnation and rendes in pieces,
having none other guide but it self. But the estate of the Elect is after an
other sort, for whom GOD has chosen those: does he not yeald over to their
own conduct, but stirs them forward with the force of his secret good will,
and does draw the^ unto him self, and does so draw them, yt being called they
must needs obey: moreover he does so call the^, that he does forwith Justify
them yt are called, and does so Justify them with his free and bountiful
mercy, that he does at yt length glorify the^ whom he has Justified. In all
wh Action of Salvation Gods Grace does so accomplish all, and every part
thereof, as that nothing at all is left for man's will to glory upon, but very
much paraduenture yt may overthrow it. The damnation of the wicked ought not to
be imputed to God.
Whereupon the Apostle very aptly says, that it is neither of him that wills
nor of him that runs but of God that takes mercy, On the contrary part I
mean in the shipwreck of damnation, man's wayward perverseness being left unto it
self, does therein thoroughly play all her parts so, yt there is nothing now,
wherewt it may justly accuse God: neither is there any man condemned, but he
that through his own default does purchase to himself damnation. In which
damnation too things offer themselves in the mean time to be considered: In
the damnacion of the wicked two things are to be considered.
not only what he suffers which has deserved to be punished, but what he
has deserved which suffers, and how righteouslye he suffers: in the one
whereof man's offense is declared, in the other Gods Justice is discernable. The
first whereof the deuines do call, the evil of the offense, the other the evil
of the punishment: Paul calls it the reward of Sin, therefore whereas a
man does commit evil, Malum culpae. Malum poenae.
and is punished for that evil, let him thank himself for it: But whereas he
is righteously punished: herein let him not murmr against God as though he
were the Author of evil: for that which is righteously done, can not be
unorderly done: Although the punishment seem evil to him that suffers yt he
would not suffer, yet he is himself the Author of that punishment, because he
did that, which he ought not to have done. Moreover neither is that thing
forthwith evil in the sight of God, that appears evil to man's judgment:
these things therefore are to be wayed by the circumstances of the end. For
even as the cloudy ouerspreading of the darckened night, does not diminish any
part of ye clear day light, but rather beautify the lightsome clearenes of
the bright sunneshine, even so where the persequutors of the Church do dash
sometime on a Rock, and are drowned, How the damnation of the^ that perish
through their own default tourneth to good in the sight of God. Aug. Enchi.
Cap. 95. Aug. Enchi. Cap. 100.
although it be evil to the^ that perish properly, and of it own nature: yet in
that they dash on the Rock and perish, in respect of Gods ordinance, and in
respect of the end whereunto all things are directed, it is not evil in the
sight of God, but tourneth to good rather, and to the setting forth and
beautifiing of his glory. So Augustine not unfitly: It is good (says he) that
evils be, neither is there any inconvenience in this that Evils may not
happen without Gods will, which yet are performed contrary to his will. That is
to say, against that rule and ordinance which himself does allow and command.

To conclude. Albeit the Salvation of the elect, and the destruction of the
reprobate do proceed both from one original, namely, How the efficient cause
of salvation and damnation do differ.
from the secret counsel of almighty God: yet this same decree nevertheless
does not express it self after one manner at all times, if you have regard to
the manner of the operation. For the cause of Salvation of such as are saved, is
so wholly shut up in the closett of Gods mercy, that God only and alone is
the whole and only efficient cause thereof, so that the same ca^ by no means
be ascribed to any other. But ye damnation of the reprobate, albeit can not
escape the knowledge of the secret purpose of God, (because no one thing be it
of never so small value can be done without his will) yet if we seek the true
and efficient cause thereof, whereunto may it be more properly imputed, then to
Sin? and to the Devil the father of Sin? But for as much as: God does
compel no man to commit wickedness, but rather yeldeth them over whom he
forsakes to their own lusts, hereupon does it consequently follow, that the
first seeds of original corruption (being destitute of the grace of God)
suckyng up more deadly poison of ragyng lust by the contagious motions of it
own natural will, The efficient cause.
clean contrary to Gods will, is become by that means the cause and procurour
of his own destruction. The cause deficient whereof (as I vouched before out of
Augustine) is only in God: The deficie^t Cause out of Aug. lib. de Ciuit. dei.
12. Cap. 6.9.7.
but the cause efficient consists no where else then in man only.

These premises considered and duly examined, I return to the Question that
was proposed.

Whether God by his bare decree did create his Creatures to destruction,
Question.
and made them vessels of wrath?

Whether we will not grant that the promise of God was universal?

Whether we may imagine such a will in GOD, as will not have all to be saved
and come to the knowledge of the truth?

I do answer. Answer.
Gods promise is without all controversy general, and is extended generally
to all mankind, yet with this Prouiso, All, whosoever do believe or shall
believe in the son of God.

And there is no dought, but that his will does agreably condiscende with his
promise at all times, and in each respect very readyly bent, The promise of God
is general with a promise.
inclinable, and favorable toward the salvation of all ingenerall: so yt
those All be understand with the same Prouiso, to wit, all that are engraffed
in Christ Jesus by faith: Again, as under the name of this universal subject
All (to speak with Augustine) not every particular of all the generalities,
but the generalities of every particular is comprehended, Singuli generum.
(for else as All have not the true faith: so neither is the promise made unto
the^ all, Gunera singulorum.
who do not believe in the Son, nor is there any will in God to save them, but
to cast them of rather.

The end of Creation to Godward.
But as concerning Creation, if the end thereof besought for. I do answer,
that God did create man unto righteousness. For we were created to good
works, according to the testimony of Paul: That we should walk in them. But
man abusing the freedom of his own will, contrary to the will of God, to
wit contrary to the rule of righteousness, falling quite away from
righteousness into unrighteousness, did at the length through the same
unrighteousness throw him self headlong down into unrecoverable
destruction. What them? Shall we say yt these things chanced without Gods
knowledge? and against his will? or else with his will, or not regardyng ye same.
For one of these we must grant of very necessity. If we say, against his
will, we shall overthrow his omnipote^cie: if, without his knowledge, we shall
then empayre the excellency of his wisdom: If you say that he regards it
not: I beseech you what difference will be betwixt you, and that filthy pigge
Epicure: It remains then: That we boldly pronounce, yt this work was
achieved, God not only willing it, but foreknowyng, and withal permittyng it
so to be done. Which being agreed upon: there remains further to be enquired,
whether this will and sufferau^ce of God were idle and fruitelesse or
effectual? but to assign unto God an idle and fruitless foreknowledge (as
the Epicures do) we are altogether forbidden by the Scriptures. Then if we
grant, that this is accomplished through the effectual and determinate decree
and will of God, and withal that no man is able to withstand his will: what
shall we conclude then? That the Reprobate are altogether excusable, because
the fault to their reprobation rests wholly in God? This saying in deed thus
spoken might seem to be somewhat paraduenture, if so be that God had not made
man perfect, when he created him at the first, and had not enjoined him a law
and rule of righteousness, and had not strengthened him with a sound freedom of
will, adding thereunto further a certain severe caution of wholesome counsel,
and a fatherly forewarnyng of the danger that would ensue. But now when as our
first father Adam fell, we were all overwhelmed together within the self same
downfall, in such wise that we were neither able to shake of from our
shoulders that law of Justice, wherewith we were yoaked: nor accomplish the
perfection thereof, were the freedom of our will never so mighty. And therefore
he that does offend, has no cause whereof he ought to quarrel with God: The
providence of god ought not to be accused in the destruction of the Reprobates.
but has matter of contagion enough, and more then enough to quarrel against
his own lusts, Adam and the Devil: Whereupon we conclude at the length, that
the things which apperteine to destruction of mankind can neither escape the
knowledge and counsel of God, and yet the providence of GOD to be
nevertheless void altogether of blame and reproach.

But the Osorianes will deny that this ought to be attributed to Predestination
or Gods decree, How Gods sufferaunce deals in men's actions or life.
but to his sufferaunce only. Certes this is not to be doughted, but that God
does permit and suffer the things which he has decreed: But they do win
nothing by this distinction: seeing that they fall back into the same quauemire
out of the which they can by no means clear themselves. First whereas God
uses his sufferaunce, it is out of all question, that he does the same
wittingly and warily: furthermore whereas he had comprehended all those
things: by his unsearchable wisdom, and foresaw the euentes thereof: we
must needs confess that he was able of his omnipotent power to forbid all
what soever he were not willing should be done, if it had been his good
pleasure so to have done: now my question is, why he would not? what? because
he regarded it not? but this swinish blockishnes of Epicure ought neither be
admitted into any Christian cogitation: neither can any such retchlesnes agree
with the gracious mercifulnes of God: what then? was not God sufficiently able?
who shall let him? does there lack in him then any means to help? to think
so, were heathnish infidelity. But some man will say: Seeing that the fall of
Adam might have been stayed by an only beck of Gods countenance, if it were
not his pleasure so to do, why yet at the least would he not make stay of that
welspring of Sin in Adam? Whether Gods sufferaunce or his will bear more
rule in man's life.
so that the same might not have raunged to any further infection of the
posterity. Finally why does he daily give so great scope to Satan, whom, he
may so easily restrain? The premises considered, what remains? but that of
Necessity we yield, that he did will ye things which he foreknew would come to
pass, as not restrayning the proceeding thereof, being otherwise of ability
enough to stopp and overthrow it quite if he would: Or else how shall Paul's
saying be true, He takes mercy on whom he will have mercy, and he does harden
whom he will, if we make this an infallible rule that these things are
suffered contrary to Gods will, or not performed by his will? forasmuch as he
does all what soever him lists both in heaven and in earth.

Moreover, whereas he is called by the predestinate counsel of God the Lamb
slain before the foundations of the world were laid, and before the fall of
Adam: by what means (I pray you) could a playstere be prepared before the
wound made, but that through the same providence it was decreed, yt a wound
should be made of Necessity?

A dubble objection.
But lo a new onset again upon us: If this be true, then must it needs follow:
that both God is the Author of Sin, and withal that men were created by him
to destruction also. I do answer to both the objections. First that God is
not the Author of Sin, but the Author of his own creature: out of which
creature springs Sin: so that Sin now is the work of the Creature, not of
the Creator. Secondly where it is objected. That God did create his creatures
to destruction: this is most untrue: for God does condemn nothing of his own
nature, but sin only: when God created man at the first, he created him
perfect, upright, The original of sin is to be ascribed unto the Creature
not unto the Creator.
and without Sin: he endued him also with free, and absolute ability, not to
sin: the^ he armed him with sufficient furniture against sin, to wit:
with an especial admonition, so that the matter does sufficiently declare it
self, that God did so make man that he should not perish but be saved.
Afterward sin began to bud out, taking the sap thereof not from God, but
from Satan, God did not create man to the end he should perish.
and the freewill of man. Whereupon immediately ensued damnation, not laid upon
man's shoulders by reason of his creation, but willingly purchased by reason of
his own Sin. For if Adam had stood fast, in that vprightnes, wherein he was
created, and God had condemned him then, being in that vprightnes, there might
have been some cause peradventure that might have moved him to this just
complaynt: That God by his bare decree had unjustly created his own creature
to the end that he should be damned. But now sithence the whole race of
mankind did cast it self underfoot, through the default of his own lust, and
not through Gods default, this will be a good answer to the question: That
God did not make his creature unto destruction, but that the creature it self,
by defiling it self with sin, contrary to the dignity of his creation, From
whence the cause of damnation sprang at the first.
has made it self an abominable and ugly chaungeling, and transformed it
self from the creature of God, into the creature of the Serpent. So that the
creator himself in destroying his creature may well be adjudged to have
condemned now not his creature which he made, but the creature of Satan, which
the Serpent destroyed.

But you will say: Then was the Image of God deformed as soon as it was
created. I know it: but by whose default? by Gods default? or man's default? but
why did not the good creator of the world forbid it to be done, when as he
foresaw it would come to pass? The Objections confuted.
As though he gave not an especial commandment to the same effect in plain
words. Nay rather if your reason be so captious, as will not be satisfied but
with natural reason: I might more reasonably demand this reasonable question
of you? why did not man obey the express restraynt of God? For what do ye
read? was not Adam forbidden to touch the unhappy Apple of unlucky knowledge?
was he not carefully admonished, and forewarned by denouncing the danger that
would ensue thereupon? And being sufficiently armed with the power of Freewill,
hadd he not strength enough in him self to take heed? why the^ did he not
look to him self at the least in season, if he were not willing to believe and
obey Gods aduertizement? Certes as long as her reprosed him self, and his
whole sauetie in the save keepyng and custody of the Lord, he was in no danger
at all. But setting Gods commandment at naught once, whenas he chose rather
to become the bondslaue of Satan, aspyring to be as wise as his Creator and
God: here what should Gods Justice do now, which was not bounden to be any
more careful for an other bodies Servant? And yet for all this, God of his
mercy did not so forsake, and yield over his creature, although his Creator
most unkindly forsook him, The cause of each ma^s damnation is within him
self.
being his Creature. He did beautify this runneaway with the light of Reason,
whereby he might know, what ought to be eschued and what ought to be embraced.
Furthermore to make him more careful to regard virtue, he planted into him
very deep roots and pricks of conscience, he added moreover Statutes and
Laws, not only emprinted within every ones heart, but engraven also outwardly
in spectible Tables.

Finally besides these written ordinances of the law, he did ever now and then
among, raise up Prophets unto them, who with lively voice and teaching,
should never cease by aydyng, by promising, by terrifieng, by obtestyng, by
sweet exhortyng, briefly by all manner of means should never cease to retain
the people in an universal obedience, according to order and duty. What
shall we say to this also? that he furnished the very Gentiles them selves
(though they were never so beastly and barbarous) with the doctrine of
Philosophers oftentimes, with cou^selles of graven men, with wonderful helps
of good letters and precepts of Philosophy, persuadyng them to all things,
and withal not sparyng to prick them foreward to the embracing of virtue and
eschewing of vice, with horrible examples oftentimes as it were with a spur?
I beseeke you now what wa^ted to be added more either to Gods Justice, to
express mercy? or to his mercy, to express Justice? or to his diligence, to
express his continual fatherly carfulness?

But here wanted natural strength (you will say). Yet was not God to be
blamed for this, but man's folly rather. And yet neither in this behalf, did
Gods fatherly goodness deny his assistaunce: for even for this so are also he
made a plaster: And to Cure this universal poison of nature, he gave as
universal a Mythridatu^, made with the precious blood of his only begotten
Son: wherewith the weakest Creature in the world, and the most overwhelmed
with Sin might easily atteyne remedy of eternal life.

For as much therefore as mankind was of every side so wonderfully fensed,
with so many and so great benefits of Gods gracious mercy: what is there that
any man may either want to be supplied by this our most bountiful God, and
Creator? or what could this good and merciful God, have done more liberally
for his creatures? but here bursteth out more contention and quarreling
amongst the deuines, wherein they plunge themselves to much. For whereas this
faith in Christ is not pertinent to all persons, and that the greater sort of
people do not acknowledge the son of God, and that he is not so faithfully
Reverenced, as becomes: and that they repose not the safety of their
imbecillitie in this Christ as they should: now comes here the question, what
the cause should be then of this his reiectio^? from whence it proceeds? from
out the will of men? or or from out the decree of God? or out of both causes
being coupled together? Osorius here grounding his authority upon his fine
Cicero does very mightily affirm. That they were therefore made the vessels of
wrath because they would not be made the vessels of mercy. But how this may be
true, I can not conceive sufficiently. Although I do not deny this, that those
which ear made vessels of wrath are altogether replenished with a rebellious
will, wherewith they do voluntarily forsake the offered grace of their
vocation, yet this same will is not the cause of reprobation, but the effect
rather: and does follow, and not go before it, and it self is made rather,
then makes reiectio^. For neither such as be razed out of the book of
Election, are therefore become the vessels of wrath, because they did forsake
mercy: but they do therefore throw away mercy offered unto the^, because being
excluded from the grace of Election, they were foreappoynted to be ye Uessels
of wrath and castawayes: so that Osor. might have spoken more truly, on this
wise: yt such were made ye vessels of wrath, who^ God would not have to be the
Uessels of mercy: And for this cause those Pharaonicall persequutors of the
church were subject to wrath: not only because they will not be partakers of
Gods mercy, but also because they cannot.

Infidelity proceeds rather of ignorance the^ of will.
Besides this also, in as much as all the Mercies of God are contained in Christ
only, and in the knowledge of Christ, as as it were fast locked in the Ark of
God: in what sense will Osor. say, that they which will not believe are made
the Uesselles of wrath? as though the sin of Infidelity did not rather
proceed of the ignorance of Judgment, then of any motion of will, and of
purpose. For it consists not within the compass of natural strength, Faith
being the gift of God springs not from man's will.
for every man that will, to be able to know Christ as him lists: But such as
it is given unto from above, that they may be able to know and have a will also
to know Christ. Otherwise in what sense do the scriptures teach? that Christ
shall be the stone of offense, and Rock to stumble upon to them, who do not
believe and do stumble upon the word of faith, whereunto they are marked, if
the whole matter were achieved not by ye decree of God, but did hang upon the
determination of man: 1 Peter. 2. 2. Thessa. 1.
eue^ as ye Apostles does testify in an other place that all do not apprehend
faith. Again we hear also by the testimony of the same Paul. That it is
neither of him that runs, nor of him that wills, but of God that takes
mercy: Acts. 13.
finally of the^ which are ordained (says Luke) to eternal life, and whose
hearts (as the same Luke records) God does open, 1. Cor. 2.
to make them know the word of God. And again the same Paul does deny them to
have known the Lord of glory for if they had known him, they would not have
crucified Christ. But what was the cause, that they knew him not? but because
the whole matter thereof rested not in their own wills: but because by Gods
secret decree, Esaias. 6.9.
it was not given to them that had ears to hear: and eyes to see. For their
ears were made deaf that they should not hear: and their hearts were
blinded, that they should not understand. And therefore the Lord himself does
openly pronounce: Math. 20.
that many were called but few are chosen. Moreover in an other place, the
same Lord calls his flock a little flock. And why does he call it a little
flock, (good sir) I beseech you? If Gods mercy so largely poured abroad and so
freely offered (as you seem to blaze it out) do extend it self to all
persons indifferently without exception, why do not all persons then
indeffere^tly repair unto Christ? at the least, why is not the greatest part
drawn unto him? forsooth because they will not (say you) You are come back
again to the first question: For I demand what the cause is why they will
not, but because it is not given unto them? so that ye may perceive now, the
very welspring of this fountain springs not from man's will, but from the
counsel of God. Or else how does Christ name them which be his, to be but few
in number? but that he foreknew assuredly that it would be so: or how did he
foreknow it? but because it was decreed first of an infallible certeinty: And
therefore Christ teaching his disciples spoke openly and plainly unto the^ That
it was given unto them to know the mysteries of the kingdom but to others in
parables, Luke. 8.
that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not hear. Likewise
Peter confirmed by the same spirit (speaking of the rock of offense) does
openly denounce, 1. Pet. 2.
not only what they should do which should be offended at Christ, but also
that they were ordained of very purpose so to do. And yet I will not deny that
which they teach of the mercy of God. I do know and confess that it is far
and wide dispersed abroad every where, and that the same mercy of GOD denies
it self to no person (as Augustine says) but to such as will not receive it.
But in this same very mercy nevertheless two things are to be considered: Two
things to be considered in Gods mercy.
That God does not only offer those promises of benefits and blessings, of
his mere mercy and bounteous liberality: but also that he does inspire ye
heart of man inwardly with his spirit, to receive those things that be offered.

And so after the first manner of speaking, I do confess, that there is a
certain general grace of God, Whether Gods mercy be general to all
indifferently, and how it is general.
and a certain free choice of Election laid open to all, without exception:
that he may receive it, that has a will to receive it, so that under this word
laid open Gods outward calling be understood, which consists in precepts,
in exhortatio^s, in Rules, written either in the ten Commandments, or in
the conscience, or in preaching of the word. Grace of Vocation.
And in this sense may we rightly say: ye Pharao himself wanted not the grace
of God, nor Saul: no nor any of the rest, whom he did oftentimes allure with
gentle promises: terrify with miracles, reward with gifts, enuyte to
repentance with prolonging of punishment: suffer with much patience alluring
and calling all men daily to amendment of life. All which be infallible tokens
of his merciful will, called Voluntas Signi.

But after the second manner of speaking: if we behold the mercy of GOD, and
that grace which makes acceptable or if we respect that will of his, wherewith
he not only wills all to be saved, but wherewith he brings to pass, that
these whom he will, shall be saved: the matter does declare it self
sufficiently: Grace of Election.
that that Mercy and Grace of acceptyng those things, whereunto they are called
is not laid open for all and every one indifferently, but is distributed
through a certain special dispensation and peculiar Election of God: whereby
they that are called according to the purpose of his grace, are drawn to
consent. By means whereof it comes to pass, that the same calling according
to Gods purpose failing, every man has not in his own hand to choose, or refuse
that earnest desire and general Grace indifferently offered, but such as have
either received the gift of God, or are denied the gift of God. Neither does
the matter so wholly depend upon the choice of our will, either in choosing, or
refusing totally: for then might it be verified, that there was no
Predestination, before the foundations of the world were laid, if our Election
were necessaryly guided by our wills, and that our will were the foundation of
our Salvation. Therefore whereas they say, that God does accept them, which will
embrace his grace, and reject the^ which will not receive it, is altogether
untrue. Nay it rather had been more convenient to fetch our fou^teine from the
wellspring of Grace, then from ye puddle of our own will. So that we might
speak more truly, on this wise: Faith and Salvation take their original from
Grace rather then from our own will.
That God does endue us with his grace, and favorable countenance, because we
should be willing to embrace his ordinances and Commandments: on the
contrary part, as concerning those that will not receive his grace offered,
that such do worthily perish. And that the very cause, that they will not
receive it, does hereof arise, because their will is not helped: and that they
do therefore not receive it, because they are not the^ selves received first.

For as touching the Objection urged out of Chrysostom, An Answer to the
place of Chrysostom.
that God did as much unto Pharao in deed, as he could do, to save him: if
ye refer Gods doing there to that will which is called N^on signi, but to
beneplaciti: which God could and would utter in those, whom he made Vessels of
mercy, The secret will of his good pleasure unrevealed. i. Beneplaciti.
whereof S. Paul makes mention treatyng of the mercy of Predestination: surely
the Scripture is quite repugnaunt against it, saying: God did harden the heart
of Pharao. For if GOD did harden the heart of Pharao, how then did he to Pharao,
as much as he might? The express will of God revealed. i. Voluntas Signi.
But if Pharao did harden his own heart, after that God had not mollified his
heart, had not tamed his insolency, and not bowed him to godly inclinations
(which he is accustomed to do to his elect.) In what sense then is he said to
have done as much to Pharao, as to his other Vessels of mercy, whom Election
had Predestined to be saved?

But to let Chrysostom pass a whiles. Vocation taken two manner of ways
according to Augustine^ August. ad Simplici.
Let us hear Augustine hereupon, and make him as it were Judge of the cause.
For where question is made. Whether God did call all men indifferently by a
general inspiration to faith and Salvation. Augustine does make this answer.
For as much as vocation or calling is taken two manner of ways, to wit
internal, and external? true it is (says he) that all men are indifferently
called after the manner of that external calling: but all are not as
indifferently drawn by this internal vocation. And if the cause be sought
for, why all are not drawn indifferently, but that to some it is given, to
others some not given. He makes this answer. Some there be that will say
(quoth he) it is the will of man. But we say, it is the Grace and
Predestination of God. But God does require me^ to believe. I confess (says
he) yet is faith nevertheless the gift of God. For he that does require faith,
does promise withal, that he will bring to pass, that they shall perform
that which he commands. etc.

And again, If it be demanded: whether mercy be therefore given to man,
because he believes: or that mercy were therefore bestowed upon him, because he
should become beleuyng: to this question he makes the very answer of the
Apostles. I have obtained mercy, because I should be faithful. He does not
say, because I was faithful. etc. And this much hitherto out of Augustine. Let
us now come to Pighius. And because we are happened upon this place to
discourse upon, to wit, the equal dispensatio^ of Gods mercy: It shall not
be amiss to consider briefly his opinion herein, agreeyng with Osorius
altogether. For these be the speeches of Pighius. God does offer him self
(says he) an equal and indifferent father to all persons: he ouerspreadeth
all me^ generally with the one self same gladsome beams of mercy and clemency
without any difference. Pighius touching the equality of Gods Grace toward
all. Pighius similitude taken out of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Now if some through this lenity become tractable, and other some hereby made
more indurate: this discrepaunce proceeds from the corruption of me^. There
is no vnequallitie of distribution of lenity, and mercy in God. For proof
whereof taking a Similitude out of the Epistle to the Hebrews the iiij. Chap.
For as not every land watered with like bountyfulnesse of the heavenly dew does
yield like fruit to the husbandman, but one land yeldeth forth corn, an other
thorns and brambles, ye one whereof is blessed of God, ye other accursed, even
no less ioyously does the mercy of God shine indifferently, with general and
equal largess and bounty toward all universally: which being set wide open
to all alike, does deny it self to none, but such as will refuse it them
selves. But some turn to ame^deme^t of life through this mercy, others some do
abuse this mercy to more outrageous licentiousnes of sumyng. And again
fetchyng a similitude from the heat of the Sun. Whereas the Sun yeldeth
one self same heat: we do see that through the same, the earth is made more
stiff and hard, and ye wax softened and made more pliable. Hereupo^ Pighius
gathers. That, what soever difference is betwixt the good and the reprobate,
the same wholly to issue out of ye corruption of men, and not out of the will of
God.

The Reason of Pighius and Osor. is co^feted.
But our Expositours have sufficiently answered this slipper devise, that this
Assertion of Pighius, and of his mate Osorius, that Gods mercy is powered alike
into all men, is utterly false and absurd, and where they do affirm, that God
makes no choice in the dispensation of his Grace, and that there is great
difference betwixt the godly and the ungodly: in deed that there is great
difference betwixt the good and bad we do not deny. But where they do ascribe
the principal motion, and efficient cause hereof in man's will only, and not
in God only, they are altogether deceived. For as concerning the common nature
of man, Whether it be of God or of man that the good and the evil do differ.
truly in this we may with more certeintie determine equabilitie of condition
in mankind, as that they retain one semblable condition and quality of free
choice, for as much as all being created out of one lump, are alike all
poisoned alike with one kind of infectio^, as men that be altogether unable of
them selves to do any thing auayleable to Salvation. And for as much as this
imbecillitie does infect all mankind alike, as with a general pestilence: It
appears therefore evidently, that this difference stands not so much upon
the determination of their will: or at least if it stand upon their will, yet
that it does not proceed first from man's will, but from the calling of God,
which offers it self not alike to every one, nor after one manner to all
ingenerall, but does diversely draw some after one sort, and some after an
other. For as I said before: The Scriptures have set down a double manner of
calling, the one whereof is general and outward. The other is inward, according
to purpose: to wit, the calling of them, whose wills the holy Ghost does
enspire and enlighten with an inward effectuallnesse.

But this Similitude of the Clay and Wax is ridiculous and worthy to be
laughed at. An answer Pighi. similitude.
Because that this distinction can not be appliable to Freewill after the fall
of Adam. For of the whole ofspryng of Adam, not some be pliable as Wax, nor
some lumpish as hard earth. For where God does fashion vessels of one kind of
Clay (as Paul says) some unto honor, some unto dishonor: no man is so madd
to affirm that the Clay is the cause of this difference, but the Potter rather.

Moreover to as small purpose serves that place to the Hebrews: The place out
of the Epist. to the Hebrews.
which treats not of Grace and Freewill: but of the word of God, and men,
whom he does exhort by way of demonstration, and comparison of fruitful
ground, to receive the word of God fruitful and profess the same with
effect. The same also is to be understood of that Parable of the good ground,
yeldyng to the husbandman plenty and abundance of fruit, mentioned in ye
Gospel. But how may these be applied to Freewill? or what will Pighius coin
hereof? If Gods word take root in none, but such as be good, what avails
this sentence to establish the doctrine of Freewill? For the question is not
here, whether they only be good, which receive the word of eternal life
effectually: But this is the point that must be touched. From whence men
receive ability to be made good: of the nymblenesse of their own will? or of
the calling of God? And therefore that Parable serves to no purpose in this
case, as being applied for none other end, but to signify the dispensation and
disposition of Gods holy word, which in a manner may aptly be compared to seed,
wh though the husbandman do sow upon every ground indifferently, yet it
yealdeth forth fruit but in a few, yea and in those also that be good
grounds.

But having now rent in sunder these slender and trifling cob webbes. The
adversaries notwithstanding be never a deal the more quieted, but having pyked
together a fresh supply of skiptacks, do rush upon the grace of predestination
with a new Hooboube again, for the maynteinaunce of Freewills quarrel. For
with these shuttlecocks do these Redshankes with their Colonel Osor. set upon
us: An other Reason of the adversary leading to absurdity.
for to Admit (say they) that God does make choice but of a few, and pass
over an infinite number of others: this seems to argue no small repugna^cie
in Gods mercy, and a wonderful cruelty in him: neither is it consonant to
Reason. For if he suffer the more number to perish because he will not save
them, he is cruel: if he cannot save them, he is not omnipotent: Moreover if
he cast them of without just cause of offense, or deserte, he is unrighteous:
if in equal cause he make unequal distributione of his Election, he shall be
judged an acceptor of persons. An acceptio^ of persons.
But the almighty and most merciful God, does nothing now, that is not in all
respects most consonaunt to reason, no cruelty, no unrighteousness finally no
one thing that is not replenished with goodness.

The adversaries objections are met withal.
Albeit this mowsy and drossy chafe long sithence blown abroad in ye eyes of
Augustine by the Pelagianes, has been sufficiently fanned away in his book
entitled De articulis falso impositis: Yet following Augustine herein (more
then I need) somewhat to please Osorius withal, least he exclayme again that
his arguments are not thoroughly resolved: I will auswere in few words on this
wise. It cannot be denied that few are chose^, and many called: yet is not the
goodness of God any ioate impeached in this respect, nor his cruelty increased.
First in that he did choose few, or any at all: was an especial work of his
goodness. Then, in that it pleased him to proclayme a general calling to the
participacion of his Gospel for all men universally, was also a point of great
clemency: but in that those yt are called do not come, proceeded not of any
cruelty in God, no nor yet is any fault thereof to be laid to his charge, but
unto men's disobedience: but how can it be said to be man's fault say you, seeing
that not their wills, but Gods predestination withstandeth them so, that they
cannot be able to come? In deed that men's will is no obstacle unto them to
come, this does no man affirm: for hereof springs all the fault yt is in
man. That those that are not chosen do not come how man's will and gods
predestination: do severally work.
Again to say that Gods eternal Predestination is no prejudice to them that
fall away, surely no man can deny this likewise: but how this predestination of
God is an Estoppell, must be seen: not by powringe in new poison (for that
needs not) but by forsaking the old: thus therefore the will of man is an
obstackle, but not alone: So is Predestination also an obstackle, but not
without the will of man. So that here both man's will works, and Gods
predestination works, each one in his own kind, but after a several manner
of operacion: in the difference whereof, because Osorius will seem so
bussardly blind, we will not refuse to open it unto him.

And first Gods Predestination in deed has her operation according to the
infallible will of his most free decree, not so much in the things themselves,
as most inespeciall in the wills of men: and expresses in this their will such
a kind of operation, that it felfe in the mean time is forced of none, and
does always go before the actions of man's will, and does guide and govern
those wills: which direction and conduct man's will does atte^d upon: which
withal works also in things subject unto it, and after a certain manner of
her own, does move it self freely, that is to say, does with earnest
affection be^d it self willingly of her own accord, and voluntary
inclination, to the things which it embraces, or despises: for it does
neither choose any thing, but that it wills: nor refuses any thing, but that
it self wills not: finally attempteth nothing at all, but willingly, that is
to say of her own accord, and with a very willing mind. And yet not
altogether so freely as Osorius surmiseth which is in very deed cause of
Osorius his error herein, and drowneth his judgment most in this question.

For as often as he hears mention made, that will does use her certain free
choice, in consenting or dissenting: he dreameth by and by, that the same will
is such as is subject to the direction of none other, but is at her own
liberty: and is endued with full and absolute power in her self (which power
the Greeks do call (...), or (...) to eschew ye things that it wills, Self
power or liberty to live after her own will.
and to do the things that it wills, so that it does nothing of Necessity,
but which it might otherwise do according to it own pleasure if it will.
Again if a man make never so little motion of the purpose of predestination,
he does by and by so interprett thereof, as though nothing were left for man at
all to be able to conceive with reason, or deliberate with judgment, or make
choice of, through any voluntary motion of will, but to be enforced to all
things by a certain external coaction: as it were by vnauoydeable and fatal
Necessity. Both wh are utterly false: and to speak directly, ye very dotage
of Osorius. For as we do not despoyle will of her liberty, nor banysh it out
of the world, nor raze it out of our writings, so do we not magnify it like
an Idol, we do not root it out of nature, but we make it subject to God: nor
do deny that it is free after a certain manner, but do declare in what sort it
is free: for then it is free, when it is made free: we do not so derogate from
it, as though in attempting, Aug. contra. 2. Epist. pela. lib. 1. Cap 3.
or Relenting, it had no feeling or sense: but we do neither esteem it of so
great a price, as though it acchieued any thing of her own strength, without
the special conduct of Gods predestination. Moreover we do neither so
establishe this same Predestination, working in men's wills, as though it
enforced them against their wills, and violently to do the things they would
not. Aug. de predest 1. sancti. Cap. 3.
For will cannot chose but will, yea willingly always, and freely, what soever
it does, nor can do any thing, but that it wills. Or else will were no will at
all whether it did well or otherwise. But to will well, and to do well, she is
not able of her self, but boroweth her ability thereunto from else where: And
yet to do evil, has it more then enough in it self, yea without any help at
all, which she does both will of her self, and does of her self bring to pass
freely: albeit not altogether so freely yet, but that this freedom is always
captiuate with miserable thraldom and bondage. For will being left destitute of
heavenly assistance, is so subject and servile to her natural lust, Man's will
is never so free but that it is always coupled with Necessity.
and overwhelmed with backward affections: yt when it does evil it ca^ do no
better of it self though it would: nor is of it self able to do any thing yt it
does otherwise, the^ of very Necessity.

Whereby appears evidently what kind of freedom man's will enjoys: which
whether it consent to good things, can neither will nor do any thing of it
self, being not assisted: again if it dissent, cannot otherwise dissent, but
of very Necessity, being left over to her own strength: The strength of
Orignall sin.
For so deadly an infectio^ has poisoned the very Roots and whole offspring of
nature, that it is neither able to will any good thing, but being helped by
grace, no nor so much as to think a good thought.

What then? shall there be nothing left (say you) in the power of man's
freedom. Yes truly Osorius I do not spoil man's will so naked, that it can do
nothing in heavenly things: but your opinion tends rather to this effect,
that Gods predestination can appoint no certeinty in humayne acccions. For if
man's will do possess such a full and absolute freedom, as you say, as can by
no means be subject: what scope then give you to Gods Election, but that it
perform nothing at all freely, but be directed always by the free conduct of
some foreign guyder, so that the whole force hereof now be not of him that
calls, but of him that is called rather. But if according to Paul's doctrine,
the whole exployt of things be governed by him that calls only: what shall
become of man's freedom then? If you will cut these two asunder, and yealde
part thereof to will, and part to Predestination, ascribing all to man's power
and abilitye, and little or nothing at all to Gods predestination: why then do
you not instruct us distinctly, what, and how much each of them does perform?
and withal wherein the diversity and difference of them both consists?
which if you will not distinguishe duly and orderly according to their
natural and proper distinctions what other doctrine will ye teach us but that
Gods predestination must needs appear both in order of time to be first, Gods
predestination both elder in time and in power surmonnting all ma^s will.
and elder, and in power always more mighty and far surmounting all the
force of man's will? which being granted, what will follow here of at the
length? but that man's choice will be proved at the length so, and none
otherwise free, but yt it must always be in bondage, either to Gods grace
being helped to good, or to her own lust, being cast of to wickedness.

But me seems I do hear what the secrett whisperings of Pelagius brood, and
amongst them chiefly Osorius the stought Champion of that crew will bark
against this.

To consent or not to consent (say they) is in our own power, nor is the grace
of God otherwise effectual, but as we embrace his aid and assistaunce offered
unto us. The objections of the Adversaries.
Whereupon they conclude at the length, that it is in our own power either to
enterteine, the grace of God, or to forsake it.

This consequent we deny, as the which being made without all form of art, The
answer.
is also as void of all ground of truth. As concerning assenting, or
dissenting: I do confess that these motiones are numbered amongst the residue
of the natural powers of man's will, if we do consider of them, as in their
bare and naked powers, Aug. ad bonifacium. lib. 1. Cap. 19. De lib. arb. Cap.
2. and. 17.
without their obiectes. But to assent rightly to the things which appertain
unto faith, and Gods calling: Augustine does answer very discretly, That unto
this we are altogether unable of our selves, but that our ability hereunto
proceadeth wholly from him, which does first bring to pass, that of unwilling,
we may be made willing, and does draw them that are obstinate to obedience,
creating a new heart within the^ to make them his own willing, voluntary, and
serviceable servants. Moreover where they say that grace is none otherwise
effectual unless we do put our helping hands also together with grace: and
that none are helped but such as endeavor thereunto of their own accord. It is
true also, and the reason is: because God does work in man not with any
forraygne constraynt only, as he usually accustometh in brute beasts, and
stoanes, but with man's own voluntary inclination and motion: But from whence
this voluntary motion (in things appertayning to God inespecially) does arise,
Augustine will teach you: Aug. de correp. and great. Cap. 1. epist. 107. ad
victalem.
who does deny that this grace of God does find any good will in us, but does
make our wills to be good. And again where he testifies that no man is able
to resort to this grace for aid, but whose stepps the Lord does guide
thereunto: in so much that he boldly pronounces, that the beginning of Grace
is even to feel a want of grace.

Now therefore follows upon these propositions thus granted, that whersoeuer
Gods effectual grace is, Wherein effectual Grace does consiste.
there is no defect of will: on the contrary part, wheresoever appears any
defect of will, there Gods grace is ineffectual: which is comprehended in
these ij. operations: namely: in eternal calling, and inward drawing: so that
the receptacle of grace is within us in deed, but not as of our selves: but of
the grace of God. But the refusal of grace is both in us, and withal comes
of our own selves: and yet so nevertheless of our own selves, as that being
rejected from Gods grace, we cannot but reject his grace, nor are we able of
our selves to do otherwise, though we would never so feign. And what kind of
freedom shall Will be said to enjoy here, then the which no kind of servile
thraldom can be more miserable or more wretched?

But our good Sir here will deny this. That God according to the inestimable
goodness of his fatherly nature does reject any at any time from his mercy,
which is indifferently and equally laid open for all ingenerall. Hereof has
been sufficiently discoursed before. Yet I will add this one saying. If Gods
grace do reject no person from him, then must we of necessity confess that he
does not make choice of any like wise. For where all are generally and
indifferently chosen with out respect, there surely is no man cast away. Again
where is no reiection at all, there can be then no place for Election. For in
choice we are not said to choose all, but to accept out of all, not every one,
but whom we like best: Where a choice is, and no man rejected, there is not a
choice or Election properly, but an acceptaunce, and an allowaunce rather.
Neither can that be termed a choice of men, which the Grecia^s do call (...)
after the proper manner of speaking, except it be out of the multitude of a
remnaunt. But God (say you) has left no man so destitute of his grace, but
that every man is able of him self to be converted and to embrace grace, Aug.
de gra. and libe. arbit. Cap. 5.
if he will: or not to be converted, if he will not. Who ca^ better vnloase
this knot then Augustine? When the Gospel is preached, why do not all believe,
they are not all of the father? If we shall say (says he) because they will
not be converted, we shall answer here, to what purpose then was this spoken?
Conuertyng us O Lord, thou shall quicken us. And again. O God of hosts
convert thou us. etc. And therefore the same Augustine speaks not unfitly in
an other place. GOD does help them that are converted, and forsakes them that
are forsaken, but to be converted God him self helps. etc. If none be
converted unto God, but those only whom him self helps: Hereby it appears
plainly, that they which turn the^ selves away from GOD, do not therefore turn
away, because they will not turn unto him: but yt they will not therefore turn
rather, because God forsakes them. That is to say, because the Lord of hosts
conuertyng does not quicke^ them, that they may have will to be converted.
Albeit I will not deny in the mean whiles that vnwillyngnesse does proceed
from men them selves and from their own Freewill, yet this vnwillyngnesse
notwithstanding is not so free of it self, that they which are forsaken can do
otherwise, then they be unwilling of very Necessity: neither can there be any
defect of this will any where, but where Gods effectual Grace was not present
before. For as no man is good (as Augustine witnesses) that will not be good:
Aug. contra. 2. Epist. pela. lib. 1. Cap. 18.
so is there no man evil, but through his own voluntary will, which will
being forsaken of God, can nevertheless not do any otherwise but evil.

And why does God forsake the^ (will you say) why does not God help them whom
he has created? Let me move you a counterquestion I pray you, even in as few
words. And why do they not ask it of their God? if they be without, why do
they not knock? if they be unbelieving, why do they not seek? if they dwell in
Sin, why do they not repent. How can they (say you) seeing that they have no
Freewill (as you say.) Admit the same: but in whse default? in Gods default?
but God did create man perfect at the first, and endued him with freedom: was
it man's fault? Let them then accuse them selves, not God. But ye urge again.
And why then does he communicate his grace to some, which he denies to others?
why is he not indifferently merciful toward all? and as inclinable to all
universally? At the beginning, when God created man, he did then create also
all the nature of man fully furnished with all integrity, and freedom.
Afterward when this state of innocence and freedom was lost, when as also
the whole ^umpe was defiled withal, God might withal have so forsaken all the
same ingenerall. Nevertheless his mercy does not so, but would rather by
Election choose some out of this abominable corruption, not forsakyng the other
altogether in the mean time: only he denies help unto them, unto whom he
was not bound to give assistau^ce. And what though he were not so
indifferently merciful toward all? Yet was he injurious to none: what? do
you not hear what him self speaks? Is thine eye therefore wicked is it not
lawful to do with mine own as it pleases me? Or at least, do you not hear
the Apostle? O man what art thou that contendest against God? Whereas God does
owe thee nothing at all, do thou therefore snarle at him, because doing
wrong to no man, he does enlarge the richesse of his mercy toward them, whom
it pleases him?

But foreward crawleth Osorius Inuectiue. Osori. page 162.
For as much as this is the mind and meaning of Paul: what outrageous fury
is this madd man intoxicate withal, that would endeavor to persuade such a
co^struction by Paul's testimony? which would both overthrow the state of
human society, and withal make God guilty of unrighteousness? Sithe^ce
this is ye infallible meaning of Paul, which we have heretofore confirmed
after ye Judgment of Luther, Bucer, Calvin and by the testimony of the holy
Scriptures chiefly, which also Osorius him self (were he never so sober and
sound witted) can never be able to confute: to what end rendeth this so
foolish, and childish exclamation, proceedyng from an old and grayheaded man?
whereunto serve these Tragical outcryes? The complaynt of Osorius against
Luther touching the subversion of Civil society.
that this Ruler of roste so ruffleth up of a trifle, thundering out such
mo^struous outragies and frantic exclamations.

Which does overthrow (says he) the state of men. And what kind of estate of
men is this at the length, which Luther does so overthrow? If he mean the
state of the common weal, and Civil society: herein truly are many several
degrees and estates as well of offices, as of persouages. For there be Princes,
there be Dukes, there be Knights of ye noble order, there be Citizens, there
be diverse and several Magistrates, some high, some low, under who^ are the
mean and inferior subjects, eue^ the rascal rabble and multitude. So ^^
there also several distinctions of Ages, Arts, handycraftes and in manitary
occupations: some young, some old, some rich, some poor. All these now albeit
in number innumerable, and in kind and quality distinct, are nevertheless
co^federate and knitte together in a certain general unity, and mutual
co^formitie of allied leaque, through a certain Civil policy, and
institution of manners: are beautified with mutual amity: are united and
linked together to God, in one participation of Religion: are orderly governed
by force of laws: do exercize mutual traffic togethers: are restreined from
licenciousnes of life with one manner of general correction: So that if they
live not in full perfection of virtue, according to ye prescript rule of ye
laws, yet do they much less offend, for fear of Justice and Judgment. Now
Sir in this general Regiment and state of things, and of persons, what one
City, what one Villadge, or what Family was ever made one myte ye worse by
Luthers doctrine? either in respect of their due obedience to Civil
Magistrates, or in breach of domestical tranquillity, or in their dutyfull
allegiaunce to their Princes, or in any other Civil society.

The Tyrannical state of the Pope somewhat troubled by Luther.
One only disorderous order of people has entruded it self upon this state of
human society, vsurpyng a certain Princely superiority (I know no thy what
means) crept in at the first: sure I am, was never established by God, nor by
nature, ne yet by any necessary institution. But pressing to the pearche,
partly through fraud, partly through oppression, and chiefly through the
ambitious arrogaunoy of their own proud Prelacy: not to undertake any
necessary or profitable function in the weal public, nor to join in
administration of office with others for the behoof of any common weal: but
to hale all other gouernementes under their Jurisdiction, and to make subject
all other estates, potentates, and Empires under their stately Superiority, by
erectyng a certain new found, and Luciferlike Monarch upon the earth. It is
that Romish Tyrannical, and Papisticall dominion which I mean, and complain
upon, which through incredible subtlety, craft, and secret slye vnderminynges
under a commendable title of the Church, has by little and little, enhaunced it
self to so wonderful loftynesse: that all other estates and degrees (being
enforced to yield their necks to the yoke, as it were) must maugre their
beardes, not only submit their heads, and shoulders to their oppression, and
tyranny, but also like miserable bondslaues, must with all reverence, and
humility prostrate them selves, to kiss their feet. In this Imperial throne
is enthronized chief above all others, and triumphyng over all other estates,
the most mighty potentate and Monarch the Bishop of Rome. Next unto him (as the
principal stays and proud pillars of this Ierarchy) The Pope.
advance them selves the Cormoraunt Cardinals: The Cardinals.
Then follow in order the Roystyng route of Mytred Prelates, Mytred Bishops.
of the Scarlet crew of Rochettes, and shauelynges. I speak not here of good
and virtuous Bishops: nor of true Ministers of Christ, but of such as hang
only upon the beck of ye Bysh. of Rome. Last of all, after those ^olly
Cha^pio^s, whole droues of Monckes, Droues of Monckes and Friars.
and Friars, come tumblyng in heaps together, a rabble of rascals as of all
other people the most lazy, and lewd, so surroundyng the whole world in such
unmeasurable warmes (issue as it were and brood of the earth) that the earth
it self is scarce able to foster up her own generation.

And therefore if your meaning concern the overthrow of this sort of people:
in this point I do agree with you Osorius. That Luther trauayled in deed
earnestly herein, but achieved not so much as was needful for the Christian
common wealth. For albeit he could not utterly raze out the rakyng Regiment of
those Romish roysters, most inordinately raising them selves, not only above
all Empires and Regimentes of the earth, but also beyond all whatsoever is
called God: yet did he pretely shake them: he plucked of the vysours of those
Apish stagers, discovered their fraud, made ye world acquaynted with their
subtle sleyghtes, and lyeng doctrine, and confuted them with the manifest
force of the truth: finally albeit by openyng the light of the Gospel, he
could not utterly ^ende in pieces the shryne of the beast, which so many
hundred years had suppressed and drowned in darkness the knowledge of Gods
word, yet was his industry and labor not unprofitably employed to the defacyng
thereof. And I would to God he had been able, not only to have defaced the
power and outrage of ye See, but also to have plucked the same up by the
roots, and brought the memory thereof to utter confusion, and vanished it
clean out of ye minds and memoryes of men and, Nations for ever, in so doing
truly he could not have done any exployte more acceptable to God, and more
profitable to the state of Christianity. Certes many thousands of men and
women had been wonderfully preserved thereby, who through the more then
barbarous and unspeakable cruelty of this consumyng gulf, have been miserably
swallowed up and devoured within a very few years in England, France,
Spain, Scotland, Flaunders, Germany and other Christian Nations: for as yet
can not this insatiable Cormorau^t be sufficiently englutted and fully gorged
with Christian goare. And yet for all this, The Wolf does accuse the Lamb for
troublyng the water.
poor seely Luther is accused, which durst so boldly presume to unlade and
cure Christian consciences of so cancred a Fistula, of so poisoned in
impostume, and so raunging a carbuncle. And because he did dare to undertake
the patronadge and defense of the truth against manifest heresies, and more
then palpable errors, there is no less laid to his charge then high treason,
as though he practiced the utter overthrow not only of all Christian
society, but of the state of the whole world also. And why may not the Wolf
with as good reason condenme the seely Lamb for troublyng his water? Let Isaac
also be accused, because he restored to the Philistines the Wells pure, and
cleansed from filthe, Gene. 26.
and baggage which them selves had maliciously dammed up before. Let the
Physician likewise be endi^ed of murder, who ministering wholesome potion to his
patient against the pestilence or frenzy, has preserved life. Furthermore
let it be lawful for Osorius him self to bark against the shynyng of the
Sun, because it renews the gladsome countenance of the pleasant dawnyng,
by driuyng away the dazelyng darkness of the ugly night.

Finally let him quarrel with Christ himself, and his most sacred spirit, The
seat of the beast in the Apocali.
who did not only himself raise up Luther for this purpose, but also by
plain foretellings did so many years before prophecy of ye darcknes, decay,
and overthrow of ye self same See. Apoc. 16.
And he poured out his vyall (says he) upon the seat of the beast, and his
kingdom was covered with darckenes, and they did gnawe their tongues for
sorrow. etc. Which prophecy for as much as can not by any probable allusion: be
applied either to the Jews or to the Turckes: Let the Romish See bethink it
self well, what kind of kingdom at the length is foreshewed here, by ye
words of the holy Ghost. And to the same end do the words of Saint Paul tend
likewise: where he declares in what manner the Reuealyng of the Son of
perdition should come to pass. 2. Thessa. 2.
But after the proper phrase of speech nothing is said to be Revealed, but
that which before did lie close, and hidden in covert: And therefore if of very
necessity the Divine spirit of Christ must be had to the discoueryng of this
covert Enemy, which could not otherwise be espied by the policy and wit of
man: Certes it could not be, but yt this Antichrist whatsoever he be must lurk
and shadow him self wonderful covertly, and craftily, and that much people
should be deceived in him, before he could be Revealed and detected to the
world.

What Person this Son of perdition is, I do not at this present trouble my
brains about, surely for my part I know no one person else, neither by
application of the signs, notes, or circumstaunces, and plain demo^strations
(wherewith S. Paul does painte him out unto us) can I guess upon any other,
whom this counterfaite may resemble in any proportion, besides this one Prelate
only, who so lustely vau^teth him self in the Temple of God.

And therefore these thunderboltes and great flashes of Osori. lightning
touching the overthrow of the state of Christianity, do no more touch Luther,
then the lying cauillation of Amasias the Priest of Bethell, did concern the
Prophet Amos, to be a seditious person, when he accused him in the presence of
Jeroboam, the king; behold (says he) Amos has conspired against thee, even in
the mids of the house of Israel. Amos. 7.
Even such like lieger de main does our Osorius utter here, very finely
expressing unto us the wonderful and singular sleightes of the Papisticall
subtelties which those catholic counterfaytes seem long sithence to have
sucked out of the crafty wyles, and practizes of that old Comicall Phormio,
who being chiefly to be detected for some crafty conueyaunce, step forth like
call fellows first, and become accusers of others: supposing they shall hereby
acquit themselves clear of all suspicion of crime, if they ca^ first accuse
others of the fault, whereof they ought themselves be impeached (And here in
mine opinion) the very self same, or very like unto the same, seems to have
happened to Luther, wherewith we read ye wicked Achab did charge Elias ye
Prophet eue^ in like deceitful manner, 3. Kings.
saying. Thou art he (quoth he) that do trouble all Israel. Not much unlike
to that example of Nero whereof the histories make mention, who having himself
set Room on fire, playing and singing upon his harp the destruction thereof
in Homers verses, whiles it was on flame: did afterward lay the burning
thereof to the Christians charge, to thend he might procure them (though
altogether innocent) to be maligned, hated, and persequuted of the people. Even
in like manner (Osorius) whenas ye Papists, and the generation of your holy
Father have long sithence turned the state of the whole world, and the
conditions and decrees of all Civil society quite vpsidowne, according to
your own lust and pleasure: yea and daily moyle and turmoyle the same, and
have left nothing sound, and in peacible order throughout the whole earth,
continuyng still all manner of outrage, persequutyng continually with fire and
sword, with your cursings and Bulls, with execrable Inquisitions, horrible
punishments, scourges, and torments, and with all manner of horrible tortures,
triu^phyng (as it were) upon the Ransack of all Christian peace, and
tranquillity: Yet do ye Papists nevertheless rail rudely upon Luther. Thou
art he which do trouble all Israel.

And why should not that song be chaunted rather even into the ears of your
holy Father the Pope? for this is he, the same very Troiane Horse: from out
whose belly has issued all callamitie, and mischief. This is that Dauus, that
disturbeth all things. This is that Babilonicall strumpet Thais, the bruer of
all misery. What will become of that See hereafter I know not: hitherto surely
it has so behaved it self, that it may be worthily called the plague and
cancker of all Europe: which may be easily made manifest by many and sundry
testimonies. And although I speak thereof nothing at all, yet will their own
doings and proceedings faithfully described by historiographers, and deeply
imprinted into the present view of the world, sufficiently bewray their
dealinges. It is declared by examples what and how many mischiefs the Romish
See has ^ay sed.
The great and manifold turmoyles of changed estates, the sundry vproares of
people: schisms, slaughters of Christians, the horrible disturbau^ces of
kings, and kingdoms, the sundry alterations of the Romayne Empire, chaunges,
and translations of the same from out the East first, into the West, do
evidently declare the same: whenas the pope of Rome renouncing the oath
wherewith the Romans and Italianes hadd obliged them selves to the Emperor of
Greece, The Translations of Empires,
did send for Charles Martellus out of France, into Italy, and crowned him
Emperor, contrary to the ancient order of Election. Afterward, because the
Frenchmen would not yealde to their outrageous ambitions, practiced in
procuring the preeminence of the Popes Election, the Empire was suddenly
translated from France, into Germany, by means of which inordinate
alteration, can scarce be expressed by tongue, how great and how cruel wars
and contentions followed betwixt the Frenchmen, and the Germaynes, in ye reign
of Henry the first and Otto being then Emperoures. Neither was this amitye of
the Pope toward the Germayne Empire of any long continuance: whose only and
special practice was, that not only all Bishops, but Emperors also should
run to Room for ye Inuestiture and confirmation: Provided always, that it
might by no means be lawful for any of them, to entermeddle any thing at all
in the Popes Jurisdiction. The confirming of Bishops taken away from Emperors,
Now because the Germaynes could not be made pliable hereunto upon the sodeine,
as men who reuere^cing the dignity and maiestly of the Empire (after the
example of Otto, and other their Ancestors) were not willing to yeald to
thabacing of their lawful authority and prerogative imperial: hereupon began
incredible sturres and vproares to be kindled. The wars of Henry the 4. and
Frederick. 1. and 2. ^^donick of Bauie re, Frederick of Austriche, Ludouicke
and Rodolphe.
This was the occasion of the great wars of the two Henryes, the fourth, and
the v. Then also of Frederick the first, and the second: After them of Ludouick
of Bauiere, and of his brother Frederick of Austrich: And again of Ludouick,
and Rodolph, whom pope Gregory the seventh of that name had privily raised up
against Ludouick the true and lawful Emperor, sending him a Crown with this
proud inscriptio^ or poesy, petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho.

The Tragedies of Henry the 6.
What should I here renew the remembrance of those old Tragedies of the
Emperor Henry the vi. wherewith the whole world is well acquaynted? upon whose
head Pope Celestine the iiij. vaunced upon an high throane, did set the
imperial Crown not with his hand, but with his foot, and immediately with
the same foot, overthrew the same Crown again: most arrogantly boasting,
that he had authority to create kings and to depose them again. What shall I
speak of Chilpericke the French king? Chilperick the French King.
Whom Pope Zachary against all equity and conscience did depose from his true
and possessed inheritance, and advanced in his place Pypyne? The Scepters of
Emperors and Kings overthrown and taken away by the Popes.
And it lacked very little, but that king Phillip had been driven to the very
same extremity: Phillippe the French King.
against whom Pope Boniface the 8. did by all means possible teaze, and egg
to battle Alberte the king of Romans, to drive him out of his kingdom. Like
as before him Pope Hildebrand, did maintain in arms Henry the Son, against
his own natural Father Henry the fourth, Henry the 5. against Henry the iiij.
the Son in arms against the Father thorough the practice of the Pope of Rome.
who brought to pass by his cruelty, that the Father (being taken prisoner by
the Son, and shorn a Moncke) was thrust into a Monastery in stead of a
prison, where he perished miserably, through famine, and want of food. What
shall I say of that, where Pope Alexander the 3. that most meek servant of
the servants of God (treading upon the neck of a most renowned Emperor as
upon the imperial majesty trodden now under foot) applied thereunto this
triumphant Sonnet taken out of the Psalms of David. Super Aspidem and
Basiliscum ambulabis etc. Neither was Frauncisce Dandalus king of Creete and
Cipres, Francis. Da^dalus, an Ambassador of Venice first: afterward Duke of
Venice and king of Creete.
and Duke of Uenice any jot more friendly entreated, whom Clement ye proud
Romish Prelate would scarce at the length after long suit admit unto speech,
though chayned with an Iron Roape, and lying under his table amongst dogs.
Surely I shall seem to measure the sands, when I enter upon the gulf of
this Romish Ierarchy. Briefly therefore, and to be short: what Nation? what
Country? what territory? what Island did ever hear of the name of this See?
which has not withal been pinched with their crampes, spoiled with their
exactions, and beggered with their trumperies: at or least skarse peepeth as yet
from the tirannicall thraldom thereof? Yea what vproares? what commotiones?
what wars have wasted, or consumed any Christian nation these many hundred
years at any time? whereof this Babilonicall stru^pet has not been wholly, or
at yt least for the more part the Author and procuror? And no marvel at all.
For what may be looked for else, at the hands of so proud a prelate? who being
enflamed and boiling inwardly (as it were) with such an incredible inordinate
desire of luciferlike superiority: as that he would only, and alone, rule the
roast, and have all others in subjection under him, how then could such
unmeasurable ambitione be possibly satisfied without infinite troubles,
vproares, and tumultes? And therefore as touching that clamorous accusacions
against Luther: to be a common Barrettor and disturbor of all Civil society,
seems to me to be framed of Osori. none otherwise, then as though he would
that Luther should only bear the name, but that the Bishop of Room
should win the game.

Deal plainly therefore (Osorius) and point directly to the Butte, that you
ought to have shot at: Name the person by his name, if ye will be taken for a
good Proctour at the Bar: yea if ye be so careful for the preservation of
the common weal of Christendom (as ye are a courteous and Civil Gentleman)
let the force of your wrotte eloquence be blown directly against those
persons, which are Enemies to Christendom in deed, which tread Empyres
under foot, which do writhe and wrest Scepters out of the hands of Princes,
which move commotions, stir up ye people against the Nobility, ye Subjects
against their Kings, which do mainteyne the Sons in arms against the
fathers, which do cause the subjects to abjure their sworn obedience due to
their liege Lords, and teaze and provoke the rude multitude to bend their
force against their natural Princes, which do overthrow the peace and
tranquillity of the Church of Christ, with their seditious Bulls, open wars,
and Civil discensions, which do subvert all places of Justice, Judicial
seats and Judgments, rende laws asunder, are truce breakers, and
disturbours of peace, are disseysours and disinheritors of lawful discentes,
proprieties, and possessions: and are pillars and pollers of all commonweals:
which do turn all things vpsidowne, choppyng and chaungyng, and making a
general confusion of all things: finally which do neither render that unto
God that apperteyneth unto God, nor give that unto Caesar, which is due unto
Caesar: but rushe violently into both estates, as well Temporal as Spiritual,
making havoc of all: and appointyng one only Judicial Consistory in this
world, to wit, Gods and the Popes. If these dealings emporte not a general
overthrow of all Civil, and politic gouernementes, let the accuser him self
deny it. But if he confess it to be true: now then may I be so bold to
demand of Osorius, that he will vouchsafe to answer me truly without
parcialitie: For as much as that Po^tificall Romish See is to to much polluted,
and defiled with all those enormities (whereof I have made mention before) which
one of these ca^ he pyke out at the length, that may be duly and truly laid
to Luthers charge? where was Luther at any time moved with such desire to bear
rule, as yt he seemed willing to bear full sway, and be Lord and Ruler of all
others? Where did he entrude upon the right of any Prince, or took upon him
self violently the authority of the Civil Magistrate? where did he show him
self rebellious against the Superior powers? where did he disturb the peace,
and quiet government of any weal public? What Church or Congregation did he
molest and trouble? where did he ever shake of the obedience of due
allegeaunce? or procured any Subjects to rebellion against their Governors?
What Empyres did he transpose? what Kingdoms did he trouble? what wars was
he the author of? what Kings or Bishops did he ever minister poison unto?
either in the Communion bread, or in the wine within the Communion Chalice? or
in the common drinkyng goblet? as we read in the Hystories has happened unto
the Emperor Henry, unto Victor, and unto John king of England. And I would to
God there had never been besides there any other poisoned after the same sort.
When? or to whom did Luther ever offer his feet to be kissed? or upon whose
neck did he tread with his feet any time? Finally in what Nation or Country
was Luther ever known with his curses Exco^munications and Bulls, to have
usurped upon the Majesty of any Prince? or to have abated the due obedience of
the people? or else to have allured and drawn away the hearts of the Subjects
(which were by oathe obliged to their higher power) to rebel? and pursue the
destruction of their Rulers and Magistrates? contrary to their oath, contrary
to all Religion, contrary to all law, reason, and common course of nature it
self? Which inordinate outrage being neither to be found (by report of any
Chronographer) amongst the Scythianes, ne yet amongst the cruel Massigetes:
yet this do we read, yea and have seen with our eyes to have been practiced of
late here in England, by the treachery of Pope Pius the fifth, against our most
gracious Queen Elizabeth: yea and not long sithence against the late renowned
Kings Henry the viij. her Father, and Edward her brother.

But it comes already to my mind, what answer Osorius will make to all this.
For all that I have spoken touching the overthrow of the peace of the church,
and the scatteryng abroad of the possessions thereof, Osorius will forthwith
take holdfast of, and hurl violently with all the force of his eloquence
against Luther: speaking in this manner. What? as soon as these books of Luther
were scattered abroad, Osorius quarrel against Luther.
do we not see how the quiet and peacible estate of the Church is vexed and
troubled every where? how Monckes are driven out of their selles? spoiled of
their goods? Chanones thrust out of their Colleges? Abbottes and Bishops
thrown out from their rightful possessions? In deed we see this to be done
in many places (Osori.) Eue^ so also do we see the dark clouds to vanish away
after ye rising of the Sun in ye morning: we see also the foggy mystes to be
scattered abroad, ye darkened night to be driven away, the smaller stars to
lose their brightness, and the heavens to wax clear, beautiful, and fair of
hew, and men that before seemed blind with drousy sleep, to awaken, and shake
of their sluggishnes at the clear shining of the glittering light.

Now concerning your Objection against Luther, in the behalf of the Church, of
the Bishops and Monckes, you shall then make party colorable, and good,
whenas ye have rightly defined: First what ye true Church is, who be true
Bishops, and true Monckes. When I do hear this word Peace named, when I do
hear mention made of the Church and of Bishops, Peace. Church. Bushoppes.
I can not choose but acknowledge them to be honorable, names and commendable
titles: yea even such as all men do most gladly and joyfully embrace, but yet
truly under these names lurk many times, many crafty conspiracies, I know
that it is not unfitly reported by the Poet. That Peace is the most precious
pearl of Dame Natures stoare. Sillius.
And surely as every man excels in virtue and piety, so for the more part
is he studious and careful most for the due preservation of Peace and of
concord. And therefore good men do jove Peace, yea and mainteyne Peace
amongst them selves, yet good men only (good Sir) have not Peace alone. How
glorius and acceptable a thing soever Peace is accoumpted to be in her own
nature, yea though it be chiefly embraced and hadd in greatest price with good
men: Yet is not Peace always, and altogether conuersaunt amongst good men
only, Peace is a common thing both to the good and the wicked.
nor the entoyeng of Peace alone does make men to be good. For there is a
certain Peace amongst the wicked: Yea Pirates, Thieves, and Robbers have
their certain Peace, and agreement in wills. Neither is it to be doughted,
but that false Catholics, and such like heretics have their several
Conuenticles, and peacyble bands of concord, and consent: eue^ as the false
Apostles and false Prophets had in times past. They that worshypped the Golden
Calfe, and they that conspired and took counsel against the Lord cryeng
Crucifige against him, did represent a certain form of the Church, and were
firmly knitte together in mutual Peace, The form of the church is
altogether beutifull: but not always true.
and agreement of minds. If it be an heinous matter to dissolve the bands of
Peace, and knittyng together of fellowshyppes, concluded and determined upon
for ever occasion whatsoever: we must needs think that Cicero dealt very
wickedly, Cicero.
who at the time of Catelynes conspiracy did break a sunder, and sparckle
abroad the false treatheries of this detestable co^spiracie, being linked
together with a certain wonderful agreement of wills and affections, yea and
affyed together and sworn in one, by drinkyng a cup of blood. So also did
Elias very naughtely, Elias.
who detected so great a number of the Priests of Baal, agreeing together so
constau^t in error, and in so great a tranquillity, causing them to be slain.

And therefore it is not enough to pretend the names and titles of Peace and of
the Church only: if their effects be not aunswerable. Peace (says Hillarie)
has a glorious name, and truth is had in great admiration: but who doughteth
of this, that the only unity and peace of the Church, and of the Gospel, is
that which is of Jesus Christ alone? etc. Now as the Peace of Christ, and
Christ's true Church does always live in a perfect unity, so together with
unity does it always enjoy perfect truth and verity. On the contrary part,
that Peace and Church whatsoever is not grounded upon the Rock of Christ's
infallible truth, is not Peace, but Battle rather: is not the Church of
Christ, Under the name of peace many times lurketh horrible breach of unity.
but a conspirary of naughty packes. And therefore we do see many times come to
pass, that under the name of Peace, very natural dissentio^s are fostered,
and many persons are deceived by the painted vysour of the title of the
Church: yea they are many times accumpted seditious persons, which do uphold
and mainteyne Peace and tranquillity most. After this manner Tertullus the
Orator did accuse S. Paul to be a seditious fellow: so was Christ him self
also, and his Apostles, exclaymed upon as seditious by the Pharisees: Christ,
Paul, the Apostles, and Martirs, falsely accused as disturbers of the peace.
the holy Martyrs were likewise charged with treason, and procuring of vprores,
by yt vnbeleeuyng Emperors and miscreant infidels. Even so fares it now a
days with Luther, and the Lutheranes. Luther (says he) does rende a sunder
the Peace and tranquillity of the Church with his writings and preachynges:
does tear in pieces Christ's Coat that is without seame, rayseth tumultes and
vprores, does enta^gle whole Christendom with dissentions and varieties of
opinions. Luther accused of the Portugal Tertullus without all reason.
And why so (Osorius) I pray you? From sooth, because he does discover the
lively wellspringes of sound doctrine, because he does enstruct men to
conceive the most wholesome and sovereign Grace of God in his Son, and
declares unto them the true rule of righteousness, and the true Peace which is
in Christ Jesus: because be allureth all men to the only mercy of GOD,
excludyng all man's merits, and vain confidence of Freewill. Now because their
bleare eyed dulnes could not endure the sharpenes of this light, from hence
flush out all these fluddes of complaints, from hence rush out all these
Tragical scoldinges, and exclamations, wherewith these Rhetorical Becons have
conceived so grievous a flame, ragyng out on this wise. Is not this mo^struous
wickedness? is not this horrible madness? is not this intolerable
presumption? what fever does make thee so frantike Haddon? what furies do
possess thee Luther? what pains of haynousnesse do pursue thee? And such
like pleasurable ornaments of whotte eloquence, which scarce any man can read
without laughyng. Iuuenal.
For who can endure to hear common outlawes complainyng of Sedition?

Truly I suppose (Osorius) that with the very same words and even in the same
manner of outrage, or surely not much unlike, Herod and the whole Nation of
Pharisees did cry out, whenas the fame of Christ's birth being bruted abroad,
it was said, Math. 2.
that Herod the king was exceedingly troubled, and with him all Ierusulem
also. And therefore according to this Logic, and Rhetoric of Osorius. Let us
condemn Christ him self for a seditious fellow: because, unless that child
had been borne, and that Son had been given unto us, those troubles had never
arisen amongst the Jews. What shall we say to yt? Where the same Christ
afterward being now of well growe^ years, did declare in plain and open
words, That he came not to send peace in the earth, but a sword, but division,
but fire, and that he desired no one thing more earnestly, the^ that the same
fire should be kindeled. Wherefore if it be so much to be feared, least breach
of Peace and concord, breed offense: Let this Portingall advise him self
well, whether Christ shall be here accused as far forth as Luther, because in
the Gospel he is said to stir up the Father against the Son, the
daughter against the mother, the stepmother against the daughter inlawe, and
the daughter in law against the stepmother, two against three and three
ogaynst two: or whether Luther ought to be acquitted with Christ, for as much as
in this accusation, he can not duly be impeached with any one crime, which may
not also as well be charged upon Christ. If the Peace of the Catholics be
disturbed in these our days through Luther, the same also happened to the
Pharisees in old time, by the means of Christ and his Apostles, yea not to the
Pharisees only, but also in sturryng up all the Nations of the earth in an
vproare: wherein yet no fault can be laid upon Christ, who is himself the
Prince of Peace, and can by no means be unlike him self. In like manner, and
with like consideration Luthers doctrine is to be deemed (as I suppose). For
what a stir soever the Papisticall generation keep in these our days, yet
surely is not their Peace hindered by Luther: or if it be, yet ought not he to
be accused that ministered wholesome plaster to the wound, but the fault was to
be imputed rather to them, whose cankers were so incurable, that could not
endure the operation of the Medicine. And therefore as touching the crime of
sedition, and troublesome disturbaunce of Peace laid unto Luthers charge,
therein the accusation is wrongfully mistourned, and Luther injuriously dealt
withal. For it is not Luther, that has turned the Peace of the Church
vpsidowne, but the worldlynges, with their Osorius do in a corrupt sense define
the Peace of the Church.

It is an vndoughted truth that they speak, Where the Church is, there is the
unity of faith, but not where unity is, there the Church is always.
and which we also do confess together with them to wit: that the Churches
of Christ, as it is one, and most peacible: so delights in nothing more then
in Peace. But let Osorius give us such a Peace, under vysor whereof lurketh no
conspiracy against the Lord: Let him give such a Church wherein are not
fostred Enemies, and traitoures of the true Church. I speak it not, because I
reckon them all enemies of ye church that are Resiaunte within the borders and
territories of that pontifical Ierarchye. So neither Luthers vehement writings
were bent against them all. Nay rather Luther carpeth at no man's person
privately, inuadeth no man's possessions, nor seeks the loss of any man's
life. Only against the wicked Assertiones, Determinations and decrees, of your
pestilent patched doctrine, Luther did not inueigh against any private persons
by name: but gaynst their pestiferous Sects.
against the established erroneous falsehoods, abominations, and heresies,
against the wicked worshipping of Idols, Breadworship and stock worship, and
most pestiferous Superstitious Absurdities, wherewith ye force and efficacy of
ye Eua^gelicall faith was well near overwhelmed (not without manifest peril
of the loss of many thousands of Christian Soldiers) Luther undertaking the
Necessary patronage of the truth, endeavored with all his skill and force, not
to the end he would hurt any man, but that he might enduce others to the same
clear light, and sweet joyce of understanding, which himself had sucked out
of the pleasant source of holy Scriptures. If your darcknes vanish clean away
at the view of this light: If Herod withal his Jerusalem be troubled, If ye
Gentiles do frett and fume and the people imagine vain things, If monasteries
fall down altogethers: If Idols shiuer in pieces If the issues and sproughts of
Religiones never planted by god, be plucked up from the bottom of the Roots:
is this the fault of Luther? or the greuousnes of the malady rather? that will
by no means eudure the launcing of the soar? or is it because the botches and
plagues could no rather be handled, but would of themselves burst out, and
vanish away into vapors and smoke? And what if Lands and possessions long
times englutted with gorbelly mouncks, The overthrow of Monasteries not to be
imputed to Luther.
became a pray to the spoylers: or were turned to some better uses? first what
an injury is this to impute that unto Luther, which Princes and Magistrates in
their several dominiones did establish, as they lawfully might? morcouer what
is that to Luther? or what meruell is it if the birds do pluck their own
feathers again, which they gave before to the though? And what should let but
that a man being better advised, might revoke and employ to better purpose, as
may seem him best, ye thing wh he did foolishly or wickedly lavish out before?
But hereof enough: and I am long sithence thoroughly weryed in spending so much
breath and loss of so much time, in contending with such a trifling brabler,
who accustoming himself to nothing else almost but to lying, and slaundering,
yet among so many notable lies, and heaping together so many slanders upon
slanders, has not hitherto justified any one of all his lies, to bear but
even a bare resemblaunce of truth.

And here again comes to hand an other most shameless, and abominable lie:
So conning a craftesman he is, that the further he proceeds, by so much more
he contendeth with himself, yea and exceeds himself in slaundering. Osorius
shameless slander vp-Luther.
And this is it forsooth? That Luther (as he says) does accuse God to be an
unrighteous God. Good words I pray you good my Lord: In what place of all Luth.
speeches, or writings did you ever find any such word, or syllable? wherein
he laid the crime of unrighteousness upon God? Not so: but a man may gather no
less by his assertion. And no meruell: if you be the expositor thereof your
self. For what other thing else does the venomous spyder suck out of the most
sweet honnysuckles, and pleasant roses? but poison: But go to. Let us hear
at the length this notable Collection: for Luther does affirm that all things
do proce^de from out Gods eternal predestination as well when such as being
Vessels of wrath are damned through their own default: as also, when such as
are Vessels of mercy without any their desert are advanced to glory. This
phrase of speech being not founded first by Luther, but long before his days
preached by Paul, and confirmed by the full consent of the whole Scriptures:
Osorius knittyng and plattyng together many absurdities (which are both false
and ill fauouredly placed by the means of wrong misconceauing the said phrase
of speech) is come at the last to conclude on this wise. That God of
Necessity must be accounted unrighteous, Osori. page 162. 163.
as one that does unjustly punish poor wretched miserable men for the evil
deeds which they do not of their own accord: but whereunto they are forced
through eternal coaction. But this conclusion is not Luthers: but framed by
Osori. himself. And I think no man alive besides Osorius was ever able to forge
so mad a conclusion: who if were as void of desire of frivolous cauilling,
and slaundering, as Luther is clear of this reproach, to condemn God to be an
unrighteous God, he would never have patched up his papers with such frivolous
libels and unsavory Arguments, bewraying therein his notorious ignorance. But
that the matter may appear more plainly, let us display and unfold his whole
captious argumentation which he has framed to entangle Luther withal,
standing in arms as it were against him with a certain brood of ill favored
coupled propositions. And in this sort crawleth forth this slipper devise for
the more part.

If be determined by the sure and established decree of predestination, Osor.
creepyng Sophisme.
what shall become of every thing: and that it can not be, but as he has
decreed what soever he has decreed shall come to pass. Then is it necessary
that all things must be bound and tied to an everlasting Necessity.

If all things be brought to pass by an absolute Necessity: then must God be
accounted the only author and works of all things, whether they be good or
badde.

If all things good or evil, be ordered by the guyding of God the Author
thereof. Then remains nothing for man's Freewill to put in execution.

If this be granted: it follows hereupon, that men when they rushed headlong
into mischiefs, do not now commit wickedness of their own accord, but as it
were tools and instruments of wickedness, plied thereunto by an others hand,
and enforced with merueilous coaction.

Which propositions being thus argued by Luther, thereensueth upon the same
(being-layed together) this Necessary Conclusion. Conclusion.
That God does deal unjustly if he will punish that in man, which himself
wills and determines to be done.

Answer. The nature of the Sorites explaned. Generum. Specierum.
The Logitians that have described the form of a Sorites does deny that this
kind of arguyng is of any substance, unless the parts of the true
properties, and differences do accord and answer each other, with a necessary
coupling together of the kinds and the forms, and that the proper effects be
applied to the proper causes: Of all which there is not one so much observed in
all this heap of words, and sentences, wherein if I might as lawfully utter
some follishe skill, by creeping forward after the same sort, with follish
childish degrees of propositions: it would not be hard for me to conclude, out
of gramtyng the freedom of man's will? That there were no Predestistation nor
provident of God at all in heaven: which we proved before out of Augustine^ was
once concluded upon by Cicero. First such as do affirm, that God is the chief
and principal cause of all things, and do grant all things to be subject to
his will, do not err, except Augustine do err, who discoursing upon the will
of God. August. de Trinitat. Lib. 3.
The will of God (says he) is the first and Sovereign cause of all forms and
motions: for there is nothing done that issues not fromout the secrett and
intelligible closett of the highest Emperor according to unspeakable Justice:
for where does not the omnipotent wisdom of God work what it pleases him?
which mightily stretches his power from one end of the world to the other,
and orders all things most sweetly? Thus much Augustine. Necessity of
coaction.
And yet this cause does not therefore enduce such a Necessity of coactione,
as Osori. does imagine, as that no freedom of will should remain in man, that
he should do nothing of his own accord, that he should deserve nothing worthy
of punishment: but should serve in steed of an Instrument (as it were)
enforced through fatal coaction, and should be governed by an others power,
that it self should bring nothing to pass, wherefore it ought to be punished.
Now for as much as Luthers Assertion, does maintain none of all these: what is
become of that horrible accusation, wherein Luther is said to accuse God of
unrighteousness?

It is not agreeable with Justice (says he) that such as are only instruments
of wickedness, Osori. page 163.
should be punished. But according to Luthers doctrine men in doing wickedly,
seem nothing else then instruments of wickedness. Where find you this M.
Doctor? where have you it? who ever besides Osorius spoke on this wise either
waking or sleeping? sometime Gods providence does use the service of man to
punish evil doers. Even so did God avenge him upon the sins of own people,
by the Babilonianes. Again to take vengeance of the Assirianes, was Cirus the
Duke of Persia raised up. So did God use also the malice of the Jews, to
finish the work of our redemption: for unless that Natione had conspired
against the son of God, we had not been redeemed. And what is the devil
himself, but the Rod of correction in the hand of God? and as it were an
Instrument of vengeance, ordained to punish the outragies of evil doers? yet
does it not therefore follow, that devils and wicked persons, when they are
called Instruments of Gods wrath: are nothing else but Instruments, as though
they were forced only, and themselves did nothing at all, and as though by
doing nothing, themselves deserved no wrath. For neither do we so imagine me^
to be like unto stoanes (as I have said before) as though we left unto them no
ability in action: No man sins, but by his own will. Without the will of
God. And contrary to the will of God.
even as the mind of man, unless it be aided, can of it self do nothing but
sin: so does no man sin at any time, but by his own voluntary motione:
which sin albeit he does not commit without the will of God, yet because he
does commit it contrary to the will, and commandment of God, he is not
acquired of his fault. As when a murderer kills men, albeit he seem after a
certain manner to exe^uute the will of God, yet because he does not the deed
only being of the mind simply to serve his God, but rather to follow the rage
of his malice, therefore is he neither excusable: as being not faulty: nor is
God to be accused for unrighteous, because he executes his wrath.

Wherefore it is false and slanderous which Osorius does conclude upon the
Assertion of Predestination. For he concluded two absurdities chiefly, but with
a far more gross absurdity The first. Two absurdities in Osorius.
That God is the cause of destruction and reprobation. The second That they
which offend are punished unworthily. Both which are vnmeasurably vain: For
albeit the decree of God be the first and sovereign cause in all actiones, by
the which all other second, and inferior causes are governed: and although
there is condemnation to the Reprobates, without the same decree: Yet
nevertheless this same condemnation is both adjudged righteous: and flows
also from their own will properly, and not properly from the decree of God. For
many things be done against the will of God, by a certain wonderful and
unspeakable manner (as I have said) which come not pass notwithstanding,
August. de Lib. Arbitr. and Great. Cap. 20. and 21.
without his will. He rules over the minds of men (as Augustine reports)
and works in their hearts to incline their will whither him lists, either
unto good things for his great mercyes sake, either to evil things according
to their deseruings, after the proportion of his own Judgment, sometimes
manifest, sometimes secrett, but always most just and righteous: bringing to
pass by a certain merueilous operation of his own power, August. de
Praedestin. Sanct. Lib. 1. Cap. 16.
that in the things which men do against the will of God, it cannot be, but
that the will of God must needs be fulfilled.

Therefore the will of God (as you see) is the first and sovereign cause of
all causes, and motiones: which nevertheless must be so understood, that
this first cause respect properly nothing, but the last end. Now this end is
the glory of God, and the most excellent commendation of his Justice, and
mercy. In the mean time the other middle ends do depend upon their own
middle, and proper causes, and are referred unto the same. Whereby it comes
to pass, that betwixt Gods decree, and the condemnation of the Reprobate, many
causes of condemnation do come between, to wit: Infidelity: the Inheritable
corruption of Nature defiled: and whatsoever fruits spring thereof. Now the
proper efficient cause of this Infidelity, and natural corruption, is man's
will, not Gods predestination: which corruption and Infidelity notwithstanding
are so governed by Gods decree so subject there unto, that although they be not
executed by the decree of God, yet chance they not at any time, August. de
Ciuita. Dei. Lib. 12. Cap. 6. 7. 8.
besides his decree, nor without his decree: whereof God (as Augustine says)
is not the cause efficient, but the cause deficient.

Now therefore where is that fatal and everlasting Necessity (Osorius) which
(as you say) does thrust men maugre their heads by violent coaction without
any their own will into all kind of wickedness? Osori. page 163.
where are the vndescrued punishmendes of oftendours? where is the overthrow of
the common weal? where is that heinous accusation of the unrighteousness of
God? And where are now those Protagoristes and Diagoristes, and men far more
wicked then any of those, of whom you preach so much? what answer shall I
frame to this your malapere and currishe slaunderinge, O some of Iemini? 2.
King. 16.
If God have commanded you to lie so shamelesly without controlement, and to
backbite virtuous personages in this sort, what remains for them, but that
they patiently endure this general grief of the godly? and recomfort
themselves by the example of David? If peradventure the Lord will behold their
affliction; and will render unto them good things for this cursed slander. In
the mean space: this one thing delights not a little, that whereas his
fellow does counterfayte and lie in all things, yet he does the same so
openly, that no man can choose but laugh at him: and withal so Impudently,
that every man may detest hynm: and again so blockishly, that every man may
despise, and deryde him for it. Whereby it comes to pass that he does not so
much prejudice to Luther, by evil speaking, as he does bewray his own
ignorance to the world, by worsse proving his false and forged lies: seeing
he has neither seemed to have learned any thing of the truth as yet, nor
proved those lies which he has forged, nor ever shall be able to prove any of
them. Go to, and what gain (think ye) have you made by these your slanders
and lies? when as ye accuse Luther amongst the number of Atheistes.
Diagoristes and Protagoristes? and far more wicked also then any of these? as
one that does condemn God of unrighteousness: affirms him to be the Author
of evil, dispoyleth man of Judgment and reason, brings in fatal Necessity
(excludyng all action and operation of Will) compels men to do wickedly
against their wills: teaches that men may freely be evil, and go unpunished,
covers their naughtines with an excuse: These and other unspeakable
treacheries when ye lay to Luthers charge, do ye believe that ye shall make any
man give credit to your talk? And do ye not think, that some one or other
will rise up upon the sudden, which by readyng Luthers books, will espy
this your manifest falsehood in lying? Let every man that will peruse Luthers
writings, over and over, which he has left behind him as pledges, and
testimonies of his faith: who has ever judged or written more honorably of
Gods Justice? who has ever with more vehemence, reproved man's unrighteousness?
or condemned it more sharply? so far is he of from shadowyng the wickedness
of naughtipackes, with a cloud of excuse. And where then has this man
affirmed, that God is the Author of evil? Or where does he tie men to a
Necessity of sinnyng? such a Necessity especially as Osori. dreameth of? This
does he affirm, That Nature being left destitute of grace, cannot but sin of
very Necessity: which Necessity notwithstanding proceeds from no where else,
then from will it self being corrupted. But Osori. does so snatch, and wrest
this sentence into a cauillation, as though Luther did bring in such a
Necessity, as should leave no freedom to man at all: moreover such a
Necessity as should so abolish all liberty, as though will could undertake
nothing at all of his own voluntary choice: but should be forced, and whirled
(as it were) to all things through ^oaction and constraint: Such indifferency
uses Osorius here both to make an open lie himself, and to charge Luther with
a lie also. In the first whereof the vain error of Osorius is easily espied,
and in the second his unshamefast impude^cy discovers it self. Now to make
the same appear more evidently, it will not be impertinent in this place to
make a short collection of all the sentences and arguments of each party,
touching the whole cause of Freewill and Predestination: which being compiled
into certain brief places, it will not be amiss likewise to expound the same:
That by this means the Reader may more easily conceive, and more substancially
discern betwixt the doctrine of each party, as well of them yt are of Luthers
opinion, as also of the^ that hang upon the Popes sleaue: what is truth, and
what is false: and how slanderous a tongue Osorius has: what soever therefore
has been taught by Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin and other Deuines of
sound Judgment of Freewill and Predestination, are to be reduced for the most
part into this brief.

A Breuiate of all Luthers doctrine of Freewill and Predestination gathered out
of his books: And withal the contrary Arguments of the adversaries and the
solution of the same.
FIrst as concerning ma^s corrupt nature thus they teach. That man is so wholly
and altogether defiled, that he is not able of him self, or of any part of him
self, to atteyne unto God. But they deny not but man may come to GOD, by the
help of Grace.

2. That it is not in ma^s power to prepare him self to receive grace, but all
ma^s conversion to be the gift of God, in the whole and of every part.

3. That the Grace of God is not so offered, as that it rests in our choice
afterward to take, or refuse.

4. That the grace of God is not so given, nor to thus endonely, that by his
aid only it should help our weakness, as though there were otherwise somewhat
within us: but that the work and benefit hereof is his own: that our stoany
hearts may be converted into fleshly hearts: that our wills be not bettered,
but wholly renewed: That being regenerated in hearts and minds first, we may
will that, which we ought to will.

5. That ma^kinde having lost that freedom, which he received in his first
creation, fell into miserable bondage: And they deny, that man being in this
servile estate, is endued with any free ability to do good, or evil, as that
he may apply him self to whether part him lists. And here they expound
freedom to be that, which is opposite to bondage.

6. Touching the effectual operation of Gods grace: thus they do affirm:
that our will is not so raised up by the conduct thereof, that it may be able
of it self if it will: but that it is renewed and drawn, so that it must
follow of necessity, neither that it can be able otherwise, but to will.

7. They deny that in perseueraunce, man works together with God, as that of
his own power, it may obey the guiding of God: moreover in re^dring reward,
they deny that the latter grace is given to every man in steed of recompense,
as though by well using the first grace, man had deserved the last grace.

8. That man ca^ do nothing at all, especially in the things which apperteine
unto God, but so much as God himself vousafeth to give. And that God does give
nothing according to his good pleasure, but the same is altogether free,
without all respect of any man's deseruinges. Finally that God does give nothing
of set purpose; but that he pursues his own work to an end, in a certain
perpetual order and course.

9. That man does not so work together with God, as bringing or adding any
thing of his own, but does work by measure only in spiritual things, by
how much he is forced by the cause agent. So does the mind see, but being
enlightened: Judgment does discern, and choose, but guided by the direction of
the holy Ghost. The will is obedient, but being first regenerated. The heart is
willing: but being renewed, man does endeavor, does will and does bring to
pass, but according to the measure that he has received.

10. Moreover where as it is declared, that man has a will as well in good
things as in evil things, then if question be moved what kind of thing will
is of it self, they do answer with Augustine. That will is always naturally
evil, that of it self it can do nothing, but frowardly bend it self against
the Justice of God: and that it is made good through grace only, and so made
good, that it may then of necessity love and sollow righteousness which it
abhorred before.

11. They do confess with Augustine, that men when they sin do never sin,
but of their own accord and by the proper motion of will: and that they do
vaynely that do post over the fault thereof to any others but to them selves.

12. Again when they are directed to good things by the Spirit of God, yet
that their will is not excluded here: for as much as even this is the very
grace of God, namely, that their will is inclined to desire good.

13. That even from the first creation, nature is so weakened, that sin must
clean thereunto of very Necessity. Which Necessity nevertheless proceeds
not from God, nor from nature simply, neither from any destiny, nor yet any
foreign coaction, but from the corruption of nature, and from every man's
proper and peculiar inclination, and is to be ascribed thereunto: to which
inclination is annexed vnauoydeable Necessity of sinning, as Augustine
records.

14. Luther Calvin, and the others, when they seem to take away Freewill: the
same is so to be construed, as that they do not wholly take the same away, but
in that sense only, in the which that adversaries do establishe the same:
That is to say, wherewith they do establish merit and preue^tio^ in Freewill.

15. Last of all whereas the whole difficulty of this controversy does
consist in three words chiefly, to wit: Will, Freedom and Necessity. Will.
Freedom. Necessity.
Our Deuines do distinguishe the same after this manner.

The will of God is taken ij. manner of ways: sometimes for his secret
counsel, wherewith all things are necessaryly carried to the end, whereunto God
has directed them before. And so do we say, that nothing is done besides this
will: It is also sometime taken for that, which God approves, and makes
acceptable unto him self: And in this sense, we do see many things done, now
and then, contrary to his will discovered in the scriptures. And therefore
according to his will, God is said, that he wills all men, to be saved,
whereas yet not all, nay rather but a very few are saved.

Freedom taken two manner of ways.
16. Freedom also, which is peculiar to man, is discerned by two manner of
ways: either as it is set opposite to bondage: and this Freedom Luther does
utterly deny, as he may well do: or as it is set contrary to coaction, or
fatal necessity. And this Freedom Luther never gaynesayd: For as much as
there is no will, which can endeavor any thing against her will, or the thing
which she will not, or which will may sin at any time except she will her
self.

Necessity taken two manner of ways.
17. Likewise Necessity is to be taken two manner of ways, the one of
certeintie, and vnchaungeablenesse: as has been declared before, which Osorius
ca^ not deny. The other of violent coaction, which does offer force unto will:
And the same is imputed to Luther falsely.

18. But now, that former Necessity (which is called unchangeable) albeit it
take her beginning from the cause of Gods Predestination: yet this
Predestination does not cast such a Necessity upon things, which may remove
Freewill, no more does it take away the Justice of God, wherewith he does
render to every one according to his works. These things being thus set
down, and duly considered, it shall be an easy matter, not only to withstand
the cauillations and subtelties of Osorius, but to confound the residue of the
Sophistical brables of all other adversaries also, wherewith they practice
busily enough (but all in vain) to oppress Luthers cause: weuyng their
Cobbwebbes (as I may term them) for the more part after this manner hereafter
following.

The Arguments of the adversaries against the foresaid Assertions propounded
and confuted.
If our actions be first determined and decreed upon: Argument.
two inconveniences do ensue upon this Assertion.1. that the Freedom of man's
will must utterly perish.2. that men shall be constrained by Necessity, as if
they were bound in bonds. etc.

There are so many, Answer.
and so manifest testimonies in the Scriptures, concerning the truth of
Predestination, and the foreknowledge of things to come, that they can by no
means be denied. As to the Objection of inconuenie^ces, it is untrue. For the
Freedom of man's will does not so perish, but that men do always choose the
thing, that they will of their own accord and willyngly. Then also neither is
any such Necessity laid upon any man, which by force of coaction may drive
him to do that, which he would not. Moreover although it rest not in our
Freedom, that we may be chosen, or forsaken: it follows not therefore, that
we have no Freedom to any other things. This is therefore a captious Argument,
falsely concludyng, from the proposition Secundum quid, ad Simpliciter. A
fallax secundu^ quid ad simplicit,
As if a man would argue in this sort.

A fleshly man does not conceive the things that are of God.

Ergo, The force of man's wit does conceive nothing at all in any matter
whatsoever.

Osorius makes Luther worse the^ Diagoras: An other objection of the
adversaries.
and Pighius makes him worse then the Manichees. Pighius Argument is framed in
this manner. The Manichees, because they would ascribe wickedness to God, did
imagine two begynnynges: Luther ascribyng wickedness and mischieuousnes to God,
makes us like unto a Saw, whom God does draw, and drive forth and back,
whether him lysteth.

Manichee did appoint two natures in man, Answer.
the one good, the other evil: whereof that one could not sin, this other
could not do well. Luther does neither affirm two natures in man, neither
does so condemn ye same nature of man, wholly of it self: but as it is
corrupted after the fall, he does affirm, that of Necessity and always it
does resist Gods Spirit, yea even in the very Saints themselves, being even
from their very childdhoode inclined to evil. Then, that wicked men are as
Sawes in the hand of God, not only Luther, but Esaias also does confess. And
again, whereas he says, that the remnaunt of flesh (even in the holy ones) is
like a wild sauadge Tiger, ever resistyng against the Spirit, and whereas
also he does convince ye whole fleshly Judgment of man of faultynes natural,
Aug. in Johan. Tomi. 49.
he differs herein nothing at all. From Paul and Augustine, Augustine
writing upon John. Let no man flatter him self (says he) of him self he is a
Sathan^ Let man therefore take away Sin: that is his own: and leave
righteousness unto God. etc.

Osor. object
Osorius is not so blokishe as to make Luther equal with Diagoras, but much
more wicked. And why so?

He adiudgeth is to be more tolerable to think there is no God at all, the^
to conceive that God is wicked and unrighteous.

Osorius. page 163.
But Luther does conceive him both wicked and unrighteous.

Ergo, etc.

Undoughtedly a very heinous fact, yea more then Diagoricall, If so be that any
man either were ever so detestably abominable, as to be able to conceive any
such thing of God. But from whence shall this mylde and charitable allegation
of this most courteous Prelate appear at the length unto us to be truly vouched
against Luther? For sooth unless I be deceived, as the man is not altogether
blockish, he will coin us, this evident demonstration out of the bottom of
his own brains.

Osorius argument leading to inconvenience.
Whosoever does impute the fault to an other of the thing he can not avoid:
does unrighteously.

Sin is a thing in man that can not be avoided, as Luther does say.

Ergo, God imputyng Sin unto man after Luthers doctrine is unjust.

Answer.
The Mayor proposition is true in those persons, which were not them selves the
cause of ye things, which they could not avoid. But man now through his own
will has thrown him self into that Necessity of Sinnyng, which he is not
able to overcome. Whereupon the fault of the trespass that he commits, is
justly imputed unto him self, nor can he nothwithsta^dyng choose, but do the
thing that is committed. And so by this reason, the Mayor is false. Moreover as
touching the Minor. Two things are to be considered in Sin, as it is taken
to be the punishment of Sin, cleauyng fast unto us. The Act and the
Imputation: For although the Act he not taken away altogether through the
corruption of nature: Yet through Christ the Imputation of the Sin is take
away. Therefore if a man ca^ not be free from Sinnyng. Let him obtain a remedy
for sin in Christ, in whom Sin, though be unavoidable in this weak nature,
yet can not be hurtful at all, because it is not imputed: Whereupon Augustine
very fitly. Augustine de perfect. iusticia.
Sin (says he) may be avoided: not when the proud will is advanced, but
when the humble and meek will is helped. And the same is helped in them, which
call earnestly by prayer, which do believe, and which are called according to
Gods purpose.

He is in vayn commanded to make choice, Argument.
who has no power to apply him self to the thing which he does choose. But we
are commanded to choose both life and death, as well good as evil.

Ergo, We have ability in us to apply our selves as well unto life as unto
death, as well unto evil as unto good.

These things are alleged, like as if there were any man yt did utterly drive
away will, Answer.
or ability of free choice from me^. We do confess that man has a free, not
a coacted power to choose good or evil. For we do choose both, not through any
coaction at all, but of our own voluntary will, albeit our choice is not all
alike in both: for we make choice of the things that apperteine unto Salvation
after one sort: and of the things that are wicked after an other sort: For
wicked things, and things that are not godly, every man greedyly catches
after, and of him self is greedyly carried thereunto: yet so nevertheless of
him self, as of his own nature he can not otherwise do: if he be not hople^.
But good and godly things no man can choose, through the natural inclination of
Freewill, unless he be thereunto assisted by the aid of the holy Ghost. This
therefore that is read in the Scriptures: Deuteronomy. 30.
God left man to the power of his own counsel: he set before man's face life
and death, good and evil, aduising him to choose life. etc. Is a true saying,
but with this restrainte always annexed: that of him self he was able to rush
into all evil, and being aided by the holy Ghost, he might be able to do
well: on the other side: not being helped, that he is neither of ability to do
any thing acceptable to God well, nor could choose by any means, but work the
thing that was displeasaunt unto God.

An other objection of the Aduer.
If man be not the thing, that he can not be, of his own power and will, but be
compelled of Necessity to be that, which he ought not to be.

Ergo, This is not now to be imputed to man, nor yet seems he to be in any
fault for it.

The Answer is out of Augustine. Answer. August. de perfect. Iusticiae.
Nay rather it is therefore the fault of the man, that he is not without Sin,
because it came to pass by man's will only, that he should come to such a
Necessity, which could not be counteruayled up the only will of man.

An other objection of the Aduer.
If to Sin be natural not voluntary, then either is it not sin now, or
surely not to be imputed.

But if sin be voluntary and not natural nor of Necessity: then in respect
that it is voluntary, it is auoydeable by will, that it need not cleave unto
us of very Necessity.

August. de perfect Iusticiae.
Augustine does Answer: God created Nature at the first pure and sounde^
which may not be accused, as if it were the cause of Sin. But afterward
man's own will did defile this good nature, which being now corrupted
conceaueth Sin, which neither can be healed without the grace of God.
Moreover touching the thing that is done by will voluntaryly, it can not be
denied but that the same will may be changed: and so the will being changed,
the thing also that was done voluntaryly may be altered. But whereas it is
said, that will may be changed by will it self, this sauoreth surely of a
wonderful arrogancy. Gal. 5.
For as much as the flesh wills against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh (as the Apostle him self witnesses.) And these two are at wars
against each other, so that ye may not do the things that ye would. Gallat. 5.

Either a man may be without Sin, An other objection.
or he can not be without Sin. If he can not, what reason is it, that Sin
that can not be but present, should be imputed? If he may be without Sin, how
is will then bound by Necessity, which might have eschued the thing that was
committed?

And to this also Augustine makes Answer: That a man may in deed be without
Sin if God do help him, we do not deny: but this reason proves not, that
there is any man without Sin, that is not helped, neither do we agree
thereunto. But when a man may be without sin, and by whom, that is the thing
that is in question. If thou will say in this present life, and in the body of
this death, how then do we pray in this life, forgive us our sins? If man can
of him self be without Sin. Ergo, Christ dyed in vain. etc. But Osorius
vnderproppeth his Freewill here, with this crooch in couplyng the grace of God
with it, disputyng on this wise.

By the assistaunce of Gods Grace nature may subdue Sin. Osorius argument.


The grace of God does assiste them that be his own.

Ergo, In the things apperteinyng to God all Necessity of Sinnyng is quyte
excluded.

Least Osor. may not seem to differ nothing at all from the Pelagians:
Answer.
he does uphold the cause of Freewill with an addition of Grace. And yet for all
this, he does not so catch ye thing yt he gapeth for, but that a Necessity of
sinnyng shall always be resiaunt, even in ye holy ones of God: Grace assistyng
(says he) Nature may exclude Sin. If he mean the perfect assistaunce of
grace, by the wh all infirmity of nature is taken away, ye Mayor is true, but
yt Minor is false. For to confess, as truth is, the riches of Gods graces to
be wonderful, and his blessyngs, which God powers into his Elect to be
magnificent, yet this Grace of God does not make any man of such a singular
perfection in this world, but that the best of us all many times offend in
many things: and do pray daily, that our trespasses may be forgeuen. The grace
of God, in deed does help our infirmities, yt they may be lessened and
pardonable, but to be clean cut away, yt I do utterly deny: it does in deed
help out infirmities, yet leaves it us nevertheless in our infirmities, that
he may always help us. How plentifully the Grace of Christ was powered upon his
holy Apostles, no man is ignorant: which Grace notwithstanding did not make
perfect their strength, to the full measure: but the same grace rather was made
perfect, through their infirmity In part (faith S. Paul) we do know and in
part we do perceive, 2. Cor. 12.
But when that is come which is perfect, then shall that which is imperfect be
abolished. For now we behold as by a glass in a darck ridle, but then shall we
see face unto face: now do I know in part, but then shall I know as I am
known. 1. Cor. 13.
And therefore to answer at one word. If Osorius do mean that assistaunce of
Gods Grace, which may make absolute and perfect obedience in this life:
Augustine will immediately deny the same: who discoursing upon the first
commandment, Aug. de spiritu. and ^itte^a. Cap. 36.
whereby we are commanded to love God withal our heart, and our neighbor as
our self. We shall fulfill that commandment (says August.) when we shall
see face to face: And immediately after: And therefore the the man has profited
much in this life, in that righteousness which ought to be accomplished, who
does know by profiting, how far he is distaunt from the full perfection of
true righteousness. Lastly whereas it is argued from the power of Gods grace:
that suffices not to exclude Necessity of sinning, for it may come to pass
through Grace, and the absolute power of God, that a man may not sin at all,
And that the fire may not burn also. And it might have come to pass likewise,
That the punishment of the whole corrupted mass in Adames loins, should not
have been derived into the posterity, if it had so pleased God. Yet are not all
things done, that may be done: unless the decreed Will of God do join
together with his power. Not unlike unto this, is the very argument of
Celestius the Pelagian against Augustine.

The Argument of Celestine the Pelag. against Augustine.
If God Will, it may come to pass that man may not sin in words nor in
thought.

But Gods will is that no man should sin

Ergo, Nothing withstandeth but that man may not sin in words nor in thought.

The Answer out of Augustine.
The form of this argument should rather have been framed on this wise. If God
Will and do minister help withal, it may come to pass that man shall not
sin at all, but God wills, and helps withal that a man shall not sin
at all in word nor in thought Ergo etc. I do answer with Augustine, unto
the Minor. That it is true in deed, that God wills and helps against the
force of sin: I do add over and besides, that no man is helped but he that
wills, and works somewhat himself also. But two things are to be noted
here: both who they be, that are helped, and how God does help them: Forsooth
such as call upon him, such as believe in the Son, such as are called after
the purpose of his Will: and such as whose will is s^irred up to this end, to
crave earnestly for assistaunce. Because whom he has foreknowne, the^ has he
also predestinate to be made like unto the Image of the Sons of God. etc.
Romans 8.
Furthermore it must be considered, by what means he does help: not to the
end that no more dregs of sin should from thenceforth cleave fast in the
flesh, but to the end that sin should not raygne in ye mortal bodies of them
whom himself has sanctified through Grace.

What thing so ever God will have to be done, must of Necessity be done. An
other Argument.


God will have all men to be saved.

Ergo, It is of Necessity that all men shall be saved.

I do answer unto the Mayor all things that God will have done, Answer.
must be done of Necessity, so that God yield his help also together with his
will, that they may be brought to pass. Then I thus annswere to the Minor.
That it is true that God would have all men to be saved, with this addition
annexed, All to wit: All that believe in the Son. For without the Mediator,
he will have no man saved. But now sithence it is not given to all men to have
faith: nor that all men do repair to Christ, for help. The fault hereof is
their own vnbeleeuingnes, not the will of God. But some of Osorius pupills will
urge again.

Forasmuch as faith is the gift of God, Osori. Objection page 159.
and his will that all should be saved, is an universal promise: and that the
greatness of his mercy is prepared ready, and set forth to all indifferently:
why then is not geauen to all indifferently to have faith? is it because God
will not give it? but so should he seem an unrighteous distributour, and so
should he offend in Justice distributive: Or is it because men will not embrace
the kingdom of GOD? But this does argue that men may take holdfast of the gift
of faith, if they will. And how then is the power of Freewill suppressed?

Answer.
I do answer first out of the scriptures, then out of August. And they
believed as many as were foreordeyned to life everlasting Acts 13. Acts. 13.
August. in his book of Questions to Simplici. the second Quest.
Augustine. Two things are to be holden to be resiaunt always in God. That
there is no unrighteousness with God: and likewise, it must be firmly believed,
that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and on who^ he will not have
mercy. the^ he hardens. That is to say: on whom he lists he will not take
mercy: whereupon whether he geaue any thing, or require that is dew unto him:
neither he of whom he requires it, can well complain of his unjust dealing:
nor he to whom he gives, ought to be over proud and boast of his gifts: for
the one neither rendereth any more then is due, and the other has nothing but
that which he has received,

An Objection.
If God had commanded us to do the things that him self saw were impossible
for us to do, he might seem worthily to be accused of unrighteousness.

Answer.
This objection were perhaps to some purpose, unless the scriptures had
provided a Triacle for this malady: namely, Faith, in his Son: in whom when
we do believe, endeavoring in the mean whiles as much as lies in us, we do
then fulfill the whole Law of works: That is to say: we do attain full and
absolute righteousness, as well as if we had fulfilled the whole, being endued
wi^h righteousness now, albeit not properly our own, yet enjoying him
notwithstanding which of God was made our righteousness, by Faith: Whereupon
Luther in his book of Christian liberty has written very excellently. Luther
in his Christian liberty.
That which is impossible for thee to bring to pass in the whole works of the
Law (says he) which are in number many, thou shall easily accomplish with
small labor. Namely, by Faith. Because God the Father has placed all things
in Faith, so that whosoever is endued with this Faith, may possess all
things: and he that is void of this Faith, may possess nothing at all. After
this manner the promises of God do give that which the commau^dements do exact,
and they do finish that, which the law commands: so that now he only, and
alone is he, that may co^mau^d, and he only and alone is he, that may bring to
pass. etc.

To what end are ordinances to live well prescribed? The Argument. Ex Diatreba.
why are threatninges added to the stifnecked and rebellious, if men were not
able to live well? why is a freedom of choice set out unto us, to enter into
whether way we will, if we can not be able to hold the right way? who is so
mad to command a blind man to keep the right path? or who will command
that man that is so fast bound as being unable to move his arm, but unto the
left side, to reach him a a thing on the right side, which is not possible
for him to do?

Augustine will answer. Answer out of Augustine.
That which man is not able to atteine to by nature, unto the same may he yet
attain by grace: he does mean there, of living commendably, not of living
perfectly: which was never as yet granted to any one person in this life (no
though he were aided by grace) but to Jesus Christ alone. But ye will demand
again, to what end then was the law published? and natural choice set out
unto us, if that choice be not free to make choice of these things, that are
set forth to our Election? I do answer. That this complaynt of Nature, might
be not altogether impertinent, if he that gave the laws had created the same
Nature, such, as we have at this present. But now whereas he did at the
beginning create Nature, upright, and unspotted: God according to the self
same Nature, did publishe his law unto men, which should be holy and
undefiled. Neither could he do otherwise: whose commaundeme^ts if we be not
able now in this corruption of Nature to accomplish with due obedience, there
is no cause why the fault thereof should be imputed to GOD (who can neither
will nor command any thing, but that which is most righteous) but we our
selves, and our first parents (Authors of this disobedience) and the Devil
the cou^sellor are to be blamed therefore. God ca^ not be unlike himself. If we
become unlike to our selves, whose fault is it? ours? or his? Furthermore
touching the objection of the blind, and the man that was bound, hereunto I do
answer: That the similitude is not in all respects correspondent, for this
cause. For if God had blinded man at the first, or had chayned him fast with
such Roopes of Necessity, and afterward had commanded him, whom he made
blind, to keep the right pathe, or him whom he had first bound fast, to
reach afterward over to the right hand: this were perhaps not altogether
from the purpose, that is cauilled: but now for as much as the cause of this
blyndnes was procured by man him self, and not sent by God: he is not to be
blamed that gives necessary counsel (to speak as Augustine does) but he that
has entangled him self into such a Necessity, out of the which he can by no
means untwine him self again.

Objection out of Pighius and others.
A righteous and wise Law geuer does never proclayme such Statutes, the
performaunce whereof will exceed the ability and capacity of his subjects.

God is the most righteous and most wise Law geuer.

Ergo, God in publishyng his law did prescribe nothing beyond the capacity and
ability of his own Creatures.

Answer.
I do answer unto the Mayor, two manner of ways. First: That the same is true
in deed, in those laws which were established of the Lawgeuer, to this only
end, that the subjects should exactly perform the same. But albeit GOD did
desire this thing chiefly, that all men should precisely and thoroughly observe
his Ordinances, yet besides this consideration, there are many other ends and
causes. The use and end of the law.
1. That the Judgment and wrath of God against Sin should be made manifest.
2. That we might be more easily brought to the acknowledgeme^t of our Sins
and weakness. 3. Thyrdly, that understanding our weakness the more we feel
our selves more heauyly oppressed with this burden, the more sharply we should
be provoked (as with the Schoolemaisters rod) to flee unto Christ, who is the
end of the law. 4. That by this Schoolyng, as it were, we may learn what way
we ought to take, that if it be not given us at the least to atteyne the full,
and absolute obedience of the law, yet that beginning to be obedient, we may
profitte as much as we may.

Secundaryly we do confess, that the Mayor is true in respect of those laws,
for the due observation of the which, there is no cause to the contrary, either
by the Lawgeuer, or in nature it self, but such as appears rather in the
Subjects: Whose only fault, and disorderous licentiousnes procures the
breach thereof. As for example. If a Prince do send forth an Ambassador in
all respects whole, sound, and well enstructed, to whom afterward he gives
in commandment to put some matter in execution, which he might very easily
bring to pass unless through his own default, and disorder he made him self
lame, halte, or unable to execute the commandment of his Prince. Now, if this
Ambassador for want of health, and strength become unable to execute his
Embassy, ought ye Prince to be blamed for it? or the Ambassador rather, who
by his own folly has disabled him self? And that is it that Augustine does
seem to emply in his book De perfectione Iustit. August. de perfect. Iustit.
Nay rather for this cause (says he) the man is blameworthy, that he can not
perfittly do his duty, nor live without Sin: because by man's own will it
came to pass, that he should be driven to that Necessity, which could not
afterward be shaken of again by ma^s will alone.

Thyrdly here is to be noted, that there be four manner of means or ways to
observe the law. 1. Either by the force of our own strength: and by this
means the greatness of our strength is overcome by the law. 2. Or by the
help of some other: And so nothing withstandeth, but that we may fulfill the
commandments of the law. 3. Or by the operation of the holy Ghost in us, to
make us to live godly. 4. Or by Imputation through faith in the Mediator, who
freely forgeueth our imperfection, and justifies the Sinner and wicked also.

All sin is voluntary. Objection.


Ergo, No man sins of Necessity.

Here must be a distinction added in these words Will and Necessity. Answer.
If Necessity be taken in this place for coaction, then is the consequent
true: but if it be taken for every vnchau^geablenesse, which of it self can
not be otherwise altered, then is the Argument faulty. Moreover in the
Antecedent. If the word Will be taken for a sound Will and able enough of it
self, such as was in ye first creation of nature, the conseque^t were not
amiss, and was true in deed in Adam. But if we take it for that Will, which
is in us now defiled, and full of corruption, the Argument concludes no
Necessity at all, no more the^ if a man should argue on this wise.

Every man by nature is two footed.

Ergo, Every man may go.

If Nature here be meant for sound, the Argument is good: but if it have
relation to one sick of the palsy, or to a maimed man, or one that is bound
with roapes, being fallen in the hands of thieves: your self will deny the
Argument. And why so? not because man is not two footed by nature (if ye
regard his first creation) but because this nature is wounded through the
disobedience of our first pare^tes, and maimed altogether: so that now either
we have no feet^ at all, or they be not sound surely: or if they be hoale and
sou^de, they are not at liberty to tread on the ground, but fast bound by
thieves, and are holden, captiuate under Sin: so that either we be not able
to go at all, or at least less able to tread the right tracke that we ought
to do, unless the holy Samaritane come, and let lowse our bands, namely: the
assistyng Grace of Christ Jesus, of yt which Augustine speaks very notably.
August. in his 107. Epistle unto Vitalis.
If we will mainteyne Freewill (says he) lot us not gaynsay that, from whence
will takes her Freedom: for he that denies Grace, whereby it is made free,
either to eschew evil or to do good, is willing to continue still in bondage.
etc. And therefore when we debate or dispute of Will: the question must not be
referred to nature it self, but rather to the corruption of nature.

The Papists Argument.
There is no Necessity of sinning where will has a freedom to do.

All men are endued with a Freewill to do.

Ergo, There is no Necessity of sinnyng in men.

Answer.
Where Freedom of Will is, there is no Necessity of Sinnyng, this proposition
is false. For there is not such a repugnau^cie betwixt Will and Necessity:
Will and Necessity are not co^traries.
whosoever sins freely, the same also sins voluntaryly. No man is
enforced to Sin, but is drawn to wickedness by the enticementes of his own
will, and not by any foreine constrainte. Chrysostom: Chrisost. (...).
He that draws, draws him that is willing. Wherefore if our own will do
carry us headlong to Sin, let us not Impute it to Necessity, but to lust.

And therefore to make a distinction of these things (Osorius) and that ye may
be satisfied, if it be possible. Voluntary and Necessary are not opposite. For
they may both light together at one time in Will. When Will enlightened by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, does earnestly covet after everlasting life:
this it does of Necessity in deed, yet neither unwillingly, nor constrained
thereunto: for it ca^ not come to pass by any means, that will may be any
time enforced to will that, which it will not. Nay rather Augustine is of this
opinion, that it stands as much against the conueniencie of reason, for man
to will the thing that he will not, as if a man would contend, that any thing
could be hoate without heat.

And yet that Necessity in the mean time wherewith wicked men are said to
Sin, is not so absolute, and vnauoydeable, as that they can not choose but
continue in their wickedness. For as soon as the holy Ghost, Voluntary and
Necessary how they agree and are contrary each to others.
and the grace of Christ preue^teth them, that chain of that Necessity is
forthwith broken in pieces. And therefore Augustine does say, that it proceeds
of nature to be able to have faith, hope and charity, but to have the^ in
deed comes utterly of Grace. For that power and ability is not put in
execution, unless Grace be given from above. And thus far forth Augustine
did agree with Pelagius, that to be able, comes of nature: but Augustine
adds withal, that Pelagius would not agree unto. That to will well and to
live well, must be ascribed only to grace.

Nothing ought to be accounted for sin, which does not depend upon the free
choice of man. Objection.


This is true, Answer.
if it be taken of that kind of Sin, that is called the punishment of sin.
For otherwise Original sin is neither voluntary, nor undertaken of any
choice.

If you be willing and be obedient, An Argument out of Esaias.
ye shall eat the fat of the earth.

But if you will not, nor will be obedient, the sword shall devour you, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Ergo, It is in man's power both to will, and not to will.

Augustine. August. de perfect. Iustit.
The whole law is full of such conditions. And these Commandments were given
to suppress the pride of Arrogant persons by way of sufferaunce, under a
color, until the seed should come that was promised. Answer.
That is to say. That men should be tied to the commandments which
otherwise presumed proudly before of their own strength, In the accomplishing
of the which man faynting, and made to quayle in his own conceipte, he
should be forced to flee, to the deliverer and Savior. And so being terrified
by the rigor of the Law, should by the same Law, as by a schoolemaister be
conducted to faith, and to grace. etc. This much Augustine.

Osori. Argument.
Sin is either of Will or of Necessity: if it be of Necessity: then does
Osorius deny it to be sin, if it be of Will: then may it be auoydeable.

Augustine makes answer. That sin is not of Nature simply, but of Nature
corrupted, and of will depraved: whereupon ensues vnauoydeable Necessity to
dwell in sin until a Release be sealed, and delivered from the Grace of GOD
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And therefore that man may be acquitted of this
Necessity, he is to be called upon, unto whom the Psalmist cries out. Set me
at liberty O Lord from my Necessities.etc.

An argument for Freewill.
God does neither forbid nor command any thing in vain.

He should prohibit in vain, if the things that are contained in the Law
might not be eschued or fulfilled by us.

Ergo, We be of power to accomplish or to eschew the things which God does
command or prohibit.

Answer.
Augustine does answer. The whole Law which is comprehended in these two
commandments, in not coveting, and in loving: To do good, and to eschew
evil, does com^maund things that ought to be done in deed, and forbids the
contrary: nor so much because that we are of power and ability to accomplish
the same of our selves, but because when as man feels his own disabilitie
and weakness to perform them, he should not swell nor be pufft up with
pride, but being weryed and faint in his travail, should seek for relief at
Christ's hands: and so the law holding him in a couenable fear, should in
stead of a schoolemaister lead to the love of Christ.

An other Argument.
God does command nothing but that which is in our power to perform.

God does command spiritual things chiefly.

Ergo, Things that be most spiritual are in our power.

Answer.
The Mayor were true, if the will were sound, or such as was at the first, in
the first man Adam, before the fall which was of power to enforce her self
wholly to the keeping of the law, now sithence all the powers of the soul are
weakened, and ineffectual altogether to do any good, we must seek for ability
yt may satisfy the law in heaven, and not in our selves.

If man were not of power to be obedient, Out of Osorius and Pighius.
God should enstruct and exhort in vain.

In vain I confess: if he should use none other means, but external
precepts to lead to the true profiting in Godliness. Answer.
But as now, sithence he makes his doctrine effectual through the inspiration
of the holy Ghost, it is far of, that his dotrine should be fruitless.

God commands nothing that is out of our power. Object. Answer.


True it is, if you mean of that power, not which is engraffed in our natural
corruption, but that power wh God does give to his holy ones peculiarly from
above.

In the conuersione of a sinner God himself does not by his own will convert
him alone, Osorius reason,
but does allure and exhort him, that he may convert himself: for in much
lenity and patient suffering, he does not punish him, but grau^teth space and
place of repentance. and prouoki^g soliciting, and pricking him forward to
repentance, uses many occasions exhortations, and corrections. And therefore
it is our part to be converted, and to turn again, and his office to receive
the sinner that retourneth, and to quicken him.

The collusion, Answer.
and fallax of this reason, is in the insufficient nombring of parts, or
derived from the cause insufficient: for albeit God do work all these in the
conversion of a sinner, yet does he not use these external means only, but
ministers also in the mean space the motione of the heart withal, and the
inspiration of a secret renouation.

In the regeneration and conversion of man every of us have of our selves
sufficiently to be obedient to the calling. An other objection of Osorius.


It is in every man I confess: but not of every man, Answer.
but proceeds from an other, who calls inwardly before that man does
outwardly obey.

The Tridentine Fathers do object that man may refuse to give his consent, and
to reject grace when it is offered. An argument of the Tridentine council.


Answer
That is true in deed, and to true: Neither does any man Imagine that Grace is
so thrust upon man in his conversion, as though he should be constrained to
receive it, whether he would or no: which neither he can refuse, though he
will. But this is the meaning hereof. That the holyghost with his secret
effectual operation, does so enlighten the hearts of his elect yt the Grace
(which he grants of his own liberality) shall be received, that the will
cannot choose but receive it, with an hearty desire and earnest willingness,
yea most joyfully and gladly. But if it happen that grace be forsaken, that
proceadeth from the corruption of our own flesh, and our natural faultines
naturally engraffed within us.

Answer out of Aug. de corrept. and gratia.
Again, it is also in our power to give our consent.

In us in deed, but not of our selves as Augustine reports, who says that
grace does not find good will in us, but does make them to be good. etc. And
in an other place. Who ronneth to the Lord for Grace, but whose foot steps
are directed thereunto by the Lord? And therefore to crave the assistaunce of
Grace is the very beginning of Grace.

God has set before all men indifferently a ctrteine general grace and
promise and a free desire of choice, Object.
that all men may conceive it that will.

Answer.
We do not deny, that we have altogether a general grace of God, that calls
us to eternal salvation. But this must be confessed withal, that Grace to
embrace the things whereunto we are called, is not granted to all ingenerall
without exception, but distributed by a certain peculiar Election, and
Predestination of God to some: whereby it comes to pass, that it is not in
every man's power ye will, to refuse, or take hold fast of this grace, so
generally offered, but in their power, unto whom it is given, for to take or
refuse Grace offered, is not in our own power. Otherwise what place were left
for Gods Election, before the foundation of the world were laid? If our will
were a a rule of his Election, or the cause and beginning of our salvation. And
therefore this their cauillation, that God does receive them that will be
received, and does reject them, that will not be received, is untrue. It had
been more agreeable with reason, to begin rather at the Grace of God, then at
our own will, and it had been more convenient, to have said, that the Grace of
God is granted us, to the end we may will those things, that he commands
us: and that such as forsake it, are worthily rejected in deed: but in that,
yt they are forsaken comes hereof, because they are not first helped, that
they may be able to receive

If all the work of our conuersione be in God only, Object.
and that our endeavor avail nothing thereunto, what remains then for us but
that we must become no better then stocks and stoanes.

There is none of us that affirms that men do nothing toward their
conversion. Answer.
This is it that we do affirm, that men when they be converted, do consent to
the word of God, do love, do wish and earnestly desire to be saved. But yet we
do call these the effects, not the causes of mercy, who being now made the
Uessells of mercy, could nevertheless not have been able of themselves to
bring to pass that they should have attained the first and primitive Election
of God.

August. says that men are worthily cast away for sin.

Ergo, An objection out of Aug, words.
On the contrary: if men are rejected for their sins why should they not
as well be predestinate for their good works.

Augustine does not mean here that reprobation that is contrary to
predestination, Answer.
but under this reprobation, he does understand the last end and effect of
Reprobation, namely damnation. And in this sense it is true yt men are damned
for their sins, not forsaken: as they are neither predestinate for their good
works.

Luther and Calvin does deny, that it is in man's power before grace received
to seek and desire it: But Augustine affirms the contrary.

Nay rather what is more common in Augustines mouth then these speeches?
Answer.
Could thou be converted unless thou were called? Did not he that called
thee back again, bring to pass that thou should be converted? And again do
not presume upon thy conversion, for unless he had called the back again,
thou could not have been converted. And in an other place. God does not
only make willing of the unwilling, but makes also obedient of such as are
stifnecked and stubborn.

The doctors of the popish faction, although deny not that nature is very much
corrupted in original sin, The Judgment of the Adversaries touching
original sin.
yet yeald they not this much, that man can do nothing else but sin: Neither
that any thing else is taken away from Nature, besides the supernatural gift
only, whereby Nature might have been made more perfect, if it had not fallen.
And therefore that Nature was beautified with those supernatural gifts, of
the which she is now spoiled: the natural power and ability of will,
remaining in her force notwithstanding.

This is most untrue: whereas Nature and will it self, not by alteration of
Substance, Answer.
but by access of sin and disposition, is so depraved and revolted from God,
so weakened and spoiled through it own operation, as yt it may be not
converted, but by the only grace of God, having of her self no part in this
work, but as far forth, as it is prevented by God: Whereupon Augustine does
witness. That will does not go before, but is handmayd to well doing: Wherefore
the same Nature and substance of will, remains still, not changed into a
new shape by Gods creation, but defiled with the corruption and filthe of
Nature. The same affections also do remain that were before (in respect of
their substance) but in respect of their disposition, they be so putrified and
stinking, that nothing can be found in them now, that brings not with it
some matter of filthiness.

Who soever is helped, he does work somewhat together with him that helps
him, Object.
and suffers not him self to be applied merely passiuely.

Will being not renewed is helped of Grace.

Ergo, Freewill even sithence the first creation seems to bring much to
pass, and not to be altogether applied passiuely.

In the Mayor proposition should have been added, perse by it self. Answer.
For what soever works by it self, having the help of an other, is not
altogether plied passiuely: but with this exception, the Minor must be denied,
for freedom of choice, when as it self never preuenteth grace following her,
but is altogether helped of Grace going before, (according to the testimony of
Augustine) what can it bring to pass at all of it self? Or if it can do any
thing at all by it self, that which it is able to do, it does in moral good
things: external, and civil exercises: certes to deserve eternal life, to
purchase the favor of God, Salvation, Justification, and the everlasting
kingdom, Freewill is altogether ineffectual: but is a mere sufferer only,
nor has any thing, but that which it has received, and is altogether
unprofitable: yea when it has done all that it can possibly do. And this is
it, that Luther seems to stand upon.

Let him be accursed that will say that God commands things impossible. Out
of Jerome.


Melancton does answer: Melanchtones answer.
what soever were the occasion of this saying, surely those wh vouch ye same,
and so busily urge it, seem void of understanding in ye causes why ye law of
God was given: worldly wisdom supposes yt laws are published only because
they should be observed. But the Law of ye Lord was ordained for this cause
chiefly, yt the Judgment and wrath of God should be laid open against sin:
yt it should convince us of wickedness, and increase the horror thereof, yt
wickedness might be restrained from to much licensiousnes: that putting us in
remembrance of our own weakness and frayltie, it should in steed of a school
master enstruct us to Christ, as it is declared before.

And there was no lie found in their mouths. Apoc. 14. to this August. Object.
out of the Apoc. August. de perfectio Iusticiae.
makes answer, aduertising us how man may be in this sort said to be true
of his word through the grace and truth of God (who otherwise of him self
without all doubt is a liar) As is that saying. You were sometimes darcknesse
but now are ye light in the Lord: when he spoke of darcknesse he added not in
the Lord: but when he spoke of light, he annexed by and by, in the Lord. But
Osorius will urge against us here: Ergo, Nature being helped through grace
(says he) may eschew all lying and sinning. To answer hereunto again out of
Augustine, he that will speak so, let him be well advised, how he deal with
the Lords prayer where we say Lord forgive us our Trespasses which we needed
not to say, except I be not deceived If our consents never yielded to false
speaking, nor to the lust of the flesh. Neither would the Apostle James have
said. We are trespassers all in many things, 1. Iaco. 3.
for that man does not offend, but he whom flattering lust has allured to
consent contrary to the rule of righteousness. Thus much Augustine.

Object. out of Jeremy. Cap. 18.
Out of the words of Jeremy. If I speak of any Nation that I may destroy them,
and they do repent them etc. And if I say the word that I may plant them, and
they tourn away from me etc. upon this the Romanistes do build as follows.
Even as men behave themselves, such shall the potters vessels be afterward.
Ergo, it is false that the Lutheranes teach, that the regard of work does
fight against Freedom and the power of God in choosing or refusing.

Answer.
The Prophet does treat here properly of the punishment and rewards, which do
follow men's works at the last Judgment, and not of the manner of eternal
Election, which does preceede all our works, either going before (as August.
reports) which were none at all, or coming after, which were not as yet. If
the adversaries of Luther shall wrest these words of ye Prophet to the cause of
Election, as though Gods Election going before, did depend upon men's works
that follow after, they do conclude untruly. For as the Potter in fashionyng
his earthe^ Uessells, has no regard to ye merit of the clay, even so ye
purpose of God in the rule of his Election, is free from all respect of works.
And therefore Paul does resemble the same of the power of ye Potter. But if
they will translate the same to ye punishments and rewards of works, in this
respect we confess they say true, even as me^ behave themselves, so shall they
find their Creator affectioned toward them: Yet in such sort nevertheless,
that if any virtue or commendation be in ye Uessell, that may move to please:
the same confess, that it comes not of it self, but of the free liberality
of the Potter: on the contrary, if it have any thing worthy of punishment, then
to yield that this proceeds from themselves, and not from the Potter: For he
made Nature at the beginning whole, sound, and upright. Afterward came in
ugly deformity wilfully and voluntarily defiled through original sin.

An object. out of Esaias. Cap. 17.
God has no regard but to the poor and contrite in Spirit.

Ergo, The Grace of God is not promised to any but to such as are prepared
thereunto before.

Answer.
True it is, that none but humble in spirit are capable of Gods Grace: But
from whence comes this Iowlines, and humble reverence toward God: truly not
from the Nature of our corrupted flesh (which is wont always to be the Mother
of pride) but from the only gift of the holy Ghost: Whereupon if any man urge,
that there ought to go some preparation in man before, apt to receive the grace
of God: neither will the Lutheranes deny this, but so, that they also confess
with Augustine that the same comes to pass, not by the direction of our
Freewill, but by reformation and renewing of the holy Ghost.

Forasmuch as the cause of all men is general and the estate indifferent,
Object.
as the Lutheranes do say.

Ergo, There is no cause not reason, why God in the choice of man should
prefer some before othersome, and separate some from othersome.

S. Paul rendereth this cause for unreprovable I will have mercy (says he)
on whom I will have mercy. Answer.
Aunswering, as it were, to this same objection, that this comes to pass,
not because God finds any cause in man, but for that he only, receaueth him
of his own mercy.

I will not the death of a sinner, Out of Ezech. cap. 18.
but rather that he be converted in live.

If this saying be referred to the secret will of Gods good pleasure: how is it
then, that such will not be converted, nor flee from Damnation, whom the
almighty will of God both would have to be saved, and can make able also to be
saved? But if it be understood of his revealed will, which is called Volunt
as Signi: Voluntas Signi,
what marvel is it if such will not be saved, but perish besides the will of
God, which are left to the power of their own Freewill, by the secret and
unsearchable will of God?

What soever is voluntary may be avoided.

Argument.
Sin is voluntary.

Ergo, Sin nay be avoided.

This is au^swered before out of Aug. The Mayor were true if it be understood
of nature being sou^de: Answer.
but now nature is wounded and defiled, either because it does not see, by
reason of her blyndnes, or because it does not perform, by reason of her
weakness.

God would not commau^de the things which he knew man could not do.

Object.
Augustine makes answer. Answer.
And who is ignorant hereof? but he does therefore commanded some things,
which we are not able, August. de great. and. Lib. arbit.
because we may know, what we ought to crave at his hands.

Where Nature and Necessity bear rule, there is no just crime in Sinnyng.

The Lutherans do teach that Sin does cleave fast with in us by nature, and
that of very Necessity.

Ergo. According to the Lutheranes doctrine there shall be no just crime in
Synnyng.

Answer.
And hereunto answer is made before. In the Mayor I do distinguish Nature and
Necessity. If it have relation to Nature that was sound and Necessity of
coaction, true it is, that there is no accusation of just crime of Sin to be
laid there. But if it mean Nature corrupt, and Necessity of invincible and
unchangeable bondage, it is false, of which Necessity Augustine speaks. But
now faultynesse punishable ensuyng did make a Necessity of Freedom. An other
argument of the same sort.


There is no reason to make it Sin, where is no power to be able to avoid
it. I do answer that it was true in Adam, who committed that, whiles nature
was sound, Answer.
which he might have eschued: but in us not so: who in this corrupted and
forsorne nature now, whether we may avoid it, or not avoid it, yet does Sin
follow us of Necessity. For if will could eschew Sin, yet can it not clear
it self from sin of her self, and of her own ability, but only through
the assistaunce of helpyng grace: whereupon will deserves no commendation,
though it can clear it self: but if it eschew not the sin which it might
eschew, so much the more does it aggrauate the trespass. And why comes not
forth any one such at the length, which can or dare boldly profess, that he
has ever eschued the sin, that these Jack braggers boast so much may be
avoided? on the contrary although will can not escape from Sin, yet does it
not therefore cease to be Sin, because it sucked this imbecillitie, not from
nature (wherein it was created at the first) but from him, which might have
been without Sin, if he had would.

Osori. objection.
No man lacks the Grace of God, but he that will cowardly faynte of him
self. Answer.
True it is: but to make man not to be faint hearted in him self, it is
needful that the grace of God be present first, without the which all our
good will is ineffectual. Moreover whosoever being helped with grace, does begin
to will well, and to endeavor well is not now altogether a coward crauen: but
he that is faint hearted, is therefore faynte hearted, because he was not assisted
with the effectual Grace of God.

God does constrayne no man forcibly. Objection.
I do grant: but that they may be made willing, Answer.
he does first of unwilling, make them willing, and draws such as are
stiffenecked, to become inclinable: creating new hearts within them, and
renewyng a new Spirit within their bowels, to make them tractable, and willing
servants for him self.

But thou according to the hardness of thy heart, Osori. Object. out of S.
Paul. Answer.
do procure to thy self vengeance. The Apostle speaks here of the
external blessing, or calling of God: which he exercizeth indifferently,
as well toward the good, as toward the evil: and not of the spiritual
Grace of Regeneration, wherewith he does peculiarly seal, and establish his
Elect unto him self.

The Grace of God is none otherwise effectual, An other out of Osorius.
then as we be not sluggish or retchelesse to use his help offered unto us.

Ergo, It is in our power either to receive the Grace of God offered unto us,
or else not to receive it.

I deny the Argument. For where the effectual Grace of God is (which works
in us not only by outward calling, Answer.
but also by the inward renewyng and earnest motion of the mind, as Augustine
writes to Simplician) there can be no defect of will. And again, wheresoever
is any want of will, there is not Gods effectual Grace, which is comprehended
within these two parts outward calling, and inward drawyng. So that the
receauyng of grace, is within us in deed, yet comes not of our selves but of
the grace of God. But the Refusal of Grace, is both in us, and of us: and yet
in such wise, as that being left over to our own weakness, we are not able
to do otherwise of our selves.

There is objected out of Augustine Hypognosticon 3. book. Object. out of
August.
That we have lost our freedom not to will: but to be able, and to perform.

Answer.
First by yt consent of ye learned, it is certain yt this book was never made
by August. 2. the adversaries do not interpret it aright. 3. let ye premises
be joined with that which follows. For he does confess, yt there is a Freewill
having Judgment of reason in deed, not by wh it may be apt either to begin,
or to end any godly action without God, but only in the actions of this present
life. And forthwith follows in the same August. When we speak of Freewill,
we do not treat of one part of man only, but of whole man altogether. etc.
Whereupon their error is condemned, which do affirm yt corruption is wholly
includes within ye flesh: whereas by testimony of ye same Aug. corruption has
defiled yt inward powers of ye soul likewise: whereupon he speaks in ye same
place on this wise: Freewill being defiled, the whole man is defiled: wherefore
without help of the Grace of God, he is neither able to begin to do any thing
that may be acceptable unto God, nor yet to perform it.

The Objection of Osori. and others.
The Scripture does every where describe the Freedom of will. Where it
testifies: that God will render to every man according to his deseruyng:
whereas it co^teyneth ordinances and precepts of good life: where it
exhorts every where to godlynes: forbyddeth to sin: and threateneth
punishment: Out of all which it is most assured, that the power of freewill is
declared.

Answer.
If the whole Scriptures treat altogether every where of these, where be the
premises then? First as touching merits Augustine does Answer: Woe be unto
the life of man thought never so commendable, if God deal with us after our
deservings. As concerning reward, he does answer after the same manner: That
reward is given in deed, to them that deserve it, but yet so as to deserve, is
given first from the grace of God, and proceeds not from man's Freewill, unto
who^ reward is given afterward. That is to say, Grace for Grace as Augustine
says. Moreover as concerning the precepts and commandments: in deed GOD
does command us to walk in them, but he does promise that he will bring to
pass, that we may walk in the^: that is to say, that he will give us both a
mind, and feet to walk withal.

Object. against Free Election.
Where a Recompense is made, there is a consideration of merit.

Answer.
Nay rather the conclusion would have been more correspo^dent on this wise.
Where Recompense does follow, there does consideration of obedience go before.
For of Obedience the Argument is good enough, but of Merit stark naught.

Where Recompense is, there is regard had both of Obedience and of Merit, Out
of the Master of Sentences Lib. 3.
out of the Master of Sentences. Whereupon they argue on this manner.

Hope does not trust to the mercy of God only, but to our Merits also.

And therefore to hope being void of Merits: is not to hope, but to presume,
as they affirm.

This Treatize here touches Merits and Obedience both. Answer.
I answer unto both. First of Obedience, the Assertion may be granted. But
that Obedience is meant here, that is made acceptable to God, and proceeds not
from the will, and ability of our Freewill, but from the grace of GOD only.
But of Merit, if the worthynesse of the work be regarded, we do utterly deny
it: if they understand of Obedience approved and acceptable in the sight of
GOD, we do not strive against them, so that they will reknowledge this much
again, that this Obedience of ours, how ready soever it be, does not spryng
from our own ability, but that we ought to acknowledge it (as a gift received
by the benefit of the heavenly Grace) to be his gift only, and none others.
Against this Masterlyke sentence I will set down the opinion of Basile. He
that trusts not in himself, Basil. upon the.32. Psalm. Aug. in his Epistle
to Sixtus.
neither looks to be justified by works, that man has the hope of Salvation
reposed only in the mercies of God. Augustine, disputyng against the
Pelagians, which did say, that the same Recompense which shall be given in the
end, is a reward of good works going before, does answer: That this may be
granted unto them, if they likewise again would confess, that those good
works were the gifts of God, and not the proper actions of me^: for those that
are such, that is to say, proper unto men, are evil: but yet are good gifts
of God. etc. Whereupon in an other place. If thy merits (says he) come of thy
self, August. de Great. and Libero Arbit. Aug. in his Epistle to Sixtus. 105.
they be evil, and for that cause are they not crowned: and therefore that
they may be good, they must be the gifts of God. And again writing to Sixtus.
Be there no merits of righteous men? yeas truly: Because they be righteous
men: but their merits brought not to pass, that they were made righteous. For
they be made righteous, when they be Justified: but after the manner of the
Apostles teaching: Freely Justified through the Grace of Christ. And again
writing upon the 94. Psalm. Aug. upon the.94. Psalm.
If GOD would deal according to men's deservings, he should not find any
thing, but that he might of very Justice utterly condemn. etc.

But these sayings, because they apperteyne to the Judgment of yeldyng
Reward, do concern our cause nothing at all, who do not create now of the last
Judgment, but of the Grace of Election properly: August. de bono persevere.
Cap. 17
Which grace whosoever will say is given according to the proportion of
deservings, Augustine does call the same a most pernicious error.

Object. out of August.
It is Furthermore objected that Augustine writing unto Prosper and Hyllary does
not only in the very title of the book join Freewill with Grace, but also
heapyng a number of Arguments together does very earnestly endeavor to
confirm, that man has Freewill.

Answer.
I do confess that Augustine in these books, as many times otherwise, does by
certain Arguments framed out of holy Scriptures teach. Freewill, and withal
join it with Grace. But such Arguments are they, as him self afterward
confuteth. Moreover consideration must be had in what wise he does join both
these together, and how he does part them a su^der again. Will is always Free
either to righteousness or to Sin.
They that do fortify Grace in such wise, as that ma^s Freewill may in no
sense be admitted withal, do not Judge thereof rightly. For man's will whether
it be good, or whether it be evil, does never cease to be after a certain
sort Free: either Free to righteousness, or Free to Sin: which if it be good,
she receaueth her goodness of Grace: if it be evil, she sucketh that evil of
her self: and therefore sucketh it of her self, because it is severed from
Grace. Furthermore it must be considered, in what sense Augustine does construe
Freewill: Surely if our adversaries do interpret Freewill after this sense,
as though it contained in her own power, a Free election of choosing good, or
evil: they swerve altogether from Augustines interpretation. Who by this
vocable Freewill seems to signify nothing else, then that will only, which
works those things voluntaryly, that it works, whether they be good, or
evil.

An other Objection out of Augustine: Out of August. in his 1. and^ 2. Epistle
to Valentine. How far forth will is free after August.
Believe the holy Scriptures both that there is Freewill, and the grace of GOD,
without whose help man can neither be converted to God, nor profit with God.
Again out of his 2. Epistle to Valentine. The Catholic faith does never deny
Freewill either toward good life or toward evil life. Neither does it
attribute so much unto it, as that it may be of any value without the grace of
God, whether it be converted out of evil into good, or whether it continue
profityng in good, or whether it attain to the everlasting good: whereas now
it fears not least it quayle and wax faynte. etc.

What is meant else by these words of Augustine, Answer.
but that under the name of Freewill, Man's will capable of good and evil.
that will be understood in man, which is capable as well of evil, as of
good: and may be evil of it self, through corruption of Nature, but good
only by reformation of Grace.

All actions that men take in hand do proceade from God the first mouer and
ruler, Against Gods providence and Predest. out of Osorius.
as from the first cause thereof according to Luthers doctrine.

All sins are actions.

Ergo, After the Lutheranes doctrine, all sins do proceade from God as from
the chief and first cause.

First in the Mayor this word Actions must be distinguished. Answer.
Some Actions are Natural, some are Divine, and Supernatural. Now if the
Mayor have respect to these Actions, Three manner of Actions.
then is the Mayor true, and the Minor to be denied. For the Mayor does not
mean properly these Actions which are not of nature, but against nature: of
which sort are sins, and the Actions of wicked Spirits: or if it do mean
those Actions, it may be denied. There is besides the^e a thyrdkynde of Action,
which is called a Free and voluntary Action. I call it Free for this cause,
whereby will is willingby evil, without all coaction as August. witnesses. And
these kinds of Actions, which are proper and peculiar to man, do proceade
from will, as from the nearest and most proper cause, although not altogether
without the providence and ministry of God, which as it powers it self
abroad through out all manner of things, by a certain secret influence, beyond
all reach of capacity, even so does it incline, and make pliable the very
wills of men, to whatsoever purposes it pleases him. Yet so notwithstanding,
as that no man is constrained thereunto by this inclination. For neither is any
man compelled to be evil against his will, when he does naughtyly, except he
will him self. So that now it is needelesse for any man to seek for the cause
of Sin, without him self, as Calvin truly teaches. But Osorius does object
here again.

Out of Osorius.
Whosoever does entice and allure an other to wickedness, is as much in fault,
as he that is allured thereununto: at the least is not void of blame.

God does move and provoke men's wills to do heinous offenses after the
Lutheranes doctrine.

Ergo, God him self according to the Lutheranes, as the first motioner and
cause of evil, can not be clear of fault.

Answer.
The Mayor is true there, where both he that does allure and he that is allured,
are lead both by one kind of consent, are holden both together under one self
co^ditio^s, and have both regard to one self end in their doing. But now all
these things do chance far otherwise in God, then in men. For as God does
work nothing, but that which is wrought with a marvelous pure, and sincere will
(who ca^ will nothing but that which is most good) even so does he attempt
nothing at any time, but that he may do of his most Free Justice, nor is tied
to any conditions or laws: Now where no law is, there neither is any Sin at
all. For Sins properly are defined, not so much by the bare actions, as by
the conditions, laws, and ends. At a word, to make this matter more
discernable. God commanded Abraham that he should kill his Son: if any other
had commanded the same, or if the Father had attempted to do the same, at any
others commandment, he had ^urely sinned. But now sith it was the Lords
Commandment, neither was there any sin in him that did command, neither
in him that did assent, no though he had slain him in deed. What shall we say
of this? That the same Father of heaven and earth, when he gave his only
begotten son to be flayne, yea altogether vndeseruyng it (for this Tragedy
was not played surely without his hand and secret counsel) shall we therefore
say that he sinned, In the death of Christ our Savior how the fathers will did
consent and how it did not consent.
because in this work he willed the same that the murderers did? For neither
was his consent absent, nor sene^ed from their will which did Crucify the
Son of God, ne yet his ordinance: yet was this ordinance of his clear from
sin notwithstanding, but their fury lacked not sin. In deed his consentyng
will did will the same, that they willed: But not after the same sort, and for
a far other manner of end. For in them that did Crucify Christ appears a
treble Argument, and plain demonstration of Sin. First, because they brake
the laws, that were commanded the^ contrary to all equity and right. Again
for that they laid violent hands upon the innocent, being enflamed with
malice and despite: wherein also they did not respect any other end, but to
embrue their madd murtheryng hands with innocent blood, to establish thereby
their arrogaunt ambition. All which were far otherwise in God. For first, who
ever limited any laws for God which he might not break? Wherefore being Free
from all law, he neither did any thing here, nor at any time else can do any
thing, that is not in all respects, most lawful for him to do. And yet
neither did the Father here so procure the death of his Son, but that ye
Son him self did volu^taryly of his own accord yield theru^to. Moreover in
this ye fathers will was nothing amiss: in his ordinance nothing malicious,
in ye end nothing but most glorious, and for our salvation. For on ye other
side, in all this actio^ was wonderfully uttered and expressed his most just
Judgment against sin, his most excellent piety toward his son, and his
most tender love toward ma^kinde: For in that he did most sharply, and with
seuerest Justice punish our Sins in his own son, he restored him to life
and to a most ample kingdom wtall, and thereby provided most fatherly for all
our salvation generally.

We Read likewise in the holy Scriptures. It is necessary that offenses shall
come, it is necessary that heresies be. etc. And it is not to be doughted, but
that this Necessity does issue from the ordinance of God. And what then? if
these offenses do chance altogether besides the ordinance of GOD how then do
they chance of Necessity? Again if they happen by the ordinance of GOD, how
shall we then defend the goodness of GOD? Forsooth even by the same means,
that I spoke of before: For if he which did foreordeyne those offenses were
alyke affectioned, and of the same mind, nor did respect any other end then
the persons themselves do from whom those offenses do arise, there should
nothing withstand, but that he should be in the self same fault: and in all
respects as blameworthy as they. But now sith there is so great diversity
betwixt them in the manner of doing, and the respect of the end: hereby it
comes to pass, that in one self action: that which is committed by me^ is a
most heinous crime: and in that which comes of GOD appears most evidently a
wonderful commendation of Justice, and pyety. But here is yet a very great
knott in this bullrush: whereupon Osorius scrapeth again very busily.

Again out of Osorius.
To confess this to be true, that offenses and heresies must arise by men: yet
forasmuch as their wills are not otherwise ordered, but by the guyding and
leading of Gods direction: it can not be denied, but that God himself as (one
that does suggest some matter first) must be accounted for an Abettour or
furtherer: for whosoever shall be the cause of any other cause or action, eue^
the same must needs be an accessory to the crime that is committed.

Answer.
That offenses, and other sundry inconveniences of this present life, do flow
from out the corrupt affections of men, as out of their natural source and
sprynghead, is most true: And again, that the wills of men, which way soever
they bend them selves, are guyded, not without the permissio^ and especial
providence of God. This is also most true.

Furthermore that the very Will of God, and his providence do seem to be in
some cause, that offenses and inconveniences do arise, I do confess likewise,
agreeing herein with August. Well: and what hereof? what if we grant that God
is after a certain sort the cause of evil? Ergo, Osorius does conclude
presently upon the same, that God (as being the cause of evil) cannot be
excused of blame. But if he do so, he is at hand that will deny his argument.
For it is not a good consequent which is derived from the cause of offenses and
euilles, but only in such offenses and sins: which are not themselves the
very punishment of sins, and reward of trespass, and where the evils that
are committed, be the uttermost effects of the cause agent: Whereof neither of
them both may be imputed to God. For neither does Gods providence work in the
corrupt affections of men, as the principal cause unto the last end: moreover
neither are men's wills inclined, or hardened to wickedness, by the operation of
God, but where God has most just cause so to do, as well because God does all
things to make the excellency of his power, and Majesty to appear more
glorious, and to be wondered at: as also because he does harden the hearts of
no person, but to thend with sin to punish the former sins, wickedness, and
mischievous facts, that have been committed before, Yea and this also most
rightfully. Whereupon August. says: Aug. de lib. arb et gra. Cap. 2^.
this must be grounded and unremovable within your hearts. That there is no
unrighteousness in God. And for this cause when ye do read in the holy
scriptures, that men are seduced by God, or that their hearts are hardened,
dought nothing at all, but that they have committed before offense enough, for
the which they ought worthily to suffer etc. If man's nature be of it self so
valiant, as to defend it self sufficiently against all storms, and assaults
of sin: wherefore then does he suffer himself to be carried away, willingly
and wittingly, out of the right way? why does he not prevent all occasions, and
temptations, as he ought to do? why does he not practice the same courage,
that his own reason inuiteth him unto? If he cannot, why then (even from the
beginning, throwing over boorde the helm of Gods government) did he take upon
him to be pylote of his own course? why did he presume to be wise without God?
why was he so arrogant, with so hauty and lofty a courage, to give the attempt
upon the tree of life, and graspe of the fruit thereof? why being not contented
with his own simplicity chose he rather to raunge the field himself with the
bridle in his teeth, the^ to abide the managing of the Lord? who now if were
able to govern him self without Gods assistaunce, does worthily break his
neck if he fall over the rock. If he cannot guide his own ways, eue^ for this
cause is he worthily forsaken, and spoiled, because him self cast of of God
being his Ryder, from his back: Whereupon this is a good consequent, and must
be granted of Necessity: that either God is not the cause of evil, or if he
be, yet that in this cause is nothing at all, but that which stands most of
all with equity and Justice: likewise that in man is nothing, but that whereof
he may worthily condemn him self.

An other objection of the adversaries against the Lutherans.
The will of God does work together with man's will in sin according to the
Lutheranes.

It stands therefore with as good reason, that the same should be imputed to
the one, that is imputed to the other.

If the circumstaunces of them both were in all respects like, the consequent
would be good: Answer
but the circumstances being altered, the state of the conclusion is altered
also. All the actions of man's life are governed by the disposition of the
secret providence of God. This is very true. Man's will also does endeavor
withal together with the same. Here is therefore an operation, and working on
both parts: God works, and man works: and both in one matter. But because
God does order things after far other means, and respecting an other end,
then men do, herein redowndeth unto him the highest commendation of power,
Justice, and Bounty. Men are worthily blamed, as being the very causes of their
own harms. When Joseph was sold by his brethren: when Judas betrayed the
Lord: when Absalon defiled his fathers concubines. When Pharao witheld the
people of Israel: When Semei rayled upon David: When Antiochus waxed wroth
against the Jews long sithence: whenas Antichrist even now gryndeth his teeth
against the seely flock of Christ: when as Paul breathed out threatninges and
slaughters: no man will deny but these were heinous and horrible factes: of all
which notwithstanding no one wanted the singular counsel of God, and his
especial providence: whereupon it could not possible be otherwise, but that
the things which he had determined before, should so come to pass in the
end. For neither does enter into man's thought any thing that God does not will
before, that man should will: neither does man's will purpose any thing, which
is not both foreseen, and foreordained of God. What the^? shall we therefore
accuse God as Author of the wickedness of the ungodly? because these things
chance of Necessity, which God has purposed shall come to pass, and can by
no means be altered? For so seems Osori. to conclude his argument. But I
argue against him in this wise, and with two reasons. First. If this
preordinaunce of God, whereof I speak, do bring such a Necessity of external
coaction upon men, as Osorius does speak of, as that no man could sin
voluntaryly but compelled thereunto by God: it might not seem altogether
perhaps from the purpose, to impute the fault thereof to God. But what is he
now? or what man has ever been so horribly wicked at any time? who in
performing his treacherous devises, can say that he was constrained against his
will to commit the fact, that he would not have done, being neither led
thereunto of any motion of him self, nor blinded with any his own affections?

Moreover although the will of God does work together with man's will: Aug. de
great. and lib. arb. Cap. 21.
or (as Augustine liked rather to speak) whether God do work in the hearts of
men to apply their wills whereunto it pleases him, either to godliness for his
good mercies sake, or to wickedness and vice according to their own
deseruinges: or whether man be afflicted with any cross of persequution, yet
does God bring all these to pass, according to his own just Judgment,
sometimes open and manifest, but always most righteous: for what sits more
with justice, the^ to punish offenders? then to tame and suppress the
outrageous pride of rebellious Nature? But forasmuch as all the works of GOD
are directed chiefly as to one end: from whence then may man take a more large
occasion, to magnify and extol the Justice of God, then out of his own
works? And therefore though we confess, that it is one self work which is
wrought by God, and by man, yet because in the self same work God works by
an other way, and to an other end: Namely putting in ure the work of his
Justice: and because men do the works of pride, of Lust, of wrath, and of
covetousness: hereupon it comes to pass, that sin is worthily imputed unto
them: the will of God remaining always righteous and good notwithstanding. For
this rule is to be holden always unshaken: That all the works of God are
wrought for the best. So the fall of our first parent Adam, the hardening of
Pharaoes heart, the treason of Judas, the persequutio^ of Paul, tended to as
good purpose as the perseueraunce of Noah in faith: The humblenes of David,
Peter's denial of his master, and the conversion of Paul. For what soever is
wrought by God, does always turn to the glorifiing of his power, and
magnifieng his Justice: of his Justice, because by sin he does punish sin:
and that most righteously: of his power, when with his mighty hand, and
onstretched arm he does advance and deliver them for his wonderful mercies,
sake, and of his free liberality it pleases him to vouchsaue. But Osorius is
a wylypye, and will not be destitute of a starting hoale, but will seek to
escape through some chynk or moushoole. And because he does perceive, that Gods
power cannot be utterly sequestered from the Actions of men, he like an old
tried shifter, will color the matter, and apply the works of God which we
have rehearsed, to Gods foreknowledge. For this is the subtle distinction
whereunto our adversaries flee for their defense.

How the adversaries do dally with Gods providence.
They say that no providence of God that may enduce any Necessity, does go
before to cause men to sin. Only that God did foreknow that they would so
do, and that they were such in deed: not for that God did foreknow, that they
would be such: but rather that he did therefore foreknowe that they should be
such through their own inclination.

Where the Adversaries make mention of the foreknoweledge of God, Answer.
they do not altogether lie in this point. For it is most true, that the
Majesty of God does behold (as it were) with present view all things that
are, have been, and shall be, as though they were present in his eye: but herein
they go amiss, where they practice to establish the foreknowledge and
permission of God so firmly, that they would have his unchangeable providence
severed from the same: which cannot possibly be by any means: for what may a
man think, if God do foreknow and permit wickedness to reign, which he is
not able to turn away, where is then his power? if he be able and will not,
where is then his mercy? what father is so hard hearted, that seeing his child
ready to receive some harm, will not call him from ye peril if he may? But
say they, he that does wickedly, and he also that does consent thereunto, are
both in one predicament. Therefore as it is an absurd thing not to confess God
to be omnipotent, or that any thing is done that he cannot do: so is that as
false also to say, that any thing with God will not, is permitted without his
knowledge, and against his will. For how shall we conceive that God does
permit any thing to be done, but because his will is, that it shall so be
done? whereupon we may frame an argument against those persons, who rejecting
the necessary doctrine of predestination, flee only to Gods Permission on this
wise.

If God do permit sin, that does he either with his will or against his
will.

But he does not permit it against his will (for there can nothing be done
against the will of God.) Argument. Sufferaunce.


Then follows it, that God does willingly permit sin, and will not stay
nor hinder it.

Which being granted, their objection has a dubble error. First, because they
take away sin altogether from the will of God, casting the same wholly bpon
his Permission: Next, because they do fear least Gods Justice should be
blemished: being of this opinion: To wit: if God do work in the hearts of
the wicked, when they do sin, Then must it be taken for confessed, that the
cause of sin shall be forthwith imputed to God: and withal that men shall
hereof take just occasion to excuse the^ selves: Both which are easily
confuted. For first of all, whereas it is said, that GOD works in the hearts
of men, to incline their wills whereunto it pleases him, either when he does
thrust upon men outward calamities, as strange diseases, cruel Wars, flames
of fire. etc. or where he brings upon men inward griefs by the service of
Satan exequutioner of his wrath: as famine of his holy word, ignorance,
blindenes of understanding, hardness of heart, as appears evidently by the
Scriptures. I pray you what mean you by that which you read in the 9. of
Judges? Judges. 9.
God did send his evil spirit betwixt Abimilech and the people of Sychem etc.
When you read in Moses, I will harden the heart of Pharao adding a cause to
the same wherefore he would do it: Deuter. 2.
And again when you hear that the Lord did harden the heart of Syhon King of
Hesbon. When you read in Esaias the Prophet. Esaias. 6.63.
Blunt the hearts of this people, and stopp their ears. And again, why do
thou make us wander from thy ways O Lord? What is this in the 3. of the kings
the 22. chap? 3. Kings. 22.
Behold the Lord has given the Spirit of lyeng, into the mouths of all the
Prophets. etc. and in Job. 12. Job. 12.
The Lord does take away the hearts from them that rule over the people of the
earth, and he makes them to go astray. etc. of the same sense are the words
of the Prophet Ezechiell. If the Prophet be seduced and speak a word. I the
Lord have seduced that Prophet. And in Amos, Amos. 3.
If there shall be any evil in the City, that the Lord has not done. And
again in the 2. to the Thessalonians the 2. chapter. 2. Thessa. 2.
God shall send upon them strong illusione to believe lies etc. These and
innumerable like unto these who so shall hear every where in the scriptures,
can he dought hereof, that the sins of the wicked are not hidden utterly from
the decreed will of God? or that any thing is done in any of all these by Gods
Permission so, as his effectual providence does not work also withal?

Now as concerning the inconvenience, as though it were of Necessity, yt Gods
Justice should be therefore called in question: and that it would by that means
come to pass, that wicked me^ would hereof take occasion to excuse themselves,
as though they should not offend through their own default, but by the
compulsary constraynt of Gods will: if so be those things be so taken
according to ye very purporte of the bare letter wherewith God is said to
deliver over into a Reprobate mind, to make blind, to harden the hearts etc.
then is this also each way as false. Neither does the conclusion of his
argument thus shuffled up hang together.

A conclusion ill fauoredly inferred.
All things that God has foreordayned shall come to pass, do chance through
absolute Necessiitie.

God did foreordayne that sin should come to pass.

Ergo, When sins do come to pass, they are to be imputed as well unto man, as
being an instrument, as unto God himself, as being the Author.

Answer
Nay rather the conclusion ought to have been framed on this wise. Ergo, God
has ordained that sins should be, which for the same cause cannot but be of
very Necessity. And so in deed is the conclusion right, and to be granted
also. For it is without all controversy, that sins cannot come without the
ordinance of Gods will: which ordinance nevertheless having just cause of
defense, ought to be acquitted of all unrighteousness. And to show that it has
just causes of defense, Three reasons may be rendered. Three reasons may be
rendered why sins do come by the just judgment of God.


First. This seely earthly worm had skarse yet thrust his nose out of the
dyrte, whenas he would needs make himself equal with God his creator far
above ye reach and compass of his creation, presuming to attain the knowledge
of good and evil: then came it to pass by the most just judgment of God, not
by his Permission but by his providence also, that Freewill being as then
thoroughly furnished with understanding, and reason (but destitute of Grace)
could not govern it self, but must needs both against his own knowledge,
and conscience stumble, and fall down withal. And no marvel. For as soon as
God had withdrawn his light, right spirit, and helping hand (whereupon issued
lack of well doing, blindenes and hardness of heart) it could not otherwise be,
but that (the grace of God being withdrawn and all abillitie to do well being
taken away) this proud presumptuous Uermine must fall to the ground, both of
very Justice and of very Necessitye, whereof the one is ascribed to God, and
not to man, this other not to God but to man, and to his own Freewill: And
hereupon aryseth that absolute and vnauoydeable Necessity whereof we treat so
much, and withal the most just defense of Gods Justice.

Then besides this Freewill, there is yet an other reason, The second reason.
that will plainly acquit the just providence of God from fault, though it
work in the sins of men together with men themselves. As when he brings
upon man either diseases of the body, or blindness of understanding for sins
already committed, punishing sin: as it were, by sin Even so Pharao, that
had used horrible tyranny before in drowning ye suckling babes of the Hebrews,
was himself afterward most justly hard hearted by God, and at the last
miserably drowned in the read Sea. Even so likewise Esaias, Esaias. 6.
and the other Prophets did prophesye, that the Jews should be blinded for
the wickedness which they had committed. Ezechiel.
By the like Judgment, of God came it to pass that which was spoken of the
Gentiles. Rome. 1.
As they would not give themselves to know God, God did deliver them over to
the lusts of their own hearts. etc. And in an other place writing to the
These. For this cause (says he) God will send upon the^ strong illusion to
believe lies etc.

Besides these most just causes spoken of before, The 3. reason
there is yet a third, no less rightful, and just: which although be somewhat
dark unto us, yet seems not so dark to the understanding, and knowledge of
S. Paul, where Gods Divine providence does wonderfully order and dispose his
works: to wit, by his Judgment hidden in deed, but always just, leadyng
and directyng all things to that end, whereby he may make his Justice, or his
power discernable to mankind. And to this end at a word, do all the counsels
of God, and all the effects of the same tend and be directed, whether he do
fashion the vessels of his wrath to destruction, or prepare the vessels of his
mercy to Glory: or whether he be merciful to whom he will, or whether he do
harden the hearts of whom it pleases him, or whenever it pleases him so to
do, or when he does stir up the minds and endeuoures of men, where unto
him lysteth, by the service of Satan, minister of his wrath, or whether he do
comfort, and make glad the hearts of his chosen, by the operation of the holy
Ghost. And yet is there no cause in the mean whiles, why any man should
complain that the things are done injuriously which are done by Gods secret
Judgment: or that God ought to be blamed in any of all these, whenas
whatsoever is done by him, we believe assuredly, is done either to express his
power, or to make his glory discernable, or to commend his Justice, or else to
discover the wonderful riches of his mercy.

Wherefore when Luther does affirm, that with GOD all things are done by an
absolute Necessity, whether they come by destiny, chance, or any fortune at
all, why should not it be as lawful for him to speak so, as for Osorius to
speak in the like phrase and in like titles of words. That God is of
Necessity ye best, the most just, and the most wisest? But I hear the sound
of an Argument from the Popish Diatriba.

An object. out of the Diatriba and others against Luther.
They say that they abridge not God of his power, no nor that they can do it,
neither would at any time otherwise then as him self has abridged it.
Although there be nothing, but that the omnipotency of God can bring to pass,
yet would he have nothing lawful for him self to do, that might be contrary
to his Justice. And because it is an horrible matter that any man should be
damned without evil deservings, and that it is not reason that good works
should be defrauded of their due reward: therefore it must needs follow
according to the rule of Justice, that God should choose the^ whom he would have
to be saved, for the good works, which he did forsee to be in them, and
condemn the other likewise for their evil doings. For otherwise if he do
not regard the works, then were not his Justice constaunt and permanent.

This Objection must be overtaken after this manner. Answer.
It is one thing to treat of Gods Election, and an other thing to treat of
his Judgment. As concerning the Judgment of God, it is evident, that no man
is damned, unless he have deserved it for his wickedness: and that no man is
saved, unless some matter be found in him, whereunto his salvation may be
imputed. It is far otherwise in Election, and Predestination, which is
accomplished according to Gods Free determination and counsel, without all
respect of works, either going before, or coming after. Or else how can that
saying of the Apostle be true, Not of works, but of him that calls? etc.
meaning thereby the Free Election of GOD? Whereupon let us hear Augustine very
aptly discoursing in his book De Praedestin. and Great. It is said: August. de
Praedest. and Great. Cap. ^
not of works but of him that calls: The elder shall serve the younger. He
does not say of works done before: but when the Apostle spoke generally, not
of works: here he would that men should understand it, both of works done and
already past, and works not as yet done, that is to say, works past which
were none at all, and works to be done, which as yet were not done. etc.
Works therefore have both their time and their place: Certes in Election they
have neither time, nor place: Neither is any thing here of any value, but the
only will of God, which neither depends upon faith, nor upon works, nor
upon the promises: but works, faith, and the promises, and whatsoever else do
all depend upon it. For neither are our deeds unto him a rule, to direct his
Election by: but our deeds are directed by his Election, as the effects do
consequently depend upon the causes: and not the causes upon the effects:
Neither does God work unrighteously in the mean time in this, if he take
mercy on who^ he will take mercy, or if he harden who^ he will harden: And why
so? For sooth because he is indebted to no man. For sithence we are all in
general even from our mothers wombes, overwhelmed and drowned in this puddle
of original sin: he may, according to his good pleasure, have mercy on whom
it pleases him, and again pass over whom soever him lysteth and leave them
to them selves, that is to say, not take mercy upon them. Whereupon all men
may easily perceive, as well the Reprobates, what it is whereof they may justly
accuse the^ selves: as also they that are chosen, how much they are indebted to
God for his great and exceedyng mercy.

Object. of Osori. page 163.
Even as if one man kill an other with a sword, no man does therefore accuse the
sword, but he rather is known to be in fault, which did abuse the sword to
murder: with as good reason, for as much as men are nothing else but as
instruments of wickedness only in Gods hand, they that yield of Necessity
are not so much in fault, as he rather deserves to be blamed that caused them
to do wickedly.

Answer.
If so be that men, whom God has created after his own Image, were such kind
of Instruments, which like unto a sword, or saw, were driven not of them
selves, and without any motion or consent of their own: or if God were such a
Royster or hackster that would delight in the slaughter of men, the similitude
were not altogether to be mislyked. Now to grant unto them, that the wills of
men are directed, and are subject to a stronger power, then they are able to
resist, yet do they not suffer only as Instruments, brutish and senseless,
doing nothing them selves in the mean whiles. Men are drawn in deed, but
with their own wills: as Augustine makes mention. Neither is any man evil,
but he that will him self. And if man will be of his own accord evil, who
ought to be blamed therefore but him self? For where shall we say that sin
is, but where a will is found to commit Sin? But Osorius cease not as
yet from his chatteryng.

Argum. Osor. page 163.
They that do affirm that God has severed out of all the universal mass of
mankind some who^ he would prepare to everlasting glory, and some others whom
he would appoint to everlasting destruction, not for any other cause, but
because it so pleases him: do pluck Gods providence up by the roots.

The Lutheranes do allege none other reason of Gods Predestination besides his
will only.

Ergo, The Lutheranes do foredoe and pluck the providence of Cod up by the
roots.

I beseech you Osorius, Answer.
if as yet you have not cast away all feelyng of an honest and sober Divine
utterly, return to your self at the length. In deed say you so? Do they
foredoe Gods providence which say it is so, for none other cause but because it
pleases him? etc. What kind of Argument do I hear from you? Ca^ God be
pleased to do any thing that is not most correspo^dent to reason? or ca^ any
Reason be of all parts so absolutely perfect, that can disagree from the chief
and principal pattern of his will? or do you seem a reasonable man that do
talk so fondly? But I beseech you Sir. For as much as the will of God,
whether soever it bend and incline it self, is nothing else but a most perfect
Reason of it self, and of all parts most absolute, and without blemishe: and
for as much also as Reason it self is nothing else then the very rule of Gods
will: nay rather for as much as the will of God is the very essence, Aug. in
his 11. book of Confesi. Cap. 11.
and substance of God: what kind of couplyng do ye desire to be had betwixt
Reason, and the will of God? Who in deed can will nothing but that which is
perfect, sith that nothing is perfect but that which he wills. And whereupon
then rises this hauty crest of yours? that can not be satisfied with the bare
will of God, being expressed in his plain word? Neither seems it sufficient
in your Judgment that God should choose any to salvation, unless his secret
counsel herein may be made discernable by the deep reach of your own reason?
and that he should render an accoumpt and reason of his decreed will herein
unto your Maistershyppe? Albeit I do not deny this to be true, that the
profounde wisdom of the Divine Godhead, can not be sundered from the knittyng
together of his Reason, and counsel: that is to say, from it self: Yet out of
what School sucked you such Divinity, O singular Pillar of the Romish route?
so earnestly to require and to sift out the counsel and Reason of the
Creator, even in the very unsearchable wisdom of him that created you? I
suppose ye were thus schooled in your sacred confessions. Surely you never
learned it out of holy Scriptures. If you never noted what answer the Lord
made to Moses in the Scriptures, mark now somewhat more attentively: I will
have mercy (says he) on whom I have mercy, and I will take compassion on whom
I will take compassion. etc. Here you may see a singular Mercy of God in taking
compassion: whereof you nor see, nor hear any other rendered in the whole
Scriptures, besides the only will of God. I will have Mercy: (says he) will
you know ye causes, and the persons? the does not say, because I perceive the^
to be worthy of my benignity, whose foreseen works do delight me now,
before I take Mercy: but I do therefore take Mercy, because I will take Mercy:
and I will take compassion, on him of whom it pleases me to have Mercy. And
therefore S. Paul addyng a very fit conclusion. Ergo (says he) God will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and will harden whom he will harden. With
these words bridlyng our nyce curiosity, as it were, and withal geuyng us to
understand, that it is enough for us to know, that so is ye will of ye Lord,
although there be no manifest demonstration made unto us of the cause, wherefore
he would so do. Aug. upon Genesis against Manichaeus. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
For of what soever it shall please the Lord to bring to pass, albeit we can
not atteyne the Reason, yet ought we to ground our selves upon this, for
sufficient and lawful Reason, because the Lord has brought it so to pass: we
ought also to learn of Christ this lesson. Because it has so pleased thy good
will O Father: For as much as it is not lawful for any creature to presume to
enquire any reason beyond the will of God.

August. de Praedest and Great. Lib. 6
Right well therefore, and very profoundly does Augustine give us this lesson, It
is not meet (says he) to search for the causes of Gods unsearchable will, it
is not lawful to know it, for that the will of God is the principal and
highest cause of all things that are: and therefore if when it is asked, why
the Lord did it, it is to be au^swered, because he so willed it: if thou go
further in asking why he willed it, thou ask some greater and higher thing
then the will of God is. Which can not possibly be found out. And again the
same Augustine in an other place writing of Predestination and grace, God
(says he) takes mercy on who^ he will have mercy and of whom be will not have
mercy he will not take mercy. He gives to whom him lists, and requires that
which is due unto him, of whom he will. Here again ye hear the Will of God
named, yea and that alone: wherewith if you be not yet satisfied, because it is
named alone, harken what is immediately annexed by ye same Augustine, for thus
it follows. He that shall continue to say God is unrighteous, let him harken
unto the Apostle. O man what art thou that contendest with God? man with God:
earth with the Potter. etc. Does he herein not note you excellently (Osorius)
and (as it were) point at you with the finger? as, that no man could possibly
have noted any matter more notably? Paul the Apostle does render no causes at
all of Gods Election, but his will only: Augustine dare enquire after none.
All the whole Scripture is thoroughly satisfied with his will only: Only,
Osorius can not be satisfied, nor thinks it lawful enough for God to do
that him lyketh best, unless with sutteltie of Reasonyng as it were with
cutted Sophismes, and Sillogismes, man mainteyne Argument with his GOD, earth
with the Potter. Which thing how horrible it is, learn at the least out of
Esaias ye Prophet: Esaias. 45.
Woe (says he) unto him that will contend with his maker, a brittle
pottesharde of the outcast potteshardes of the earth: shall the clay say unto
the Potter, why do thou make me thus? did thy hands fail thee in thy
work. etc. As though there were any of the Creatures of God that does
understand the mind of the Lord: or were ever counselors unto him: or as
though it were not permitted him to will as him lysteth: or as though what
soever pleases him, were not lawful for him to do, unless he did give us a
reason, and orderly render unto us the causes that moved him thereunto? And
what if he will not discover it Osorius? Yea and what if he ought not? what if
when him lysteth to display it most manifestly, your balde mazer, and the
blockyshnes of your nymble capacity can not be able to pearce into the
unsearchable depth of his glory? wisdom? and counsel? Jeremy the Prophet
being commanded to go down into the house of the Potter, and there to behold
thoroughly ye workemanshyppe of the runnyng wheel, and the hand of the
craftesman: when he saw the Uessell that was newly made, and was by and by
broken again: neither does he require a reason thereof of the workman, nor
yet does the Lord being the workman render any reason unto him: only he
declares his power in making new, and renewyng again of that which was
broken, in these words. Ierem. 18.
Am not I of power to do unto you, as this Potter does to his claye, O house of
Israel? says the Lord. Behold as the clay in the hand of the Potter, so are
you in my hand, O ye house of Israel. And will Osor. dare be so bold (being a
fashioned lump of the Potters wheel, neither reuerencyng the Majesty of his
maker, nor contented with his only will) to require a reason of his creation,
besides the lawful will of the Creator? and will he not permit it to be
sufficient for God to do in his own works, what it pleases him best?

For what do these words of Osorius emporte else? Osorius words. page 163.
Where being squeymish at Luthers speech: He does Judge them not worthy to be
heard in any wise, which will affirm that God does choose whom he will unto
Salvation, out of the whole mass of mankind: for none other cause but because
it so pleases him. Page 163. First where has Luther any such Assertion? Why
do ye not set it down good Sir? and admit that he has: what is it, that your
carpyng cauillation ca^ gnaw at here, if you interpret it aright? For although
Luther seem in your goodly conceit to be more then a thousand times madd
(whom ye can never name without some gall of raylyng speech) yet was he never
hitherto so foolish, as to have a will to spoil the most wise works of God of
Reason, and counsel in any wise. There is with God a most perfect, stable, and
unchangeable knowledge of all the works of his own hands, but such a
knowledge, as does altogether surmount the greatest reach of our nymblest
capacities, and seems rather to be wo^dered at, then to be searched out by
us. Surely it is far beyond the Reason that you make unto us. For
deliberately notyng with my self, and entering into a very deep view and
consideration of the things, which are spoken of Election, of purpose of Gods
providence (for this word Predestination as scarce fine enough for a Ciceronian
you abhorte, neither dare ye so much as once to name in all your books)
hereu^to all your drifts seem to tend, that ye suppose that Gods Justice can
by no means be defended, in making a difference betwixt them whom he reserueth
to be saved, and those whom he adiudgeth to be damned, but by foreknowledge of
those works, which God does behold shall be in them. As though Osorius would
seem to argue with God with such an Argument as this is.

An Argu. (...) Osorius, Pighi.
There must be always with God a stable assured and upright reason in every
choice to be made.

There can be none other just cause of Reason of Gods Election and Reprobation,
Hosius. Bar tho. Camerar, and others.
but in respect of the merit that must follow.

Ergo, To the attainyng the grace of Election some preparation of merit must
needs go before.

First I do answer out of Augustine: Answer.
that it is a most pestilent error, to say, that the Grace of God is
distributed according to merits; and this is one of the errors of Pelagius.
Then as touching the Mayor. There is in deed with God a perfect, sound, and
unchangeable Reason of all his works: But by what reason be orders his
works, may not be subject to the Judgment of the claye (as Augustine says)
but of the Potter. Now I come to the Minor. Which we do utterly deny: for where
you make a definition of Gods providence (in choosing or refusing whom he will)
to be none other then such as depends upon the foreknowledge of works: this
is altogether most brutishe and unreasonable. For albeit that preue^ting for
eknowledge of things (which out Deuines do call foreknowledge) is unseparably
knitte together to the will of him, that does Predestinate: yet do we not
grant the same to be the cause of Predestination. For first as concerning the
cause efficient, for as much as the will of God is the very substance of God,
above the which there ca^ be nothing more high: there can be no efficient
cause thereof rendered, either before it, in limitation of time: or above it in
Majesty: but the material and final cause thereof may (after a sort) be
assigned. The material cause about the which it does exercise her force, is
mankind, and those things which God does give unto men by Predestination,
namely: Vocation, Faith, Justification, Glorification: The final cause is two
manner of ways: either that which forces him to doing, by the preuentyng will
and reason of the first Agent: or else that which is produced out of action. And
because there may be many ends of one thing, it may be, that there is one end
of Predestination, an other end of him that is Predestined, and an other of
him that does Predestinate: As for example: As Salvation and life everlasting
is the end of Predestination: the end of him that is Predestined, is to
believe and to live well: and the end of him that does Predestinate, is his own
glory, and the manifestation of his Justice, power and mercy. As we do read in
Salomons Proverbs. Prouer. 16.
God does make all things for himself, and the wicked man also for the evil
day. And therefore if it be asked, whether God do predestinate for the works
sake? Not for good works. To good works.
it may be answered with S. Paul, that the holy ones are predestined not
for their good works, but to do good works: so that now the respect of works
be understood, not to be the cause efficient of predestination: but the
effect rather. For thus we hear the Apostle speak, Ephesians. 1.
Even as God has chosen us in his son from eternity that we should become
holy to the praise of his glory. etc. not because we were, or should be holy
(says he) but that we should become holy, to the praise of his glory, etc. So
that no reason of Election may appear, but that which is to be sought for in
the free liberality of him, that does make the Election, neither that any
other last end may be conceived, but the praise of the manifestation of his
heavenly grace. So that as without God there is no cause efficient, which may
enforce predestination, so (if we seek for the very beginninges of eternal
predestination) we shall perceive that S. Paul does reduce them, to iiij,
principal heads chiefly. Romans ^. Fou^e principal heads of Predestination.
Ephesians. 1.
1. to his power, Where he says, has not the Potter power. etc. 2. to his
purpose or his good pleasure. For so we read in the Epistle to the Ephesianes,
where he uses both these words: because he has predestined us (says he)
according to the good pleasure of his will. etc. And immediately after when we
were predestined (says he) according to his purpose etc. 3. to his will.
Romans 10. Romans 10.
he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy and will harden. etc. 4. to his
mercy or love: Where he says Romans 10. It is neither of him that wills nor of
him that runs but of God that takes mercy.

Last of all if you demand further for some reason of Gods Election, who shall
more lively express the same unto you: then the Apostle Paul writing to the
Romans on this wise. Romans 9.
If God (says he) willing on the one side to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, did with much lenity bear with the Vessels of wrath prepared
to destruction, and on the other side to make known the riches of his glory
toward the Vessels of mearcy, which he has prepared to glory, etc. Unless
you have ceased long sithence to be a reasonable man (Osorius) what more
perfect reason can be made unto you? or more manifest of Gods workmanship then
this, that is here set down in Paul? Whereby you may plainly perceive, that
all these counsels and works of God (which we do see) were begone, and
achieved, not for any faith foreseen before, nor for any foreknowne good
works, but to magnify, and make discernable his power, and the praise of his
grace. And yet is not this untrue, that the faith of the holy ones was
foreseen, and the works of the ungodly were foreknowne, long before they were:
but yet these do follow as effects, and do not prevent, nor make
predestination, nor do certify a reason, or plain demonstracion of Gods
providence, but are themselves established rather, by the reason of Gods
providence: For to him that will enquire amongst all the works of God, what
is it, that his most highest and unsearchable will has respect unto chiefly?
for what reason: for what cause? and to what end all these were instituted, in
the same order and manner, as we do behold them? the matter may by this reason,
be made notorious unto him: to make manifest (says he) the power of his
wrath, and to make known the riches of his mercy. But I will pursue the other
reasons, wherewith they do urge upon us.

If thou will convert unto me, Out of Jeremy. Cap. 15.
I will convert thee, and if thou be returned, and will make thy self to be
returned, thou shall stand before my face: If thou will make separation of
that which is precious, from that which is vile, thou shall be even as mine own
mouth. Be ye turned and I will heal you: I will return and not turn away
my face from you.

The office of the holyghost is of two sorts: Answer.
the outward calling by preaching. And the Inward operation of the mind,
whereof the first is laid open for all men indifferently: the other concerns
none, but the chosen properly. Moreover for as much as repentance is a
spiritual resurrection from death: I cannot see how the same may be within the
compass of man's power, more then for a man that has been dead, can be able to
restore himself to life again.

If God do vouchsafe to empart his liberality to some without all respect of
preparation, The reason of the papists.
he shall be injurious and cruel to the others, who^ he passes over in the
mean time.

Answer.
God does witness of himself, that he alone is he that is able do discern and
Judge betwixt men, when as otherwise we are all like each other in all things:
but after what manner GOD does discern and make the difference, the scriptures
do declare. Not in respect of man's preparation, but according to the good
pleasure of his will: for so we read Ephesians. Ephesians. 1.
That God has predestinate us all according to the purpose of his will. etc.

Object.
If God should not work in respect of the works foreseen before, he should
seem unrighteous in his election.

Answer.
S. Paul does propose these same objections to himself, and withal makes an
answer to the quarrelling cauiller O man what art thou that do answer
with God? adding thereunto the similitude of the Clay and the Potter. And yet
GOD has much more power over men, then the Potter has over the clay. If the
Potter be at his own liberty to fashion the Uessels, as he will himself:
shall it not be as lawful for God to show forth his power upon his own
creatures? but that he must be enforced to follow men's merits, and that our
deeds now must be unto him a rule of Election.

Objection.
Roboam was said to be rejected for this cause: because he did not incline his
heart to seek God.

Ergo, It is in man's power to make the heart apt to receive grace.

Answer.
The hardness and peruersenes of the heart, wherewith we are made prone and
propense to wickedness, vprofitable and unable to do good, is a general disease
of all mankind, until the new regeneration of the holyghost do minister a new
remedy for ye same. Which remedy if it come once, Grace is to be thanked for it
only: If it do not come, let every man impute it to his own frowardnes, and
to his natural disease, and not unto God, who did create man's nature whole,
and sound at the beginning. Briefly, to answer at a word: This answer
shall suffice to all those threatninges and exhortations, which our adversaries
do pyke out of the books of sacred scriptures every where, and do object
against us.

I may seem perhapps to have been ouerlong, and tedious in heaping together,
and confuting the objections of our adversaries. It remains now, that I make
answer to certain slanders and lies of these persons, who being unable to
bring any thing to pass with sound arguments, and good matter, do attempt ye
overthrow thereof, with crooked conueyaunce, and with false and slau^derous
cauillations: wherein as many others do turmoyle themselves very much, so does
this our porting all over greedely busye himself, more then all the rest.

The Cauillacions of the Adversaries wherewith they do impugn the doctrine of
predestination, as altogether unprofitable and superfluous for edification and
Iustitution of good life.
FOr this they use to object, The reasons wherewith our Adversaries do practice
to suppress the very name of predest.
that by the means of this doctrine of predestination, all carefulnes is taken
away from me^ that are fallen, to rise again: that to such as do stand occasion
of sluggishnes is ministered, because man's travail is altogether Superfluous in
both respects: if neither he that is wounded, cannot be able to become sound
again through any his own industry: neither he that is chosen, can fall away
through any his negligence: by the one whereof desperation is nourished by the
other slouthfulnes is mayntayned.

If all things be first decreed upon with God, by his unchangeable counsel of
predestination: what need we the^ any preaching, or godly exhortations?
Whereby men's affections may either be stirred up to embrace virtue, or
terrified fro^their accustomable lice^ciousnes of life? Whenas the desperate
mind shall think with it self on this wise: Whether we live well now, or
otherwise, we shall be such notwithstanding at the length, as God did foreknow
that we should be: if good, then good: if evil, then evil.

Forasmuch therefore, as (through the teaching of this doctrine) the very
sinews of all endeavor are brust asunder, and that there remains a certain
fatal Necessity only: they do say, that it were more convenient, not to have
any words or speech at all of this matter.

They do add moreover, that it is superfluous to dispute of that matter, the
depth whereof never was man able to reach unto: as a thing nothing fit for
the instruction of the Auditorye: besides that if it were true, yet ought it
not be taught (say they) because it delivers matter very perniciouse, not to
be received: and because such things being not able to be conceived, may
without any danger be holden in covert.

Moreover there want not some now a days, Which do defend their obstinacye by
Auncientye: forasmuch as the ancient fathers did either write nothing at all,
or else very little thereof or do teach of this grace preventing the merits of
the holy ones far otherwise.

Wherefore they would have the people to be taught on this wise rather. That God
of his goodness and mercy, would have all men to be saved: And that the cause,
why all are not saved, is for that all will not receive the grace indifferently
offered unto them. And this manner of teaching they do suppose to be sound. On
the contrary: that the other doctrine of predestination does take clean away
all force, and use of wholesome preachinges, exhortations, and disciplines etc.
Answer to the object. proposed.
If we only either were alone, or were the first that were urged with these
slanders and cauillationes, there were less cause to wonder at ye wickedness
of this our age. But I do see now no new thing here, never spoken of before,
nor any other thing but such as many notable learned men have been sundry
times combred withal long sithence. Amongst whom comes first to hand
Augustine, whom (being occupied in this cause) sometime the Pelagianes, but
most of all the Massilianes did molest much, with the very same obiectiones, as
appears plainly by the transcript of Prosper and Hillary their letters to
Augustine, even the which objections our deuines are now a days pressed
withal: which if were true, then might he seem to have undertaken this
quarrel not rashly, nor altogether in vain, as our men have done also. But
let us answer to their complayntes.

The doctrine of predestination with what manner of moderation ought to be
preached to the people.
Such as are appointed teachers in the congregation of God, if they should beat
into the gross ears of the rude multitude this part of doctrine, which
treats of the secrett predestination of God so nakedly, and barren of it
self, as not doing ought else, nor respecting any other thing, ne yet applying
wtall any wholesome exhortations, and allurementes to virtue, should stir and
provoke none to virtues endeavor, honest carefulnes and godly life, these
reasons might carry some show of truth perhapps. But this matter ought to have
been foreseen Osor. how these preachers behave themselves, what they preach,
how, in what manner, and to what end they do lay this doctrine open before the
people: before you should have burst out into those cruel accusacions and
slanderous reproaches. If some you^glings peradventure may be found not so
modestly and soberly to demean themselves, as may beseem them (allured either
through delight of novelty, or carried thereunto through lightness of wit, or
to brave out their knowledge and learning) it is not convenient, that the lowse
and uncircumspect dealing of some particular persons, should be prejudicial to
the truth of the doctrine. Three commodities do come by the preaching of
predestination.
Godly and modest wits surely, as they conceive the true reason of this
doctrine, so do they Judge it no less necessary to be applied: to the end
they may pluck down that pernicious opinion of yours, treating of merits, of
confidence in works, and of doughtfulnes of Salvation. For the overthrow
whereof what more necessary doctrine to edify the congregation withal may be
applied in the Church of Christians?

And therefore, to conclude briefly. For as much as all the doctrine of
Predestination does tend to this end chiefly: that men may be forewarned not
to trust to much to their own strength, but to repose all their hope and
affiaunce in God, It is untrue that you do object: That the doctrine of
predestination does persuade rather to desperation then to godly life: For what
is this else as Augustine says, then as that you should say, that men do then
despair of their own safety, when they begin to learn to repose their hope
and affiaunce in God, and not in themselves in any wise. etc, Whosoever
therefore shall instruct the ignorant people, in the true doctrine of
predestination of the holy ones, discretly, and modestly and in due season,
when case so requires: and shall join withal godly and wholesome
exhortations, the same shall he do profitably enough without any inconvenience
seeing that the preaching of both may be well coupled, and agree together,
according to the testimony of Augustine: who affirms: that neither the
preaching of faith profiting in godly fruits ought to be hindered by the
preaching of predestination, that they which are taught may learue how to obey:
Aug. de bono, perseuera. Cap. 17.
And again that the preachi^g of Predestination ought not to be hindered by
the preaching of faith profiting in godly fruits, that they which obey, may
know, in whom they ought to rejoice, not in thoir own obedience, but in him of
whom it is written: he that does rejoice let him rejoice in the Lord.

Will you understand, Osorius how the coupling of these too doctrines is not
prejudicial to the preaching of ye one to the other? Paul the Apostle of the
Gentills did many times set forth the doctrine of predestination to the Romans
Ephe. Timot. The same did Luke in the Acts of the Apostles. Christ himself
likewise does make often mention of the same in his sermons: all which did not
cease to preach the word of God nevertheless and do notwithstanding withal
entermixt diverse good and godly exhortations to live well.

Paul when he said: it is God that does work in us to will and to bring to
pass according to his good pleasure: did he therefore abate any thing of his
godly lessons to make us less careful to will? and to work the things, that
are acceptable unto God? In like manner where he says: he that has begone a
good work in you, will bring the same to effect even until the day of Christ
Jesus. Yet did he not cease to persuade them earnestly in the same Epistle
written to the Phillippianes that they should not only begin, but persevere
until the end.

John. 14.
Believe (says Christ) in God, and believe in me: and yet is this nevertheless
true, that he speaks in an other place. No man comes unto me, or believes
in me, unless it be given him from the father. Christ says also, he that has
ears to hear: let him hear. Mar. 7.
Yet does God speak in the scriptures these words also: that he will give
them a heart from above, that they may understand, eyes that they may see, and
ears that they may hear. etc. And although it were not unknown unto him, who
had ears to hear and who had not, that is to say, the gift of obedience: Yet
does he exhort all men to hear.

Although Cipriane did both know and write that faith and obedience were the
gift of God, Cipriane.
and that we ought not rejoice in any thing, because we have nothing of our
own, yet this was no hindraunce at all unto his earnest preaching, but that he
taught Faith and obedience nevertheless, and most constantly persuaded to good
life.

When we hear S. James teach us, James. 1.
that every good and perfect gift comes down from the father of lights, yet
this preaching of grace nothing withstoode, but that he continued to rebuke
such as troubled ye congregation, saying, If you be bitterly zealous, and your
hearts be full of contencion: do not rejoice, nor lie not against the truth,
for this is not the Wisdom that came from above, but earthly, beastly, and
diabollicall etc. And these gifts of God in deed as Augustine reports, if
there be no Predestination, are not foreknowne of God: if they be foreknowne,
then is there a necessary predestination of God which we do defend.

To conclude Christ does aduertize his disciples. Math. 6.
That God does know well enough what they stand in need of before they do
pray, and yet he wills them to pray notwithstanding, showing unto them aforme
of prayer also.

Sufficient answer is made now (Osori.) if I be not deceived, unto the
objections of your fraternity, that is to say, to your trifles and slau^ders if
not to all, yet at the least to the very principal pillars, and chief stays
of your vagarant disputation, if not with such force, and dexterity, as may be
able to put your ouerthwhart obstinacy to scilence, yet as much for the
defense of Luthers cause, as will satisfy the reasonable Reader (I trust)
saving that there remains one quarrel or co^playnt of yours as yet, against
Luther: A hanger by of all the rest, as it were: whereunto I cannot tell what I
shall say: whether I were best to laugh at it, or answer it: for who can
possibly resfrayne from laughter, to read that ridiculous counterfayte
Prosopopoeia of yours? Osor. prosopopoepia against M. Luther.
wherein like a very foolish Rhetorician, you have thrust in upon the stage a
lusty Ruffler who in the person of a Swartrutter, may accuse Luther for the
vproares raised by the country Boores in Germany. As though of all that whole
route of Clownes, any one were heard at any time to accuse Luther as Author of
this tumulte: or would have uttered so much as half a word of reproach against
him for ye same, if he might speak for him self, and were not compelled to
use herein the counterfaite person of an other: or as though the Hystories do
not declare sufficiently, from whence the spryng head of all this mischief
burst out at the first: surely not from Luther, but from an other Crowbyrde,
from an other Chair of pestilence (Osorius) what soever it was. But go to:
Let us hear what dronken eloquence this gallaunt counterfaite swart Rutter
does gushe out unto us, out of Osorius drousie tankerd: And with what flashes
of thundryng words, he means to scorche up Luther withal.

Page 162.
O Luther? why do thou accuse the harmless and innocent? why do thou
rage? why art thou mad?

Truly I should have wondered, if Osorius would have spoken any thing against
Luther, but with some haryshe eloquence. Nay rather Osori. if your self be not
stark mad, what kind of maddnes? What rage? what accusatio^s do ye tell us
of here? Wherefore let it be as lawful for Luther to answer for him self
again, and with like speech, not to the German ruffler, but to the Porting
all Bishop: whom if he might reprove again contrariwise after this manner: O
Osorius? why do ye accuse ye guiltelesse? Luthers answer to Osorius
Rhetorical fyctione.
why do ye keep such a stir? why are you so frantic? who if were well in
your wits, would never reproach me with such madness. But what have I have
done? what have I deserved? is it because I would not incline to ye furious
disorders of ye rebellious? what? did I ever so much as move a finger toward
that cause? did I not reprove them forthwith with pen and speech very
instauntly? did ever man more earnestly bend the force of his arm against
them, the^ I did my writing? If they would but have harkened to my counsel,
and continual admonitions, the matter had never proceeded to so much
bloudshead. What? And shall I receive this recompense for my good meaning
toward you, to be accoumpted a madd man? No (say you) not because ye wrote
against them, do we reprehend you, but because you ministered the occasion of
this uproar. But from whence do ye gather this to be true Osorius? Forsooth
because they did learn this of you, that we were not able of our selves to do
either good or evil: for that God does (as you say) work all in all in us.
etc. In deed I have denied, that to think good or evil is in our own hand.
And what hereof I pray you? in what respect are these words applyable to the
Country Boores? and to their rebellion? Does that man open a gappe of
licentiousness, and seditious treachery to husbandmen, which does abate that
Freedom from man's will in doing or atchieuyng any enterprise, which your
Deuines do falsely challenge as proper to man? Is it therefore lawful to be
wicked, because many times men are hindered against their wills from puttyng a
mischief in execution? or shall the will be therefore not wicked in doing
wickedly, because it is not free, but enforced to yield to a necessary
Seruilitie, which of it self it is not able to shake away? Is the wicked
Spirit therefore excused, because in doing evil he does it not so much of any
Freedom, as of Necessity? for how shall he be said to be free, which amiddes
the race of his rudenes, is now and then restrained against his will? and is
not Lord of his own will not so much as in doing evil? yet does this being
not free of him self nothing withstand, but that he continue evil still: what
and if I had said, that the will of the wicked of it self is not free, but
every way captive, and bond? is it therefore to be imputed to God forthwith,
and not to men whatsoever they shall do wickedly? As though when men do think
or commit evil, they be compelled thereunto against their wills? and are
not willyngly and of their own motion chiefly drawn thereunto? For to
confess this saying to be most true, That God is he that works all in all,
yet does he bring to pass nothing in man surely, without their own wills, so
that if there be any evil in them, there is no cause why God should be accused
for it, but every man must lay the fault of his own folly, and wilfulnes to
his own charge.

But (say you) for as much as God does lead men's wills hereunto, Osori. page
^63.
by what reason, ca^ ye couple the stabilitie of your doctrine with the defense
of Gods Justice.

I do answer. Answer.
First when we do join the singular providence of God, workyng all in all, in
all the actions of man's life: we do set the same forth, as all things may be
referred to this, as to the primer cause efficient, which does not work
properly, but in respect of ye last end of all things. Here now for as much as
God is of his own nature most best and most perfect, hereupon it comes to
pass, that he which has ordained all things for him self, can in no respect
be the cause of evil. 2. Then as touching the middle causes, whereas there is
no man that does not fall through his own default, and the procurement of
Satan, it shall be reason therefore, that no man seek for the cause of sin,
without his own self, and that he complain not of God for the same. 3. But
yet to admit that the actions of man's life, are not governed without the
provident and circumspect direction of Gods will: and that it is he alone, that
inclines men's wills whither him lists: Yet nevertheless even he, that
applies the wills, has enclosed also the same wills within certain
limittes and laws, and as it were environed them, with certain hedges and
bounds, which whether we accomplish or no, seeing he has made the will of God
manifestly discernable unto us, certainly they do not only sufficiently
acquit, and clear his Justice, but also abundantly commend the same. 4. And
lastly though we be never so unable to the performaunce of his ordinances, yet
for all this, can no just accusation of quarrel be framed against God, but the
fault must be wholly imputed unto men, and that worthily. For why would this
beastly flesh (being thoroughly fortified at the beginning under the safe
keepyng of God and understanding) become Carter of his own carriadge? and
guide of his own flitteryng life afterward, refusing the conduct and leadyng
of God? Which if can now govern it self rightly in deed, as it ought to do,
let it then a Gods name enjoy his own knowledge: but if otherwise: yet is Gods
Justice sufficiently enough defended, and even for this same cause, because he
first forewarned them of the peril ensuyng, it is with very good reason
acquitted of crime: for what stands more agreeable with Justice, then to punish
sins with sins? and to crushe down, with sharp and bitter correction,
that proud rebellious arrogancy, against the high God his Creator?

Luther falsely accused of sedition.
But howsoever the matter goes here. I do marvel at this in the mean whiles,
with what faith and with what face, this one place is urged so much, which
makes nothing at all to sedition: whenas many other things may be gathered
out of my books every where, which are manifestly profitable for the
preservation of peace, and tranquislitie. For what else do all my books, and
preachynges more earnestly emporte? (the necessary instructions of faith being
once established) then that ye multitude of the rascal rabble, and ruder
Boores, together with all other Christians, should conform their lives
altogether to patience? and desire of concord, though they were oppressed with
never so many injuries? where did I ever by word or writing teaze any man to
arms? Where did I ever give so much as a crooked look against the Magistrate?
Nay rather who ever esteemed of the governors more honorably? or taught the
duty of subjects to their Princes out of holy Scriptures more earnestly and
faithfully? who did ever more carefully aduau^ce, and call back to their
former dignity, the Civil governors and Magistrates, utterly suppressed
almost through the Romish Pontifical Tyranny? whose mind or pen did ever
more hatefully abhor disorderous vprores and outrageous rebellio^s? And if my
writings and behavior do not witness this to be true that I speak, I am
contended that this reproach be Registered amongst the other Beadroll of
Osorius lesinges.

After that the light of the Gospel was restored: Luther purged from the crime
of sedition.
Carolostadius began to pluck down Images, and to make an innovation in many
things: the matter being duly wayed, was of it self commendable enough: yet
because he attempted it with violence and uproar (the Magistrate not being made
privy unto it) I withstoode him. The like attempt was made by Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, about the matter of the Sacrament. I do not here debate of the
truth of the cause: And yet no one thing restrained me so much from subscribyng
to their Assertitions, as did the dought of broils, which I feared would
afterward have ensued. I will add also somewhat of my self: when the
Counsel was called at Worms, being cited by public authority to appear
before the Imperial seat: I did not refuse. Certainly the danger was assured
and apparaunt. For being aduertized (as I was on my journey) that I should have
regard of my sauety in time: I thought better to put my life in hassard, then
sustain the reproach of disobedience. Being overcome at the last not by
Scripture, but by power I committed my cause to the mercy of the Lord, and to
the authority of the Emperor. I only defended my cause constauntly. If I had
been of so lewd a disposition, and so foreward to sedition, as you suspect
(Osorius) there wanted not at that time, both Princes, frendshyp and fautoures
of the cause: yea and perhaps there was time good enough to put it in
practice. But was there ever any Prince, or Subject encouraged (by my means)
to move discension? This being done not long after in deed, the Boores of the
Country began to raunge in that outrage (whom afterward Muncer and Phyfer
taking parts withal) brake out into like madness. The common weal being
thus divided, and disquieted, how greatly I was grieved withal, what means I
used against them according to my duty, what answer I made to their
Articles, with what reasons I refuted them, what counsel I gave and what
exhortations to common quiet, and Christian obedience, mine own writings
(extaunt as yet) do testify for me, and the Hystories thereof do sufficiently
declare. And Osorius him self does not deny the same. Yet taking occasion of
my writings, he shameth not to make me the author of all this rebellion.

The complaynt of the Boores against Luther framed by Osorius by a Rhetorical
fictio^.
And why so? We (says he) have learned of you that we are not able of our
selves to do good or evil. And what then? Hereof we conceived our
foolehardynesse, this was the cause that moved us Boores to Arms. O notable
Argument concluded by clownes, but very clownish surely. I suppose Coridon him
self could not have done more rustically. But if you will take occasion to
argue against me, of that which you might have learned out of my writyngs (O ye
Boores) ye were in them enstructed after this manner: That Magistrates ought to
be reuere^ced: why did you not obey this lesson? How often did I teach you that
Rebellion must be eschued by all means possible? that no private man should
avenge his own injuries? that it was not lawful for any Christian to avenge
any private wrong? That Christ had no need of any warlyke guarrison? That the
Majesty of the Gospel was able and strong enough of it self to mainteyne her
own quarrel? That there could be no more forcible victory for the truth and
pure doctrine, then which is achieved with sufferaunce, and patience? that the
nature of the same was such, as the more it were pursued, the more forcibly it
would prevail? Why learned ye not to follow these lessons? Lastly: when ye
were in Arms, and dereygned in field, and by sound of Trumpet had published
your Articles, and Requests to the higher powers, how much did I moyle and
turmoyle my self, to reduce you to order, and reclayme you from your
attemptes? teaching you out of holy Scriptures, conuincyng you, aduertizyng
you, chidyng, beseechyng, perswadyng, threatnyng, finally omittyng no part of
duty untouched, whereby I might reclayme you from your hurly burly, to peace
and tranquillity. If so be that my doctrine were of such authority with you,
why did you shut up your ears from your Masters lessones? If you betook
your selves to Arms, through occasion of one sentence wrongfully understood,
or misconstrued, why did ye not forsake the field, for so many my exhortatio^s,
and notable exclamations to the contrary.

But go to Osorius: because under the person of the Boores complaynte, you do
so vehemently wrest all this false suggestion of mischief against me. What if I
deny your Assumpsit? how will you be able to prove it? perhaps by hear say
amongst the clownes? what? of any that be living? or that be dead? But when
the poor clownes lived, and were drawn to execution, tormented, and stretched
out upon the rackes (in which extremity men are wont for the more part to
utter more the^ they know) If there were one so much of that whole rabble,
muttered ever half a syllable of me, such as your Carterlyke and senseless
Imagination has devised against me, I will willyngly yield to this accusation
of suspision. But by your occasion (say you) this tumult might have been raised
easily. So might the Black Moore change his skin. And Osor. also might
leave his lyeng. But all things are not by and by done, that may be done. But
onward: how prove you that it might have been so? Because (say you) that God
works all in all in us, according to Luthers Assertion, and we be
instruments only applied and wrest with his hands: hereupon follows it
therefore sith God only raised up these tumultes, and was the only
procurour, deuisour and accomplisher of this stir, that the Boores of
necessity must be guiltless, and innocent hereof. Go to: And do ye suppose
(Osorius) that these words were the whole seedeplotte of all this Rebellion?
what shall we say the^ to that, which we read in Paul? That it is God that
works all in all: Ephesians.
And again. That works all according to the purpose of his will. Amos. 3.
And in the Prophet Amos. There is no evil in the City that the Lord has not
done. And again, when we hear on every side as well amongst the Prophets as
the Apostle. That men are made blind of God, are delivered over into a
Reprobate mind. Why might not the Boores have taken occasion of these words,
as well as of mine? Go to. And what and if I had written these words also,
namely: That it is in the power of our Freewill to dispose our selves whereunto
we list? either to make our selves earthen vessels, or golden vessels in the
house of the Lord? would the Boores have the sooner been quieted for this
cause? And yet this is the general proclamation of that notorious See of Rome,
dispersed throughout all Catholic Nations: the same do all their Records
and Canons noise abroad (wheresoever they crawle) yea many years before Luther
was borne: and the very same also does Osorius write at this day in Portingall,
and many other of the like fraternity else where: what? was there never any
co^motions therefore of the rude multitude (before Luther was borne) in
Portingall? none in Italy? Germany? France? England? Cycill? and other
Nations? Could this, or any other portion of Scripture, or doctrine, eue^ so
bridle the affections of the unruly, but that they would at one time or other
burst out into outrageous extremities?

I add moreover. Admit that my words (being either misconceaued or
misconstrued) might suggest some matter of evil occasion: shall it be less
lawful therefore to bear testimony of the truth, because there be some that
are so beastly brutish that will mishandle the words and deeds of others, be
they never so well spoken? By this reason, away with the Bible, because out of
the same, the most part of heretics have sucked their poison: what? did not
Paul therefore not commend the Justice of God aright by our unrighteousness,
because there wanted not that would abuse his saying to occasion of evil? Let
us do evil (say they) that good may come thereby. The ancient godly
Christians were wont to assemble together, and sing Psalms before day light
and to receive the Sacrament of bread and wine. Hereupon began rumors to be
scattered abroad, that the Christians did worship the rising of the Sun, and
did sacrifice to Ceres and Bacohus. And what has been so well spoken, or
established at any time, that the peeuishenesse of perverse and froward persons
will not depraue^ if they list to pyke a quarrel, or slander the good words
and well doings of men? The same came to pass with Augustine him self
through the Pelagians: who after had once brought in the name and commendation
of grace, August. against Iulia^ the Pelag. 4. book Cap. 8.
hereupon forthwith they began to quarrel with him, as though he should
affirm, that men are made good by fatal. Necessity. And again where he
denied that Grace was distributed according to men's deseruyngs: this saying
they gnawed at as though he should say: That no endeavor ought to be looked for
from the will of man, contrary that saying in the Gospel, where the Lord
spoke. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find knock and it
shall be opened unto you, for every one that does ask shall receive. etc.

And all this have I debated with you, even as it were truth that your
counterfaite imagination has devised, to wit: that I should be the original
of all that rebellious insolency. I come now to yt pynche of my true defense.
Namely, to deny that there is, or ever was any Boore in all Germany, that did
ever Justify this slander against me. This was never the speech of any
Boore: but the rude unshamefastness of Osorius: void of all matter of
probability, to make me author of all this mischief. The very author whereof
if as yet you do not know, and would feign know him in deed, I will tell him
you, but briefly, yet truly Osorius.

When Satan perceived that the kingdom of your pride was ready to have a
fall: What was the cause and who was the author of the uproar in Germany.
and that the Romish Prelate could now no longer mainteyne his erroneous
sacriledges, against the glorious excellency of the gladsome Gospel: he entered
by a notable policy into this devise under the pretense of the Gospel to
tickle up madd brains, thereby to bring the Gospel in obloquy and infamy,
the overthrow whereof he perceived now past his compass, as the which he was
now no longer able to withstand. Then also, unless this lying Osorius had set
him self forth (as an especial Instrument of this wyly Serpent) upon whose
shaven sconse not so much as a herebreadth may be found growing of an honest
or sober man, ye would never have so filthyly infamed the good report and
credit of honest personages, standing in the defense of the Gospel, with so
many slanderous lies, and cursed reproaches. If Luther should use this, or the
like counterbuffe, according to the frankenes of his speech, against your
rusty, clownish, and illfauored, false Divinity: I do not ask, what you could
answer him again Osorius. But I fear this rather, least as he should not
seem to speak sufficiently in the honest defense of him self, so in respect
of your deserte, he were not able to utter enough against you.

After all this ye add moreover and demand, with what honest reason Luther
does join the constancy of his Discipline with the defense of Gods Justice. To
answer briefly: Certes with much more honester reason, then your bloody
Bishop, or you his skraping catchpolles (who having embrued your rotchets in so
much Christian blood play the Butchers more like then Bishops) can join your
pride vayneglorious Tytles, Pomp Arrogance, Cruelty, Tyranny, Treason, Lust,
Lechery, Opinions, Heresies, Determinations, and intolerable Canones of man's
Traditions, together with Peter with Paul, with Christ and with his Gospel,
not to speak of the rest of your secret abominations.

Osor. glorious triumphyng against Haddon.
I am come now at the length to the triumphaunt end of this glorious book:
where leaving Luther in the field, and sounding ye retrai^t from the great
battle of Freewill: Osor. does furbush his furniture for the Triumph against
poor Gualter Haddo^, and not without cause: for because this quarelling
Ciuilia^ (who a little before did yield over the preeminence of Eloquence to
Osorius, and confessed him to be the chief carpenter of speech, and named him
also the scholar of Cicero many times) he seems so variable and unconstant
now, Haddon inconstant.
That he dare affirm that Osorius writing is unsavory, void of likelyhoode of
truth, and without sense, argument and proof: which Haddon is so childishe in
his style, Haddon as infant in speech.
making skarse any semblaunce of wit in his vtteraunce, that he deserves no
commendation of wit at all, but such as seems to stand in darckenesse of
speech Finally whereas he does so oftentimes object against Osorius the name of
Cicero by way of reproach: He him self did very carefully foresee that no man
should be able to reproach him with the name of Cicero: Haddon has no ioate
of Ciceroes fynesse.
for he speaks nothing very eloquently nothing plainly, nothing distinctly,
nothing pitthely nothing substancially, nothing loftely. What soever pleases
him, he has thrust into his wrytinge: and that also he does confirm not by
reason or argument, but with skolding and lauishnes of tongue. Lastly his whole
writing is so bluntish, so base and so cold, that it moves Osorius to pity it
rather, then to hate it. And that is the cause. That Osorius cannot according
to his promise condescend with heart and mind to his opinions, as he promised
he would do, if he could win the victory of the cause which he undertook,
with apt and convenient arguments. But now sithence he has not done it,
sithe^ce he has brought no argument, nor used any proof to the purpose:
sithence also his reasons be such, as have no force to maintain credit, but
such as rather do disclose a token of some miserable frensye: hereof therefore
it comes to pass, that he seems to be acquitted of his promise, if he
remain as yet in his opinion unvanquished. And therefore that Haddon did very
vaynely take in hand to write, and that they did not less indiscreetly that
set him a work. Moreover that neither his Schoolemaister was void of blame,
whosoever he were, that did not instruct him at the first in what place, and in
what form he ought to apply his interrogation making to the substance of the
matter.

Now have thou gentle reader the last act of Osorius fable which whether I
may term to be Comicall, or Tragical, I can not well tell: but that it
seems in mine opinion, to resemble rather the shape of a Comedye more
nearly. For what glorious Thraso (I pray you) could ever have handled his part
upon a stage more rufflingly, and move the beholders to loud laughter more
pleasauntly. To have the whole fruition of his sweet pigsnye Cicero as it were
of Thais or Phillida, what a sturr does he keep? And because he perceaueth
that Haddon has a fancy to his mynion, which makes him to stand in some
fear least he will beguile him: how hatefully and despightfully does he exclame
upon him to drive him out of countenance? not only treading him under his
feet, but so furiouslye boiling against him, That if this Parasiticall
Gallaunt were now in England, with his cogging companion Sanga, and but an
handful of Catholic Monks with them, Uerely I believe, he would as Thraso
pretended against Thais also burst open the gates upon him, whom he does now
thrust down in the belfry amongst boys, as one that deserves no title of
good word for his wit in whom is neither any force of sentence, nor any
likelihood of truth, in whose writings no examples, finally which Haddo^ no
rese^blance of Ciceroes delectable pronu^ciatio^ does appear: but a certain
piteous sta^mering of speech vttred, in his writings untowardness, and
childishnes: in disputi^g obscure, and a certain unskillful application of
Rhetorical interrogatio^s, learned of an unskillful Master, but as one that
can skarse express his meaning by his vtteraunce: has no pertaking of
Ciceroes finesse, nor comes so much as any thing near the majesty of Cicero:
expresses nothing purely, nothing plainly, nothing distinctly, nothing
substa^cially, nothing loftely, Finally utters nothing but a vain sound of
foolish words, that it would pity a man to see it. Wherefore O wretched
man that thou art poor stammering Haddon, O piteous estate of this seely
Phedria. And in the mean time this vayneglorious proud pecocke is bedeckt with
all these Distritch feathers, and glittering plumes, wrapped up together in a
great brush perdie: so that here is no want of any thing now, but of some
gyering Gnato, which may lowt this Thraso out of his painted Coat. But go to.
Let these things pass Osorius. Although this unbridled and cottquenelike
manner of scolding and lauishnes of tongue does of right require, that we should
likewise blaze out your braynsicknesse in the right color, and make you as it
were a mockery for boys: yet dismissing now at the last those toys, and merry
conceits of your dame deynty (wherewith she has (as you say) besmeared
Haddons lips) we will deal in earnest with you: and therefore let us see what
it is wherewith you reproach Haddon so unmannerly. He said that you were
Ciceroes scholar, and a conning coyner of words what evil was in this?
Afterward himself does confess that your writings are vnsauorye, and
without reason: wherein said he amiss? meaning this in effect as I think: that
you busye your self about a strange matter as though you were raking after
the Moon, wherein ye neither savor any thing at all, you are not able to
teach, nor willing to learn. You do slander certain godly and learned
personages, here in England, yea even to their Queen, whom despightfully ye
call by a nickname new Gospellers: And thus do ye, either of no reason at all,
or in such wise, as if only exchange of names were made, would easily be more
appliable unto the forgers and counterfayte stagers of the Romish Gospel: yea
would accord much more fittely with them, then with those that you do accuse.
moreover where you say, that he utters nothing purely nothing plainly,
nothing, pitthily, nothing substancially or with good grace, if any man else
besides Osorius should speak this, perhaps he might be credited. But as now
what shall any discrete or indifferent man judge of your opinion herein? for
what merucile is it, if a man practice by all means possible to deface ye
credit of the Adversary, against whom he writes? And yet here men may easily
see, yt as you have no great stoare of modesty and discretion, so you are not
ouerladen with the rules, and principles of Rhetoric. For the skillful in
Rhetoric are wont to extol and advance ye power and excellency of ye Aduer.
against who^ they mayntaine quarrel, to th end to make themselves more famous
thereby, if happily they get ye victory.

I come now to that part of thaccusacion, which concerns the form and phrase
of his style: wherein I cannot but wonder enough at your exceeding childish
(pardon me I pray you Osor.) and more then womanishe malepartnes: for in this
sort hoyes wont to brawle for nuttes: And women (as Jerome reports) when
they are a goshipping, speak ill of them that are absent, and crake lustely
over men, as if they were stronger then they. you take it to be a goodly matter
to resemble Cicero in Eloquence and finesse of phrase, or at least to come very
near it: And think it not enough to treat of Christ, of the Gospel, of holy
things, and sacred religion, aptely soundly and learnedly, unless a man paynt
it out with the glorious bravery of Ciceroes Eloquence. And because Haddons
style does not raise it self to Ciceroes loftynes sufficiently, (as you Judge)
therefore he is not accounted worthy to sit amongst the punyes, no nor yet
fit to be a scholar in Ciceroes school: as one that utters nothing purely
nothing plainly nothing pitthily nothing loftely. etc. when wise men I say
shall read these words of yours, and this your Judgment concerning Haddo^, how
will they esteem of you in their secret conceiptes think you? Will they smile
in their sleaues at this your folly? or will they laugh openly at it? will not
all men clapp their hands, and spitt at that singular inhumanity of this
Portugal wrangler? will they not abhor his detestable shamelessenesse? for
why do ye say that Haddon speaks nothing purely? nothing plainly, etc. is
there any man that has ever read any of Haddons writings, so unshamefast
besides Osorius only, that would say so? Are ye nothing ashamed of this your
so manifest vanity? Are ye so altogether dispoyled of feeling of modesty, and
humanity, as you are barraine in scriptures, and void of Judgment? that
whereas ietting at your own shadow, you can be contented so bountifully to
bestow the best, and the fairest upon your self, that ye will find in your
heart to empart nothing but poor rags to others? For to confess in deed
that Haddon did not reach to that grace, and dexterity of phrase that was in
Cicero: Will ye therefore yield him no commendation of the latin style? nor so
much as any mean knowledge therein? nor yet will suffer him in your company to
bear the name of a poor scholar in Ciceroes school? And who has made you
usher I pray you, or pepositour of Ciceroes school? that no man may be
admitted into that fellowship unless you allow of him? And yet in respect of
this frivolous title, what matter makes who bear the name? But what kind of
discourtesy is this? so to embase Haddon of all ornaments of an artificial
Rhethorician, so to throw him down amongst the Apsy boys, as to leave him
nothing but babishnes and stammering of speech? and withal condemn him for
so doltish and rascal a writer, that ye cannot choose but marvel also, what
collpixe had so bewitched him to make him a writer?

But ye ought to have marueled at this O marvelous man, in others rather, and
posted over this taunting check to them rather, over many of whose pelting
works are flowne abroad out of your cloisters into ye world, so Mosy,
unsavory, harshe, and unpleasant, that ye learned are enforced many times to
turn over their stomachs in reading the^, and the unlearned suck nothing out
of them, but smoke, and puddle. In which notwithstanding I would not be so
squeimish at their rudenes, and barbarous grossness of speech: if even in
their most excellent writings, they might be found to carry any resemblaunce of
any sound doctrine, or savoring of wholesome knowledge at the least: and were
not more disorderous in the substance of the matters, then they are gross of
speech. For otherwise as concerning that exquisite excellency of Eloquence,
for as much as neither Cicero, that graund captain of Eloquence himself, does
at all times speak so exquisitely: neither forces so much if it be not
altogether artificial in a Philosopher, so that his manners and doctrine be
substanciall: what cause is there to the contrary, Exquisite eloquence as is
not carefully required in philosipher so may the want thereof be borne withal
in a Divine.
but if there be some defect thereof in a divine, that he may as well be borne
withal, so that the simplicity of his speech agree with the truth, and be
clear from barbarous grossness: and so that the want of Eloquence, be
supplied with the soundnes of the truth. But as now, how unreasonable is your
communication Osorius that can so courteously allow of those your unsavory, and
unpleasant Ianglers? and show your self so whotte a Censor against Haddon
only: as that ye affirm him to write nothing eloquently, nor yet able to
express his meaning any thing plainly.

But yet truly whereunto soever Haddon is fit or unfit, or whatsoever
Haddon can do or cannot do: This is most certain and true. That the want of
Eloquence is not the matter, that rubbes you on the gall so extremely: Haddon
is not therefore expelled from Ciceroes College, because he cannot express
Ciceroes finesse lively enough (which your self cannot do, more finely though
ye would burst asunder Osorius) But there is an other thing, yea an other thing
in deed, there is an other padde in the straw: for who cannot easily perceive
out of what puddle this bubling froathe does issue, and whereunto this tends,
that Haddo^ may not seem worthy to be named a Ciceroniane: not because he is
not a Ciceroniane: but because he is not a Romayne: not because he writes
scarce plainly nor conni^gly with ye Orator of Rome, but because he takes not
part with the Bishop of Rome? because he will not blindfolde himself with
Osorius: not because he does not sufficiently express the elegancy of the
Romans eloquence, but because he would attempt his pen against Osorius, and
against the doctrine of Rome, and take upon him to favor the clear verity of
the gospel, and apply his mind to the defense of true religion, hereupon
arises the reproach of the stammering tongue, of the childish speech, and of
the unskillful style.

In the which I cannot well conceive the meaning of Osor. For if according to
this rule, all writers that do not attain the clean and pure elegancy of
Cicero, do seem in his judgment childishe stammerers: in vain have
Augustine, Jerome, Ciprian, Ambrose, Gregory, Bernard, in vain have the Romish
Prelates, and all other expositours both of the Greek and the Latin Churches,
in vain have Angrensis Dalmata, Alphonsus, Turianus. Andradius bestowed great
and paynfull labors in writi^g: whose style and form of phrase if be
thoroughly viewed, and considered: peradventure the more part of them will be
found to differ as far from the finesse of Cicero, as Haddon does: That I
may be so bold to make no mencio^ at all of Scotus Sotus Lo^bardus Gratiane.
Thomas de Aquino Raphaell Gabriell, and such like trasshe, yea how many may a
man pyke out from amongst the most famous and true Christian deuines, who of
set purpose have abased their style: not because they could not write so
loftely of the things yt you esteem of so ga^ly: but because they were of
this mind, that this hawty loftiness of affected Eloquence, Ieromes Epistle
to Pa^machius
would not agree with ye natural simplicity of the Gospel. Whereupon Ierom
writing to Pammachius seems in this respect to have him in the more
estimacio^, because he despised Cicero in respect of Christ: and farther also
is of this Judgment yt in the exposition of scriptures, the nycetye of speech
ought not only to be dissimuled, but also utterly eschued: Luke. 16.
because it might be more profitable for all ingenerall. Esaias. 2.
Christ our savior accompteth the high and great things of this world to he
execrable and abominable in the sight of God. And the Prophet Esaias does with
wonderful manacing threaten Manasses the day of the Lord against all things
that be fair, beautiful, flourishing things of this world. Paul in enlarging
the knowledge of the Evangelical doctrine: durst not begin the same with
high and lofty Rhetorical speech, nor furnishe his words with humayne
Eloquence (not because it was hard for him to do so if he listed) but chose
rather to refrain, 1. Cor. 1. ^
least the Cross of Christ (says he) might be made void and of none effect.
I speak not this, because I would have men tied to such a necessity now a
days, by his example, namely sith ye Gospel of Christ does so flourish every
where, as though it might not be lawful in these days with what soever
ornaments, yea of greattest estimation to beautify ye speech, and to apply
the same to the use of Christ's congregation. But yet must modest discretion be
used here. Truly if Plato were of opinion, yt the last end of Eloquence was,
that we should deliver and utter things acceptable to God: how much more the^
is ye same to be required in a Divine?

And therefore as concerning the Grace and dexterity of Cicero: whatsoever it
be that either. Nature did emplant in him, or Industry did attain: as I
despise it not, but rather very well like of it, and do wonder at so excellent
a gift of God in him: so again do I not reprehend in any man to immitate him,
so that his imitation be joined with Christian simplicity, so that it be done
not to hawke after the proud estimation of the world, nor to the vain
glorious ostentation of wit, nor for any private glory: finally so that it
be so applied, that discret imitation may be clearly void of vain
affectation. Now what shall we say to them? who rejecting all other teachers
of manners and doctrine, do employ all their endeavor to file up their tongues
and so addict themselves altogether to Cicero alone, and so amazedly dote upon
him only, that think it a less fault not to be a Christian almost, then not
to be a Ciceronian: nor judge him scarce worthy the reading (though he be never
so Christian a writer) that does not frame his style after Ciceroes, pattern,
and savor altogether of his delicate speech? And that is the cause (as I
suppose) why Osorius does reckon, that Haddon does write nothing purely, and
nothing plainly. Not because he has corruptly or fasly written, but that it
seems to Osori. yt he has not written like a Ciceronian, and because he
does not thoroughly resemble his dexterity and loftines, although in deed he
be not very far behind him. And therefore this sweet man does wonder, what
waywardnes of mind forced him to be so bold as to write against Osorius, Osor.
163.
and commands him to learn of him (if it please the Muses) how hawty and
vehement interrogations must be applied in place fit for the same. Last of
all in stead of a Rhetorical acclamation, concluding with a Satyricall skoffe
he does aduertize him, To proceed in writing franckly as him lists, and
because he will encourage him to write more franckly and freely, he tells him
that he may freely write without danger, because no man of any judgment or
skill will blame him in this respect, that he is addicted to Cicero more then
is needful.

If there were any sense or feelyng of right or wrong in all your body, or if
there were any reason in all these your unmannerly tauntes, and rascallike
scoffs (Osorius) I could acquit you with the like, and could be contented to
space them unto you in Haddons behalf. But now for as much as this your speech
is so aboundau^tly replenished with vanity and folly: what were better for me
to do, then according to the counsel of the wise man, Prouer. 16.
To answer a fool according to his foolishness? Briefly therefore and
because I make have to the end of your book: to answer not to your
Arguments which in deed are none, but to answer your scoffs and nyppyng
conceiptes, not altogether vnpleasauntly, yet nevertheless somewhat truly:
Surely I do give you hearty thanks Osorius, not for mine own cause only, but
in the public name of all the learned generally, for the things, wh you have
taught us hitherto in these your notable books. For so have you taught, as we
all can not but be merry and receive singular delight at your doings. For what
is he that can abstain from laughing, that shall hear you disputyng upon
those matters? in wh you seem to behave your self no more aptly, then as
though a blind man should discern betwixt colors, and a Camel Judge of
dancing. You take upon you to determine franckly betwixt true, and false
Religion, very hautely and proudely, but yet much more impudently. And yet it
shall be as easy a matter for a man to find as much Relligion in Tullies
Offices, yea and as true, as this your Relligion is, which you have so
gloriously painted out in these your books hitherto, a few sparckles only
except. Likewise also throughout the whole course of the rest of your
discourse, how often have your frivolous, and confused Arguments moved me to
mirth, and laughter? As where you thrust your self to stoughtly into the
matter of Justification and Predestination: in all which kind of doctrine
notwtsta^dyng you seem as mere a stranger, as though you came new from
India, neither dare once so much all the while in all your books name out of
your mouth, the term of Justification or of Predestination: Yea truly I
marvel also why ye durst name the name of Christ also amongst your writyngs,
since that Cicero never made mention thereof in all his books.

But this ridiculous Silenus does never play his part more pleasauntly, then
whenas taking the rod in his hand, and sittyng in the Schoolemaisters chair,
he calls forth poor seely Haddon into the mids of the School, and
commands him to harken to him, and to learn of his Master. And no marvel:
for he is full of such commandments: But good M. Osorius, you must bear
with poor Haddo^ in this behalf, for he is occupied about other matters, he
can not come to your School now. And if he could be present, he would not be
so foolish yet, though otherwise in eloquence never so childishly ignorant, as
to be much afraid of this ugly Buggebeare in a Lions skin, but he would
sooner espy him to be an Ass by his lollyng ears, then a Lion by his paws.
Wherefore keep these Maisterly precepts now to your self, which you may then
at the length with shame enough lay upon others necks, when you have your
self learned to use them well before. For if we lysted to set down here to
the view, how often your Reasons and Arguments fail you: how indiscreetly and
how fayntly you roaue and raunge to unseasonable exclamations, and untimely
scornful braggynges, braying out as it were a madd man, where no cause is,
triumphyng there where is no victory, yea and many times where no adversary is,
how stoughtly sometimes ye stand by inco^gruitie: I could easily show, that the
faults which you carpe at to be in Haddon, ca^ be applyable to no man more
fitly then to your self.

Now whereas you add last of all, that there is no man of any Judgment, which
will blame Haddon for that he is addicted to Cicero more then is needful: as
I am not ignorant whereunto that your unsavory and more then foolish scoff
tends, so can I not sufficiently conjecture, what this malicious brag of
the name of a Ciceronian and emulation of speech should emporte amongst
Christians. It is not my part to Judge rashly of your meaning. And it may be,
that ye write this against Haddon, not so much of any true knowledge, as to
unlade you of some choleric humors. And yet if you will give me leave to
tell you in your care what I think: if you think as you have written, and be
of the very same mind in deed: certainly there can not be hidden under this
couerte meaning of yours any other thing, then very lurkyng Heathenish
infidelity. For if you be carried into such a wonderful admiration of Cicero,
that ye think him worthy to be noted for infamous, that is not more then
enough addicted to Cicero (for so do your words emporte) and ou the contrary
part think also a special point of high comme^dation if a man with whole
bent of affection endeavor to become a Ciceronian^ where is the^ (I pray you)
the Glory of Christ? where is that mind that knows not to rejoice in any
thing, but in the Cross of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? The Lord in the
Gospel does plainly deny that a man may serve two Masters at once. And ye
Apostle does exhort not in one place alone, that we frame not our selves to
the fashion of this world. But you will say that by these words Mammon is
understood. Be it so in deed: Ergo, who so is addicted overmuch unto Mammon,
him you deny to be ye servant of Jesus Christ. And shall he be ye servant of
Christ yt is addicted to Cicero more then enough? But it is prayseworthy to
imitate ye gorgeous neattnes of Ciceroes speech, and worthy of great
co^me^datio^ to match him in excellency, nor is it any thing prejudicial to
Christ's glory. But what and if Christ will not be glorified on this wise? what
and if ye simplicity of ye gospel, will not admit such pyrlyd pyked and
delicate speech? what and if the same yt Synesius spoke of the young man, Fine
poolished speech is always impudent.
may be as aptly verified of speech, yt is to say: That fine poolished speech
is always impudent. But eloquence was always had in great estimation amongst
all men (you will say). As though yt whatsoever were unlike unto Ciceroes
phrase, were by and by barbarous: and as though Cicero him self, if he were
now alive again, would not use an other phrase of speech in ye doctrine of ye
Scriptures, the^ he used at yt time. And as I suppose this one man Cicero did
not accomplish all manner of learning: Neither is one phrase of speech meet and
applyable to all persons, causes, and Arguments.

But now (Master Osorius) other manner of matters are in hand: and we live now
in an other world: In yt which we may not occupy our wits so much about ye
poolishyng of speech, but rather with earnest bent affections seek for life
everlasting, for remission of sins, for the kingdom of God: and learn how
to turn away the severity of Gods wrath and Judgment from us: for yt day
surely ha^geth over our heads, which shall bring us either to everlasting
glory, or else to everlasting destruction. We must be well aduized, how we shall
answer in yt Parliament before that Judgment seat: For ye Judge may not be
dealt withal with floorishyng words, but with substaunciall matter. This must be
all our care and endeavor, hereunto must we enforce all ye powers of our
souls, not how measurably or aboundau^tly our tongue may be framed to pretty
co^ceiptes: not how loftely our style mayaduau^ced. But by what means ye
terrible cou^tenau^ce of God may be pacified. All other things whatsoever are
but shadows, though they delight profane eyes of this world with never so
glorious spectackles. Undoughtedly whosoever is stricke^ with an earnest fear
of God, whose soul (being terrified with the multitude of his heinous sins)
does with inward and hearty sorrow sighe and scrytche out unto Christ: whom the
holy Ghost has endued with a true and lively contemplation of this transitory
world, An Exquisite affectation of Eloquence not so much to be regarded of
Deuines.
who has in heart and mind utterly renou^ced the world with the pomp thereof:
Finally whom the unmeasurable magnificence, and unspeakable Majesty of the
kingdom of the Son of GOD does wholly possess, what shall he regard the
lofty grace of Cicero? or ye proud stately words of his phrase? or his mynio^
devises and toys? so that he speak purely, plainly, lightsomely, and directly
to purpose: so that his speech be clean, joined with a mean comlynesse: what
needs there any more abundance be required in that man? But he speaks not
like a Ciceronian, verily Christ him self spoke not like a Ciceronian, yea
although he had so spoken, he should have profited less. For it comes to
pass (I can not tell by what secret operation and influence of things) that
the humility of the Cross, which consists wholly in Divine inspiration, will
not agree with this hauty, and lofty kind of man's vtteraunce. For it is one
thing for a Divine to debate upon holy mysteries, and an other to play the
Mynstrell: As Musonius spoke sometime of a certain Philosopher.

And therefore I do not differ much from his Judgment herein, who although
attributed enough unto Cicero, yet did so much of set purpose abstain from
affectation of his speech, that although he could have attained thereunto,
gave him self rather yet to a more sou^de, more proportionable, more pitthy,
less effeminate, more natural, less fleshly, and a more spiritual kind of
speech. And yet does no man diminish any thing of the commendation of those
excellent gifts of Tullies eloquence. But perhaps it seems more unseemly
in Osorius Judgment not to speak like a Ciceronian, then not to speak like a
Christian. And therefore this Portingall Pasquill does giere at Haddon by way
of mockage, saying: That no man of sound Judgment will ever blame him for
this, that he is more then enough addicted to Cicero. etc. As though if that
Haddon had applied him self to Ciceroes phrase, more then was needful, that
wise men would have given him any commendation for the same, and not rather
have turned it to his reproach, and condemned him of follye. But how much
Haddon gave him self to the affectatio^ of Cicero, or how much he did not,
neither do I greatly regard, nor am I well acquainted withal. Which neither
knew the man nor the manner of his studies, but that considering the man by the
view and conference of his books and writyngs, he seems to my Judgment
more addicted, and less clear from this Ciceronian scabbe, then I could have
wished him. What Judgments of others you press us withal, I know not: but
if they be Ciceronians, I do not greatly regard them: If they be blind, and
like unto your self, such I can not term to be Judgments, but
foreiudgementes rather, such as are wont to be of those, whose Judgments are
not grounded upon reason, but upon affections. Jerome in a certain place does
say, that the ^udgeme^tes of Lovers be blind, but I dare affirm that envy and
malice be much more daungerously blind. But if you tell me of courteous, and
Christian Judgments I make no doubt of these at all, but that they will Judge
right well of all Haddones cause. For he pleads in the most necessary quarrel
of the Church, and the most commendable defense of his Country. Moreover he
so handles his matters with Arguments, and Reasons, as that he seems not
only to have confuted Osorius. But also to have crushed him all to pieces? Let
other men Judge of his style and the disposition of his writing, as shall like
them best, I will not gaynsay them. As for me truly (if I may be so bold by the
leave of the iudifferent Reader so subscribe to other men's Judgments, though
it be of no great estimation that I shall speak) yet will I speak
nevertheless franckly, as I think, not of Haddon only, but so for Haddon, as
I will withal answer unto Osorius Haddones Pasquill. For this I Judge of
them both, unless your gross and Heathenishe Judgment (Osorius) did much
more differ from Christ, and from all Christian modesty, then Haddones manner
of writing (in my Judgment truly) does differ from Ciceroes commendable
virtues: you would never have set forth your self, your blind ignorance, nor
your railing books to the open gaze of the world to be mocked, derided and
hissed at, in this so great, and clear lightsomnesse of the Gospel of Christ.

The third Book.
Having stricken of two heads of this monstrous Hydre already, and mangled the
same in gobbettes reasonably well (the terrible Serpent nevertheless being not
as yet thoroughly vanquished) there remains yet one head more, or book:
Wherein this ugly vermin besturreth him self to fresh assaults, betaketh
him to new threateninges, casts out new poison, yea whole flouddes of
slanderous reproaches, and lies, against our new Gospel (as he terms it:)
like as the old Serpent did long sithence against the woman and her child, but
chiefly against our little England. And yet he does so use the matter, as that
he would not seem to enuemine all the whole Island with this contagious fleing
infectio^. For he does know (as he says) Page 166.
that in this la^d are very many good and Catholic me^, which never shronke
away from their vows, and oaths made to the Pope of Rome: and that many of our
English Nation have willyngly run out of their country: as also not a few
in number that tarry still at home, who persistyng nevertheless in the same
opinion of Romish Relligion, are restrained from vtteryng their consciences
more for fear, Osori. inueighed against England, but not against all.
then for any zeal they bear to this new Gospel: Moreover also that there be
many noble me^, yea many whole shyres in England (as he is informed by a
certain Portingall Merchant a friend of his) that are not coathed as yet with
this Lutheran moraine: And therefore that this his accusation in not bent
against whole England, neither against those particular persons and places, as
Haddon does misconster of him, but against those Lutheranes and those new
Gospellers only: From which sort of people he does louyngly aduertize Queen
Elizabeth of very good will, and hearty affection, Osori. page 167.
that she take very good heed and be warely circumspect. And to the end she
may foresee the same more prouidently, he will foreshewe unto her certain
marks and tokens, by the which (being guided, as by Theseus clewe of threede)
she shall not mysse to discern the difference betwixt true Relligion, and
false: betwixt true Prophets, and false Prophets: and by what marks the one
may be easily discovered from the other.

You have now the proposition of this book: All the rest that is patched
together, What Osorius does promise in this book.
in the process of the whole work, tends even to this effect almost. First
he makes promise to set down certain signs, and tokens, by the which he
will make manifest the difference betwixt true Relligion, and false, and
betwixt true Prophets, and false. Afterward annexing a description of his
Church he does display the same abroad very curiously in the manner of a very
fair and beautyfull picture, painted out (as it were) in a Table to be viewed.
Next unto this he makes a comparison betwixt the two Churches: so magnifieng
his own Church with wonderful praises and co^mendations, that it is not
possible to advance it more highly: and against so embasing and thrustyng
down under foot the p^stiferous sects of the Lutheranes, that all me^ may
worthily hate them, and detest them. Of the which (by Gods permission) shall be
spoken hereafter in place fit for the same.

And first of all comes to hand an infringible Argument of Osorius, now once
again repeated out of his letters written to Queen Elizabeth. Which because
he braggeth was not confuted by Haddon, so much the more behooves us to note
advisedly, his wonderful skill uttered in knittyng up the knotte thereof: So
that if we be no more able to unloose it, then Haddon was, we should at least
stand maruelously amazed at the inscrutable ingeniousnes of the man: For
determinyng with him self to make a plain demonstration, that these new
Gospellers (as he calls them) should not in any wise be harkened unto, but
should be banished out of all commonweals, as common plagues, and masters of
all misrule and wickedness: he frames his Argument upon this point: Osori.
Argument not able to be resolved.
That whereas, they took upon them to restore the ancient purity of the
Gospel, infinite mischiefs do reign notwithstanding amongst their
Auditories. And that these teachers do keep School no where, but they make
the whole country there the worse for the^. Haddones answer to Osori.
Argument.
To this Sophistical quick Haddo^ making answer affirms, that it is
neither true, that Osorius fableth of yt waywardness of this people: neither
yet though it were true, that it is prejudicial to the defense of the cause
now in hand. For the controversy here does concern properly matters of
Relligion: to the which if the conuersations of the professors were not
corresponde^t: or if the seeds of Christ's Gospel did not fall upon ye
fruitefullest ground altogether, but were choked up with thorns: or that
the Corn were ouergrowen with Cockell and Tares: the fault thereof was not in
the word, but in the people. For humane actions had never so good success in
this world, but that the greater sort were always delighted with the worst:
and the worst part many times prevailed beyond the best. And that this came to
pass long sithence, not only in the time of Christ and his Apostles, but in
the age of the holy Martyrs also, and does likewise happen by a certain
continual order and enterchaunged course of the world, daily and hourly, so
that not only the Preachers of the word, but the Church of Rome it self,
never wants matter sufficient of great and grievous complaints. And albeit
(as the manners of men are) through the ca^kerd peeuishnes of wayward frowardes
the most sacred word of God be evil spoken of amongst the Paganes, and
Infidelles, yet, if the matter be debated amongst wise, and discrete
personages, it will not be thought matter reasonable, that the things which of
their own nature are good, should be called in question, and condemned for the
naughty behavior of naughty packes abusing the same. And therefore that Osor.
did amiss herein, to wrest the whole state of the question to manners, and
evil conversation, which did only concern matter of Relligion: Moreover
also, though never so straight Inquisitio^ were made of the life, and manners of
the professors of the word: yet behooved not Osorius to bend him self so
sharply against our Preachers, with any accusation, before he had thoroughly
acquitted, or at least wise answered the griefs and complaints of many others
of his own Catholics, which are much more heinous and worthy of speedy
reformation.

To these reasons of Haddon let us hear what Osorius does (I say not) dispute,
but with open mouth cry out: first he vaunteth and triumphs that his argument
is not resolved: Afterward this gallant glorious Thraso does marvel very
much with what face Haddon may deny this to be true, seeing that the very
poreblinde do see it, and is common in every barbours shop, sealed with the
testimony of all men, yea wherewith the Siopodes are so well acquainted also:
as he says, that it is merueile that any man could be so shameless to deny it
to be true. Osor. page 167.
For what is he that does not only conceive in imagination, but also not
behold with his eyes, yea: and feel it in the whole body, to the great grief
of his heart: that lust does raunge every where allowed: unbridled
licenciousnesse pestereth every corner unpunished: Sanctuaries and Religious
houses lie tumbling in blo^d: that Temples and Churches be robbed and spoiled:
Treasons practiced against Princes and Governors: Finally all places
(whersoeuer these doctors teach school) to be in a tumult and vproare? And
forasmuch as Haddon does not only hear all these, not by report only, and
conference of histories, but also behold the same with his eyes, openly and
usually frequented, how can he say that these things were never done?

March on courageously in this dexterity and sharpnes of wit O Benedicte.
But go to: let us consider awhiles ye force of this ingeniouse man Whersoeuer
these new preachers (says he) do plant themselves and teach, there may you
see all things polluted with most filthy Brambles, Cockell, and Darnell. The
man has spoken. But how shall I know this to be true that ye speak Osorius?
for sooth he is past all shame, that denies it. And why so I pray you? Because
the matter is known, and published abroad every where to Nations, Countries:
Islands, and all people, finally bruted abroad and ratified by the report of
all me^. Behold gentle reader a very wonderful and evident demonstration,
concluded not with arguments, and silogismes (as men are wont to dispute in ye
schools of Chrisippus and Cratippus) but ratified, yea sealed also, as
orators use to verify their causes before the Judges) by the testimonye of
public seals, and witnesses, yea and that not by the report of a few, but of
all manner of me^, of ye people of Calecute (I suppose) of ye Massagets and
Antipodes, and men of a new world, yea beyond all herring, as they say. So
far and so wide does this Prelates knowledge of all things outstretch it
self, that he can test upon his fingers ends, what all men do every where,
what they speak, and what they hear: what may you require to be of more
credit Christian reader? sithence the world it self, and the whole compass
of the same produced, is witness against these new prophettes, the
Lutheranes?

The testimony of the world against the Lutheranes.
Which if might speak altogether with one mouth, would use this testimony, as I
think. Whatsoever disorders, and mischiefs, whatsoever lust, and unpunished
licenciousnes, whatsoever outrageous sacrilege, whatsoever treacherous treason
and conspiracies, were ever hard of amongst any people, the same be chiefly
and above all others frequented, and reign especially amongst the commonweals of the Lutheranes, through the doctrine and preaching of their
Prophettes. In witness whereof we all, and every of us, as many as live in
this world, do set to our seals, Ratify, and confirm the same to be true
with our hands.

The world it self (I think) if it could speak, would not speak otherwise
forsooth. And because it cannot speak for it self, it has appointed Osorius
to be proctor of the cause to speak for it: In a matter therefore so manifest:
so approved, and fealed, is there any so impudent an Haddon, that will dare to
deny this? But that ye may wonder yet a great deal more at his Rhetorical
amplification, he proves it to be true, not only by ye suffrages of dumme
men, but cyteth to witness against Haddon himself, his own eyes and ears.
Do ye not see (says he) with your eyes? The rebou^ding of the Argument against
Osor.
what should Haddon see with his eyes, do ye ask Osorius? doughtles he might
see many horrible and unspeakable abominations, if he lived now: for who is
so blind that cannot see? so Impudent that will deny? that all places: are
ouerladen with forlorn villainies, lecheries murders. Robberies. Treasons.
Uproares and conspiracies? But if inquisition be made for the special place:
where these abominations do reign most^ what place may we point out unto you
more notorious then Rome it self? the mother See of the Catholic Church?
where Harlottes, Bawdryes, howses of Stews, Brothell houses, and all kinds of
filthy lechery, are openly haunted, not only not punished, but made also very
gainful marketts to the Popes treasory. Where you appoint the chief See of
your whole Religion, the same may I boldly, and with great reason approve to be
yt caruell, and Botche of true religion, the Metropolitan City of all
abominations: the Butcherow and shambles of Christian Blood, the sincke of
theft and avarice: the very forge and schoolehouse of all Treasons,
Trecheries, seditiones, and abominations. If the bodies of mortal men be the
Temples of the living God, who has vyolated and defiled more temples of GOD,
with fire, fagotte and goare, then the Bishops of Rome? And in good time is
the vproare of Germany remembered in this place: If it might be lawful for me
to bring forth what I could, out of histories, Records, and Reports, how easy
a matter were it for one particular example only (which notwithstanding is
altogether impertinent to religion) to spread abroad whole decades and Iliades
of seditions. Tumultes, and Schisms? how easily might I point out by name,
time, and place not only the practices of conspiracies against princes? but
the cruel murders, poysoninges, Banishmentes and famishings procured against
them one in ye neck of an other? Briefly in what country soever these Droues
of Monckes and Nuns do build their nestes: what else shall a man see? then all
things polluted and contaminated with most filthy and shameful villainies and
stench? yea ye whole world bearing witness. Tell me I beseech you good holy
father whose doctrine is this? Si non cast tamen caute, if not chastely, yet
warely: is it Luthers? or some one of your profession? who makes marketts of
Incestuous marriages? who alioweth the concubines of priests for his
commodity and pleasure? who persequuteth the lawful marriage of priests with
fire and sword? To leave over in the mean space the unspeakable abuses and
mysteries of your covert Paphia, to the covert consideration of your couled
co^fessioners, who be privy and partakers of your hidden abominations: And to
pass over withal, ye Crementines, Beneuantanes, Peter's, Aloisianes, Casianes
or that Cacus rather: nor him only, the commendation of whose unspeakable
filthiness openly proclaimed, did denou^ce yt stinking lechery was not only
notpunished, but also highly rewarded by some of you.

But Osorius has found out here a very pretty starting hoale to escape out at.
For sith he perceaueth himself to be urged so narrowly that of Necessity he
must plead for the honesty of his Church, being neither able to hyde, nor
excuse her filthiness, he wringeth himself into this moushoole, that although
he can not deny, Osor. page 168.
that in all the society and course of man's life, and that in the most
fruitfullest corn stinking weeds of iniquity do grow every where among: yet
this does nevertheless not empayre the force of his argument: for he means not
in this place to make comparison of men and to set manners against manners: but
he affirms the ground of the Argument to be^ this. To wit, whereas the
preachers of the new Gospel, Luther, Bucer, Zuinglius, Martyr, did undertake
this upon them, to weed this corn clean from the chafe, and to pluck up the
noisome weeds by the roots, and did bring no ioate of their promise to pass:
nay rather whereas more wickedness has been seen to buddle up a fresh through
their means, A trim reason of Osor.
hereupon he does conclude as it were at a vauntage that the doctrine of these
men is not only unprofitable, Osor. page 169.
but also pestiferous and noisome: and not to be believed in any wise, on the
other side, to wit, in the Catholic Chur. although Avarice and Ambition do
reign in many, and the sinowes of lust are not altogether rooted out: yet
because amongst them no new prophet does arise on this wise, taking upon him
so great a charge as to restore to her former and primitive bewty, and
Apostolic nea^tnes, the decayed Church, and the doctrine of the same overmuch
weakened: therefore the Argument is not of like force against them.

To this effect almost does Osorius frame his talk in words ouerlauish enough,
but in matter so nakedly and coldly, that I am very loath to answer him. The
sum of this conclusion tends to this effect.

If any such new Prophet should arise amongst the^ which would take upon him to
make a reformation of the corrupt manners of the church, to the au^cie^t purity
of the gospel, and did not bring to pass the same according to his promise,
no credit should be given to that prophet.

Luther, Bucer, Phillip, Calvin, Martyr did take upon them to reform the
manners of the Church, and made all things worsse. Osor. Argument confuted.


Ergo, They ought not to be believed.

O Saint Sophistry, what kind of Sophisme is this. If a new Prophet should
arise, that would endeavor by all means possible to reduce to amendment of
life, such as he were able, and could not atchieue his desire in all, ought he
not therefore to be taken for a Prophett? I think this be not true. What if he
could not prevail with many, shall he forthwith be accepted for no Prophett? Go
to: what and if his preaching entered but into a very few? yea what if none
almost were profited thereby? The spirit of the Prophettes is not to be
measured by the number of beleuers.
do ye think it reason, yt the estimation of the preacher be measured
according to the number of beleuers? or unbelievers? or rather according to the
spirit, and truth of his embassye? Noah the eighth Prophet and preacher of
righteousness, did never cease calling and cryeng out upon the people, to thend
he might allure all to amendment of life: Moah.
and yet eight persons only and no more were reserved out of that general
destruction of mankind. When Moses was sent to the Egiptians? Moses.
how many of all that whole multitude became a hear breadth the better for his
preaching? nay rather who waxed not more indurate? Esaias the Prophett does cry
out under the person of Christ. Esaias.
Who have believed our teaching? If we will measure Gods Prophetts after this
rule, what shall we say to Jeremy, Jeremy.
and the rest of the Prophetts? what shall we say to ye Apostle Steven? Stephen.
to Paul? S. Paul.
who co^playned bitterly that all had for saken him, and were fallen away to
the vanities of this present life?

Now ensues the Minor of this Sillogisme. But Luther Melancton. Zuinglius,
Bucer, and Calvin, which took upon the^ this charge, yet reaped no fruit
again of innocency of life, nor of Charity from amongst them that they were
co^uersaunt withal. etc. First I would feign learn, what it was, that these
men did take upon them to do: To call back the life, and most corrupt manners
of men of that age to the perfect rule of the Gospel? Truly they undertook a
very hard charge, far exceeding all humayne power and ability. Go to, and
where did Luther, Zuinglius, or any of the rest, make any such promise of
themselves by word, or syllable of word, so much at any time? Surely I have
perused many of their works: yet could I never find any such thing hitherto.
If you have glaunced upon any such thing by chance, why do you not set down
the place openly that the reader may perceive, that you deal not with forged
lies, but with good matter: not of any desire to cavil, but of an upright
Judgment: not coldly and lyengly, but simply and plainly: not keeping a
Iangling with unsavory speeches and forged untruths (which many men do blame
you for) but so and in such wise, as you may seem to have made plain
demonstration of a true and just report, with as true and upright a mind, to
have the truth known by true proves and testimonies: and not to mock and
delude men with fables. Surely it were to be wished of all good men, that all
Christians by profession, and name, would by all means possible lead their
lives truly Christianlike, in all points agreeable with the doctrine which
they profess. And it is not to be doughted, but that these new Gospellers, as
you call them, did wish this with all their hearts, if wishing could have
auayled. But to bring the same to pass, as was never in their power, so did
they never enter into any such covenant, nor ever obliged themselves by any
promise privy or aperte, that they would accomplish the same: Wherein how much
you were not only deceived in Luther, but how much ye speak also against your
self, do ye but conjecture hereby. For whereas Luther did profess, that the
substance of man's salvation did consist not in the life, and manners of men,
but in ye only faith of the Son of God: how does this agree together, yt he
(whom a little erst you accused to be the subuertour of all honest accions,
and virtuous endeavor) should now take upon him to stoare and enriche the
lives and conuersacions of Christians, with abundance of virtuous plants and
seeds of godliness? Albeit there never lacked in them a certain Godly
carefullnesse to exhort to all honest endeavors, yet were they never so
frantic, as to make so glorious bragges of reformation of life. They
traveled earnestly, every one according to his ability, as beseemed godly and
well disposed personages, if not as much as they could have wished, yet as much
as was given them by the holy ghost. And if they attained naught else, yet this
they achieved surely, that though they could not restore ye pure simplicity
of ye Eua^gelicall life, yet they brought to pass that men by reading and
comparing the holy scriptures, began to have a very evident feeling, and a
thorough taste of the corrupt and stinking matter of your absurd and filthy
pernicious doctrine: the durty puddle whereof, albeit they mistrusted that they
should not be able to cleanse thoroughly, for the unmeasurable tyranny of your
authority, and power: Yet thought they not convenient for the credit, and
function that they bare, to suffer the same to be any longer cloaked and
dissembled wtall.

And therefore stepped forth amongst the rest Martine Luther, The first beginning
of Luther.
and yet he was neither the first, nor yet so long ago, neither so much of his
own voluntary will, as necessarily of relieng duty, not for hope of lucre, ne
yet to pamper up the paunch (as Hosius belieth him) neither of any hope at all
to purchase any authority (as Osorius mistaketh him) but forced thereunto by
the importunacy of others, yea and that not without manifest peril of his
life. Whereupon if any thing chanced afterward contrary to your
expectations, ye can justly accuse no man, but your selves: which were the
first authors of this flaming Beacon, the heat whereof does parch the very
skins of your backs. And what the very cause and occasion thereof was,
neither are the histories so obscure, but that they tell plainly, nor is the
time so far spent: but you may easily call to mind the very time, and
season, whenas Leo the Pope of Rome, sending abroad his commissioners of
receipt, and pla^ting his treasories throughout all the Dominions of Europe,
appointed a general mart (as it were) of raking his Merchandise together:
Whereupon diverse holy cloister Merchants arrived into Germany, And amongst
them a certain Friar of S. Dominicks order, named Tetcelius, but in very deed
a money merchant, and a Regrator of the Popes markett: laden with pardons and
Bulls, and proclayming general fayres for the vtteraunce of them: wherein
remission of sins, the kingdom of heaven, and free liberty to feed on fish
or flesh were to be bought for a few pence. Which proclamation seeming not a
little injurious to the people, and tending to the overthrow of the Gospel of
grace, and moving godly consciences to no small grief, and displeasaunce of
mind, and that not without just cause: Luther a man continually exercized with
inward agonyes, and unquiet passions of consciences, thought it not in any,
wise tolerable for his part to permit such horrible erroneous impiety so
directly a against conscience, and the manifest truth of the gladsome Gospel
to be hushed up, and past over, in tymerous and fearful s^ilence. Albeit he
was well assured, that this stinking and contagious weed could not be touched
without present peril of life. Wherefore he began to make a show of
himself, meaning to defend ye quarrel of the Gospel but by a very sle^der
and slight attempt as it were. And first he propounds certain propositio^s
only, and principles of questions against these gainefull marketts of pardons,
and Bulls, not of any vain desire to concontend, or dispute, nor without an
humble manner of submission of the cause: thincking nothing less, then that the
success thereof would be such as we now see is come to pass. If the contrary
part had with like moderation tempered their affections, and either contented
themselves by saying nothing, to have yealded to the truth, or to have sought
the advancement of Christ's glory, rather then to have served the Popes pomp
and ambition: these small sparckles had never burst out into so great flames.
But now by the means of their own waywardnes, it came to pass in them, as
for the more part it falls out with common brabblers, who having many times
the worst end of the staff, and having no right in deed to any part thereof,
strive so long, till at the last they lose every inche thereof, and at the
shutting up, catch a rappe for their labor.

Against these propositions of Pardones, Tetcelius vnmeasurably ragyng, not
contented with no less intolerable arrogancy and insolency to answer them
him self, but sturred up against Luther a neast of Dominicke hornettes: caused
his propositions, and Assertion of Pardones to be openly burned: framed
Articles against the man, and exclamed with open mouth against him, that he
ought to be burnt like an heretic. And because the Popes power should not be
destitute of friends, in a matter of so great importance, immediately started
up one Prierias the Provost of the Friars, who like a Lordlike fellow
challenges Luther into the field. After them stepped forth a third of the same
crew, James Hochstratus, who espyeng a fit time to purchase credit and fame,
would ieopard a ioynte amongst them, and as though there wanted furniture
sufficient enough to mainteyne the challenge, thrust more coals into the fire,
and teazed up the Uniuersities of Paris, Coleyne, and Louaine, against poor
Luther to condemn him.

Luther being thus vexed through ye madd outrage of these Friars, was driven to
this issue, that of necessity he must prosecute his propositions with a more
large and ample discourse: and so sent the same to Leo then Pope of Rome, with
Letters emportyng his humble submission: most humbly beseechyng, that he would
not give credit to the slanderous reports of his adversaries, Luthers humble
letters to pope Leo the tenth.
alledgyng for his excuse that he published his propositions touching Pardons,
not of any evil will or malice toward his grace, but only by way of
disputation, whereof he has now treated more at large, and therefore would most
humbly beseech him to vouchsaue benyngly to read, and accept it: As touching
his own person, he was so affected toward that See, that he would willingly
submit to the authority thereof not only his writings, but his sauetie and
life also withal, in all humility and lowlynesse: and whatsoever his Majesty
should determine thereupon, he would no less reverently esteem of, then as a
decree of the chief Uicare of Christ, unto whom he did acknowledge all
obedience due in earth next under Christ. In this so humble and lowly
submission of this prostrate person, in so weighty a matter, and in so
wholesome counsel, what this Uicare of Christ did, and how this heir and
Successor of S. Peter behaved him self, I do make no great inquiry after.
This one thing I ask and demand of you Osorius that you would vouchsafe to
answer me: what think you would Christ him self, or Peter have done in this
case? First would not Christ him self have thrown to the ground those money
tables, and Bowthes of Choppers and Chaungers? and scourged those vagaraunt
regrators cruelly byeng and sellyng in the Temple of god, with whippes of
knotted cords? would he ever have suffered his Church (which was appointed for
Prayer, and Preaching) to be turned into a den of Thieves? a Bowthe of
brothells? and market of avarice? what would Peter have done, whose successors
these Bishops challenge them selves to be? who on a time (not keepyng the right
course of the Gospel, and therefore reproved of Paul) yielded so humbly? would
he have refused the offered obedience of so humble a submission? or would he
not have vouchsaued it very gently? or else would he not have thanked the party
for so gentle a remembrance and friendly counsel. Pope Leo his proud
insolency against Luthers humble submission.
But now what this most humble servant of the seruau^ts of God did (who upon
earth represents unto us the person of Christ, and the Maiesticall chair of
Peter) how insolently and outragiously he dealt in this matter, what Tragedies
he raised, what thunderboltes and wildefire he threw out of his bloody
turrettes against Luthers life, is needelesse to make any mention in this
place, sithence it is faithfully set down in Histories, and all men remember
it well enough.

Even such were the begynnynges of this troublesome tempest, which ganne spread
it self abroad in every coast, Whereby you may easily understand (I suppose)
that Luther thought upon nothing less at the first, the^ to hear of any
innouatio^ or alteration of customs or ceremonies: but enduced partly through
the necessity of the matter, partly by the provocation of some peeuishe
waywardes, did only set down a few propositions: wherein he gave no attempt
against the state of the Romish See, neither did as yet utterly abandone all
Pardons and Bulls, but required only a moderation to be used in them. And it
was not to be doughted, but if the insatiable greedynesse, or the unspeakable
cruelty of the adversaries could have restrained it self within the bounds
and limittes of modesty and measure, Luther would have holden his peace: As
appears by his Letters directed both to the Bishop of Rome, and to Cardinal
Caietane, signifieng unto them his unfeigned scile^ce therein, so that his
adversaries mouths might be stopped also: which request was not only
reasonable, but agreeable also to piety, in men of their profession especially:
for as much as Luthers Assertions contained nothing prejudicial to the Bishop
of Rome: and the matter had not as yet gone so far forth, but might have been
easily hushed up if at least they could not otherwise find in their hearts to
yield to the manifest truth. But the Pontifical courage of the Bishop would not
so be daunted: neither could the unmeasurable mawe of his greedy Cormorauntes
be so easily satisfied: and at the last the old Proverb (Gold is good chaffer
howsoever it come) bare the Bell away.

After this humble manner therefore, as soon as Luther had propounded ye said
question, Prierias gave ye first onset against him: after him priest in place
diverse Coronelles, and Captains of that band: The^ rusht in whole routes of
Monckes and Friars, with their hoeboobe to the people. Out flewe Articles,
Restraintes, curses with book bell and candell, countermandes: finally the
Bishops of Rome his thunderboltes, with a terrible Bull linkte thereunto: In
this perplexity here would I feign learn of Osorius, if he would vouchsafe to
tell me, what Luther should do? he will say Luther should not have entermedled
in the cause at all. But what man of any reasonable Judgment could or ought to
endure so horrible impiette? But when he saw he could not prevail, he should
have forsaken his tackle. But by this means he must have put his conscience in
danger of drownyng. Then yet at the least he should have behaved him self in
the matter somewhat more modestly: Who could have expressed more humblenes and
modesty? He should have submitted him self and his cause to the tribunal
seat of the Pope: And herein what part of duty left he undone? if humble
submission could have auayled any thing at all. The truth whereof to the end may
be more apparau^t unto you, and to the Reader also, harken I pray you to the
second Letters of Luther written to the Pope, as him self endited them.

Everlasting peace be unto you most holy Father. Luthers second letters to Leo
the Pope Anno 1519.
Necessity forces me again, being a poor outcast of men, and an abject of
the earth, to presume with a word or two to your holiness, and the whole
Majesty. May it please your holiness therefore mercyfully to incline your
Fatherly ears, as the ears of Christ's very Uicare, to this your poor sheep
a little whiles, and to accept of his seely bleatyng. There was lately in these
parties a very discrete person, named Charles Miltitius, your holiness Secretary
and Cha^berlaine, with a grievous complaint to the most renowned Prince
Fridericke, touching my vnreuerent behavior, and unadvised rashness against
the Church of Rome, and your holiness requiryng punishment for the same: ye
hearing whereof grieved me not a little, sorowyng that my great and inward
carefulnes of duty, and good will employed for the advancement of the honor
and dignity of the Church of Rome, was accused for vnreuerent, and condemned
for so marvelous wicked, namely in the audience of the very head of the same
Church.

But what shall I do most holy Father? I am altogether void of counsel
herein: I am not able to endure the power of your wrath, and how I shall escape
it, I know not. He does require me to make a recantation of my disputations:
which if might be done to any such purpose, as is imagined would come to
pass, I would do it without any let. But whereas now through ye unportunate
resistau^ce and exclamations of my adversaries, my disputations are scattered
farther abroad, then ever I thought they would have been, and withal are more
deeply rooted in the hearts of many men, then can easily be plucked up again:
besides this also sithence our country of Germany does wonderfully floorish at
this day with pregnaunt wits, sound Judgments and abundance of learning,
I perceive that if I do honor ye Church of Rome, I must be thoroughly advised
to make no recantation at all. For in this manner to recant were nothing else,
but to contaminate and defile the Church of Rome much more the^ before, and to
betray her to the open reproach and manifest infamy of all Nations and toungues.

Those even those (O most holy Father) whom I withstoode to wit those (which
with their most unsavory preachynges under color of your holiness have made a
Relligion of those detestable marketts, and have defiled the holy place with
the shameful and abominable Idolatry of Egypt) have wrought all this mischief
and outrage with us in Germany: and as though this were not villainy enough, do
accuse me (who withstoode them in their monstrous beggyng) to be the author
of all their misdemeanour before your holiness. Now (most holy Father) I do
here protest before God, and the world, that I neither was willing: nor at this
present am willing, to impeach the Majesty of the Church of Rome, nor the
authority of your holiness by any means: nor by any colorable practice to
deface the same: but do freely and frankely confess, that the Jurisdiction,
of this Church, Luthers Protestation.
is above all things, and that nothing in heaven above, or in earth beneath is
to be preferred above the power of this Church, Luthers humble Supplication to
the Church of Rome.
saving only Jesus Christ my Lord and my Savior. To the contrary whereof let
not your holiness believe any untrue surmises devised against your poor Luther.

And that one thing which I am able to do herein, I do vow here to your
holiness: That is to say, to surcease her after from dealing any more with this
matter of pardons, and will become altogether mute (so that mine adversaries
likewise will lay down their glorious and reprochefull slanders raised against
me) and will publish an instrument of my scilence herein, that the common
people may know and acknowledge the dignity of ye Church of Rome, and yeald
due reverence to the same, and not to impute the rashness of this beggarly
pardoners to that honorable See: nor to imitate ye sharpenes, which I have used
or rather have abused against the Sea Apostolic: and wherein I was somewhat
ouerlauish against these lewd Lurdeynes: This will I do in hope, that this
disorder rashly raised, may by Gods grace, and this means be alayed again, if
it be possible. For in all that doing, mine only endeavor was that our mother
Church of Rome might not be infamed for other men's covetousness, and that the
unlettered people might not be carried into error, and persuaded to set less
stoare by charity, then by those Pardons. All other things as being but
matters indifferent, I do make not great account of. If besides this I can do
any thing, or can learn how otherwise to please your holiness, I will yield my
self unfeignedly at your commandment. Christ preserve your holiness for ever.
From Aldenburghe, the iij. of March. 1519.

Now I beseech you Osorius, what can be more myldly written then these Letters
of Luther? more beseemyng a godly and well disposed mind? or on all parts
more duetyfull in respect of humanity? The which I thought it not amysse to
set down in this place, that the shameless slander of Hosius might be made
more apparaunt hereby, who produces Luther into ye open Stage standing against
ye whole world, entryng into that combat for none other cause, but of a greedy
desire to purchase credit, to hawk after the glory of the world, and to plye
the pau^che: who as one pricked in the buttocke with a boddkynne when he
perceived this market of Pardons to come in question amongst the Dominicke
Friars by the motion of the brothers of his own fraternity, began therefore to
stir these coals. And this he justifies to be true by words uttered out of
his own mouth. For whenas in ye beginning of his disputation against Eckius he
seemed somewhat to pass the bounds of modesty, and was aduertized thereof by
some, Stanislaus Hosius in his first book of heresies.
yt in Gods cause he should moderate him self in ye spirit of lenity: he
affirms, that he brake out into these speeches: namely yt those disputatio^s
were neither begone for Gods sake, nor could be ended for Gods sake. Which
words to be either falsely imagine upon Luther by his adversaries and never
spoken of him, or else not uttered in that sense as they be alleged by Hosius,
the matter it self does express the same with open and evident proofs. And yet
it may be, that Luther both spoke truly, and Judged no less of Eckius, whom he
knew to be a notable Parasite of ye Pope. For what is he yt wayeng duly both
the glorious insolency of Eckius, and the manifest peril of Luther, will
dought hereof, yt all these broils were never under taken of Eckius for Gods
sake, but begun and ended also only for the Popes sake? Surely they can in no
respect be construed upon Luther not by any probable conjecture so much,
considering he was by Eckius forced to disputation very much against his will.
But we will speak of Hosius an other time by gods permissio^.

To return now to Osorius. For as much as Luther demeaned him self so humbly,
as you see, and prostrated him self wholly even under the feet of the Pope,
what would you have had him do else Osorius? I suppose verily he should have
done this, namely have reca^ted, and fallen upon his knees (as boys are wont,
when they fear the rodd) and should have yielded a fault where none was. Nay
rather why did not the Pope rather throw away his proud ambition and filthy
Iucre, and embrace the wholesome counsel of his brother? and sithence he
disdayned the man, The Pope the servant of servants of God: by a figure
called Antiphrasis.
why did he not douch^afe to yield to the truth? If he be so humble a servant
of the servants of God (as in name, and title he professes to be) why shamed
he to harken unto a godly man, a learned Doctor, and a grave Divine, not only
teaching the truth, but also castyng him self down so humbly? Nay rather why
shamed he not to abuse the name of his Christ, and his Gospel, in so false and
filthy a matter? Why shamed he not to blind the eyes of the people with such
smoakes? and to delude the^ (for whom Christ shedd his most precious blood) so
craftily? finally why durst he spurn so malapertly against the express
authority of the word? and for as much as there is nothing of more valor and
more excellent in this life, then free remission and forgiveness of Sins,
which we do enjoy by the only blood of the son of God, what more pestilent
practice of lyeng and deceit could have been imagined? or what ought he to be
adjudged else then the very enemy of man's salvation? who betrayeng us of the
most precious jewel in the world, does sell unto us smoke, and dead coals,
in steed of true and perfect Treasure.

These things being so manifest and clear, The cause of Luther honest.
as nothing ca^ be more manifest and clear, for as much also as Luther
defended so honest and rightful a cause, as no man ever better: and whereunto
he was not allured by any his own affection, but forced rather by the peeuishe
frowardness, and manifold injuries of others even against his will: which also
he could neither recant without heinous offense, nor mainteyne without peril
of life: where be those ianglers now, which slander Luther, as that he sought
means of him self to disturb and alter ceremonies? where be those who^ you
rail at so much (I pray Osorius) Who do set up School no where, but that
they make all things more abominable? Finally where be these new Gospellers,
who so vain gloriously took upon them to restoare the purity of Gods pure
Euangely? Nay rather where was your shamefastness? where was your honesty,
when you wrate this? where was your Logic, when you ouerflowed so
monstruously with filthy lies in steed of true and honest Arguments? For what
so simple a witted man may be found, that ca^ not see a great mayme and want
to Judgment in you, in this kind of Logic, when he shall view, and read so
wind shaken and rotten Arguments? where in all your Assumptions ye vouche no
manner of truth: nor yet of all the same Assumptions any one hangs agreably
with the other. For first beginning with a manifestlye, you Assume on this
wise. Your Prophets (say you) and your Apostles took upon them, Osori.
conclusio^s false Sophistry.
and bound them selves with an oathe that they would restore the pure and
lively wellsprynges of the Gospel. Which is most false: where did they utter
any such promise in word, or half a syllable of a word so much? But what do
you assume hereof? But nothing is amended in your Churches through their
endeavor: Hereof we shall see the proof hereafter. Go to conclude at the
length. Therefore those new Gospellers of yours be not of God: O wonderfully
not concluded but confused Argument of yours, as are all your Arguments else.
But if I may be permitted to build such scattered Cobbewebbes together without
mortar or lyme, why may not I as lawfully argue on this wise.

Jerome Osorius Bishop of Siluano, has taken upon him to confute the
Lutheranes.

But his attempt has little prevailed, unless it be to make their cause more
manifest.

Ergo, The purest Elleborus does grow in Antycyra.

But let us proceed: and because you have taken your pleasure hitherto with our
Gospellers and teachers reasonably well Sir Jerome: may we be so bold to
enquire likewise what your Gospellers and great Doctors have performed at the
length? what fruits, what notable marchaundizes they have enriched their
people withal? what answer will you make to this? They did never promise any
such thing (say you) I do believe you: But I demand not of you what they
promised, but what they performed? how much they profited to the restoring of
the purity of your Church? what they ought to have done? this is the thing
that I do ask. You suppose that they have well acquitted themselves, when by
your testimonye they never made any vaunt of themselves, to bring any thing to
pass: even as though, A comparison betwixt the professoures of the true
Gospel and the Papisticall.
when your friend shall stand destitute of your help, you care not how naked
you leave him, so yt you bind not your self unto him with any parcel of
promise. But I am of an other opinion, and this I reason with you: not because
you have not profited, nor given any hope of profiting, or help toward the
restitution of the purity of your Church: but this I say, and do expostulate
with you: because the most pure doctrine ordained and instituted by Christ
himself for our behoof, ratified by ye Prophets and Apostles, and most wisely
delivered over unto us by our elders, is wholly altogether, or surely for the
most part thereof (I say not) not converted, but utterly subverted by you: and
because you have obtruded upon us such an estate of the Church is neither
Christ, nor his Apostles (if they were now alive) would ever acknowledge which
if any man will dought whether be true or no, from whence shall be he better
certified, then if he thoroughly peruse the very shape and lively Image of that
Romish Church, which your self do represent unto us here? comparing the
samewith the true Apostolic, and that ancient Roman Church that was for
many years ago.

Therefore let us now harcken to Osorius preaching of his own Church. Osor,
Page 169. The prayle of the Romish church after Osor.
First (says he) we have neither the Gospels of Luther, nor of Melancthon, nor
of Carolostadius, nor of Zuinglius, nor of Calvin, nor of Bucer: but we do
firmelye retain the Gospells of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John etc. This is
well done indeed if it be true that you say, and I would to god it were so. I
would to God Osor. you would stand fast and unremovable within the limytts
and bowndes of that doctrine, which the Acts and wrytinges of the Apostles,
and Evangelists have delivered over unto us: and being contented with the same
Gospelles, you would not seek for any other means of Salvation, but such as
in these sacred Scriptures, is ensealed unto us by the finger of the holy
Ghost. But what is the cause then, that ye defraud the godly of these
Gospelles? why do you hyde them in darcknes? and why do you ouerwhelm them, not
under a Bushel only, but with fagott also and fire, and by all means
possible else consume them? As to that where you say, that you renounce the
Gospelles of Luther, Mela^chton, and Calvin, truly I do wonderfully commend
your stoughtnes herein. But because I never chanced to see any such
Gospelles: A fifth and everlasting Gospel made on a time of the Dominick
Friars at Parise Anno Dom. 1256.
I do earnestly desire you: O holy father, for the love ye bear to S. Fraunces
to S. Bruno, Finally for the love of that fifth and everlasting Gospel, which
the Dominick Friars not long sithence began at Paris, in the year of our
Lord 1256. in the time of Pope Alexander the iiij. That your holiness will not
be squeimish to acquaynte me, what manner of gospells those be of Luther,
Melanchton, Bucer, Calvin etc. whereof you make mention. If you can show none
such, it remains therefore: that we hang up this accusation also upon the
file of your other stau^derous lies so long, until in your next false
inuectiues you acquit you of this crime.

Osor. page 169.
We have heard touching the Gospelles. Let us now see the faith of his Church.
Which he vaunteth franckly not to be of many coats, but one Uniform, not
lately risen up, and joined with vain confidence, but delivered from the
Apostles themselves, not depraved with any peevish interpretation or corruption
of mad or franrick usage.

Go to, and what if in like phrase of speech I make evident, that Luthers
faith was one and uniform, Of the Faith of the Romish Church.
yea the same that all the Catholic fathers of the primitive church did
profess? not start up yesterday, or for a few days ago? not grounding upon
any variblenes? nor toste to and fro, by any vnsteadfast assurance? but
proclaimed by the Apostles themselves? and wholly cleared from all madness and
outrage? What if I shall show plainly, yt all these quallities be in Luthers
faith? what shall remain then, but that Osorius shall become a Lutherane
whether he will or no (if it be one uniform faith that he so much esteems)
or if he hold a contrary faith, then must he needs prove an open liar? But
Osorius will not credit my words which I shall speak touching Luther: and
why then shall I creditte Osor. speaking for his own faith? namely sith he
voucheth nothing in proof, but bare words. But if the truth thereof shall be
decyded, not with words, but with substanciall matter, by how many evident
demonstrations shall I be able to Justify, that there is nothing in Luthers
faith, but is agreeable with the truth, and the Ancient age of the primitive
Church in every point? And that in Osorius faith be many things, which do not
only vary clean from the^ both, but are also manifestly repugnaunt, and
contrary to them both? But let us draw near to the matter. Whether the
vniformitye of faith be more discernable. in the Romish Chur. or in the
Lutheranes.
The faith that you profess is uniform: you say: If by this general word
Faith, you mean the Articles of the common Creed (forasmuch as there is no
Church of the Lutheranes but does profess the same as well as you) I see no
cause here, why you should challenge a more special prerogative in uniformity
in this point, then the Lutheranes. And I would to God the Faith of your Church
would stay it self with the Lutheranes upon those Articles only, where
doughtles is matter sufficient enough, for our salvation. But now how many by
hangers do you couple to this uniform and common Creed how many new strange
stragglers, bussardly blind and unknown Raggmalles to the Ancient fathers?
And so couple them together, as things most necessary to man's Salvation, and
for these also keep a greater coil, then for the very articles of the Creed.
Whereof we shall treat more at large in place fit for it by Gods grace.

And therefore whereas you say that you observe one uniformity of faith, I
would first learn, what points you do ground this uniformity upon. For
although I may not deny, but that in certain Decrees and Decretalles is a
certain consent and agreement of conspiring doctrine (such a one as it is) yet
if a man will thoroughly sist many of the^, wherein Luther does dissent from
you, he shall easily perceive yt Luth. has not so much swarued from your
uniformity, as your faith is raunged altogether out of the right pathe of the
true Christian faith, from the doctrine of both Testamentes, from the Apostles
and Prophetts, yea and from the footsteppes of the Faith of your own
predecessors of Rome: whereby appears evidently: that this faith which you so
gloriously vaunt, is not ancient, but new fangled: not delivered from the
Apostles, but patched together with men's Tradicious: not grounded upon any
certaynty, but full of vayneglorious braggery: finally not uniform, but of
many shapes and utterly a Bastard, unlike the true uniformity of Faith. Such
as procure to themselves so many hyreling advocates, How many ways the popes
faith is contrary to the right institution of the Gospel.
patrones and intercessours in heaven besides the only Son of God, Such as
do worhip God otherwise then in spirit and truth, with alters, superalters,
Images, Pictures, Signs, Forms, and Shapes graven in wood and in marble: Such
as before God do hunt after true righteousness by other means, and merytes,
then by only faith, in the Son of God: or do apply to themselves the
effectual grace of his great liberality otherwise, then by this only Faith:
Such as do promise Remission of Sins by any other means, to themselves or to
others, but through the only bloodshed of the Immaculate Lamb: Such as with
the price of pardons do sell that to others which Christ gave freely: Such as do
daily sacrifice him for the quick and the dead, who by one only oblation once
for all, did make atonement for all things in heaven, and in earth: such as
make to themselves a way passable to the kingdom of God, and life everlasting,
by any other means and ways, to wit, thorough the merits of Saints,
through vows, Masses, orders and Rules, and through straightnes of profession,
by the merit of holy orders, humble confessions men's absolutions, and
satisfactions, through building of Abbyes and such other trumpery (barganing as
it were with God for merit meritorious, and not for the only death of Christ
crucified for us) Such as do thrust into Churches, other Sacraments then
Christ did ever Institute, and command to be kept: Such as rob yt lay people
of one part of the sacrament contrary to the ordinance of the church: and in
the other part leave nothing but that which can be no where else, then in
heaven: and which if were present naturally, ought not to be ministered as
meat, according to the verity of the scriptures: All these (I say) and an
infinite table more of the same hiewe, clean contrary to the scriptures, Such
as do retain in faith, maintain in use, clogge consciences withal: and
proclayme to be observed in their Temples: how dare they be so shameless, to
vaunt an observing of one uniform Faith agreeing with the Prophettes, and
Apostles, undefiled and clear from all spotte of Novelty, or wrinckle of
deformytie?

Wherefore you must either convince all these patcheries to be falsely burdened
upon your Church, as I have rehearsed them: or else you must needs confess
that your faith is neither uniform nor Ancient, nor sprung up with the
Apostles, nor yet consonaut to sound doctrine. And in the mean time to pass
over that (whereat I cannot choose but laugh) I mean this addicion: not joined
with any rash or vain confidence. As though any one thing under the heavens
can be more arrogant and vain, Arrogance and vain confidence.
the^ that persuasion of yours, whereby you are wont to bring poor simple
souls in belief, that such as are buried in the cowle and weed of a
Francifcane Friar, are forthwith defensible enough against all the Deuilles and
furies of hell? Again in buing your pardons, who soever shall make best stake
with you as soon as their coin shall cry chink in your boxes, shall have as
many souls (as they) will delivered out of purgatory, and send them up
presently fleeing ripe to heaven: To pass over in the mean time other
gamboldes and toys (not a few in number) much more foolish and apishe then
these, being desirous to make an end once, not for lack of such good matter,
more then sufficient.

Even as fruiolous and vain, may I say, is all the rest that follows
concerning your Church: upon the which when ye have bestowed never so many
delicate colors, and besmeaared her with never so fresh and oryent oils, and
berduers, yet shall you seem to do nothing but bedawbe old rotten putrified
walls with new mortar. Let no man sinisterly interpret of these words, as
spoken against the true church of Christ. I do know and confess, that Christ
never wanted, neither shall ever want his Church, which shall continue one
uniform, holy, Apostolic, and truly Catholic: which being builded upon
the rock of the Apostles, shall enjoy general participation in one body, and
within one bowels as it were with the whole communion of all the saynetes and
godly faithful throughout all the whole world. And I cannot wonder enough
truly, with what face you dare so hedge up within the bounds of the Romish
particular Church only, this universal Church, which is not restrained within
any limittes of place, nor tytles of persons, by the public authority of the
christian Faith: but is dispersed abroad generally and without compass far
and wide upon the face of the whole earth, wheresoever the Apostolic Faith is
of any force: in so much that to your seeming, may be no Catholic Church
now, but that Romish at Rome: from which your Church and Synagogue ye banish
and expel all such as profess Christ after any other manner then after the
Romish Fashion, The name of universal Church is restrained to the Romans
only contrary to the nature of the Gospel.
none otherwise then as if they profess no Faith, nor followed any order of
any Church at all. And hereof aryseth that your crabbed and snappish accusation
against Luther Melanchton: Zuinglius Calvin, Haddon, and others not because
they are not Christianes, but because they are not Romanistes not because they
have swarued an hear breadth from the doctrine of the Apostles, and
Evangelists, but because they will not become treacherous traitors against
the Apostles, and the express word of God, as your high Bishop is. O singular
cause: O profound and Catholic accusation.

But how wisely should you have done in this, if you had brought to pass
that it might have been notified to the Christian people, that your Romish
Church were and is a sound member of the true Church of Christ, rather then
that the universality of Christ's Church should be forced to so narrow a hoale
of subjection, as Rome is. For this suffices not (Osorius) though you cry out
a thousand times wider the you do, Osor. page 169.
that your church was founded by Christ, established by the Apostles, defended
with the army of Martirs, The false and lyeng bragge^ of the Romish Church.
amplified and beautified with the traditions, of godly men: and made strong
and for ever invincible against all the battery and countermoyles of Heretics
by power of the holy ghost: without the which no hope of Salvation may be
hoped for etc. If besides vain crakes of smoky speeches, ye show no
demonstration of sound proof, why these bragges of yours should be true, let
us grant your saying. Or else if only speeches shall be credited, and if to
babble and prate whatsoever a man lists, may like you to allow of for an
vndoughted Oracle, Why may not I as well with the like lauishnes of tongue, gene
lill for loll? and say that this Church of Rome, whereupon you brag so much,
was never erected by Christ but has dege^dered from Christ unto Antichrist
from the ancient and primer pattern of the primitive Church of Rome, to a
certain new fangled kind of life, and doctrine: not Instituted by ye
Apostles, but from the Apostles quite fallen away into Apostasye not guarded
with ye army of Martyrs, but gorged embrued, yea and drucken with the blood and
slaughter of infinite Martyrs such and so many, as never any Nero or Maxentius
did ever send more to heaven, the^ this Babilonicall stru^peth has done.

Now where you add, beautified with the traditions of holy and godly men,
Osor. page 169.
and made strong and for ever invincible against all assaults and battrry of
Heretics and shall so continue permanent by the aid of the holy Ghost.

Truly in these very words you feeme to resemble those persons, which in the
Prophett did call darcknes light, and light darcknes, Esaias 5. How the Church of
Rome is laden with men's tradicions.
evil good, and good evil. First as concerning men's traditions, how holy
those men were I know not this is most true, that your Church is fully fraught
with traditions and doctrine of men in deed, in so much yt who so shall
vncloache your Church of those traditions, and Implementes of men's patcheries,
shall leave her altogether naked, without all kind of furniture to cover her
shame except it be a poor ragge of Moses Iaunitas and solitudo. Emptynes and
void.
Have we not heard the Romish church very notably defended by this Camille,
Camel, I had almost said? now sake an other vnua^quishable argument such as
all ye Heretics wedges with all their. Beatelles and malles can not beat
abroad, when they have done all that they can: where he knitteth up the knott
forsooth on this wise. Against all the assaults of Heretics defensible by
the power of the holy ghost, and shall continue inuinciblefor ever. How shall
this be known? forsooth because the Numa of our age. Osorius does Justify the
same with his words, who is no more able to make a lie, then the Pope is able
to err. what remains therefore for us to do, but that being vanquished with
the truth, we become the Popes vassalles, and worship the foothstoole of his
feet? But to answer briefly to this Parrotte. I will demand this one thing
first, not of Osor. but of the whole brotherhood and fraternity of
Shauelinges. If they believe themselves to be so guarded by the power and force
of the holyghost, against all the assaults of heretics, as this reverend
Lord the Lord Bishop of Sylu, does boast: why do they uphold their pylfe with
such outrage and Tirannye? with such boochery, and blood? with such horrible
burninges? stiflinges? friar? fagotts? emprisonmentes? Rackinges? Constrayntes
to recantation? Famine and sword? Finally with all manner of horrible tortures?
without measure, without end, raging upon the bodies, upon the goods, upon all
ages indifferently young and old, men, women, and children, and all sex and
degrees of people? yea of them also which do confess and profess the same
Christ the eternal Son of God who^ they do? why do they broyle, moyle, and
turmoyle all things with such cankred Ranckor? with such furious outrage with so
many dead corpses, pilladge and polladge? as that (all peacible tranquillity
being now utterly taken away from out of al Christian nations) there is no part
thereof, be it never so small, which is not either crushed down with more
cruel and sauadge persecution then any Turk would have used, or at least,
that had not rather live under the Tyranny of the Turk, then under the
Jurisdiction of such a church? What? can it possibly enter into any man's
thought, that these are the fruits of the holyghost, or are guyded to the
leading, and conduct of our most meek Savior Jesus Christ? If you have
grounded such an indefesible confidence upon the truth of your cause: if you
stand so defensible by the protection of the holyghost, against all assaults
and attemptes of heretics, why then with a safe conscience, and undaunted
courage: do ye not commit your cause to the Lord, the protector of the same?
and rest your selves assured under his sauegard following herein the good and
godly council of Gamaliell: If the doctrine (says he) be not of God, it will
easily shiner in pieces though all the world seek to uphold it. Now this so
great slaughter and bootchery, so great horror of Sauadge and brutishe
cruelty, so execrable Phalarisme and Tyranny from whatsoever author it
raungeth so rudely, it sauoreth nothing at all of the sweet, and amyable
countenance of the holy Ghost surely, nor of the natural lenity and
humility of the Evangelical doctrine.

But which he adds last of all, is of all ye rest most magnifice^t and
Triumphaunt, promising assuredly of the everlasting victory of his Church,
that it shall remain invincible for ever. For even thus he speaks, wherein
he seems in my conceit to differ very little from that foolish rejoicing
of a people mentioned in the Apocalipse, who worshyppyng that same very Romish
Beast vndoughtedly, did ascribe unto her that unvanquishable power of
continuance, even by a like phrase of speech, Who is like to the Beast (say
they) and who is able to fight against her? Apoca. 13.


And this much hitherto of the faith and the Church of Rome, It ensues next in
order, that we hear henceforth of the great Uicare of Christ somewhat, and of
the high and chief governor of the Church.

Osor. page 170.
Because (says he) by the Gospel and testimony of Martyrs and the faith and
agreement of all holy Fathers: Is there any more yet? Finally we have know the
same by experience and proof of things. etc. By what Reasons the universality
of Christ's Vicar is confirmed.
Go to. And what is it, that you did know good Syrs? That it could not
possibly be, that the Church should be one, unless it have one chief head the
same high Vicare of Christ. It is well: and what do ye conclude upon this
strong Reason at the last? Forsooth that for this cause we yield most humble
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, who is Christ's Vicare upon the earth. etc.
Good GOD: what do I hear Osorius? have you pyked such a kind of doctrine out
of the Gospel and the Records of the Martyrs that there must needs be one
Church on the earth? wherein also of necessity much be such a head as must
bear chief principallitie, rule, and superiority over all the rest? In deed
if you mean this of Christ, I am wholly on your side. One head of the Church.
For he in very truth is the only husband of his only spouse, and Prince of
Princes and the very head of all things without exception, he only is the
highest and greatest of all. But whereas you provide two Princes for the
Church at one time together, as it were an office committed unto two persons,
whereof the one may supply the place of the other, as though the other might in
the mean time lie upon one side doing nothing, I pray you (good honest men)
did you ever learn this rule in the Scriptures? Nay rather does not the
Gospel of Christ (whereas it commands all men to obedience and subjection)
prescribe that the Ministers of the Church above all others chiefly, should
cast away all Souereigntie and Lordlynes? The doctrine of the Gospel does call
all the Ministers of the Church to humility and permits superiority to
none in any wise.
and should be contented with poverty? in so much that amongst the Apostles
them selves, it would admit to superiority? Moreover does not Christ him
self also throughout the whole Evangelists, very earnestly stir up his
Ministers to follow his example? who was him self so far of from desiryng
any superiority, as that he refused the same vehemently, when it was offered:
and would he (think you Osori.) like well of such brabbling, as we make now a
days amongst our selves for Lordshyps and dignities? And can you so boldly
now take upon you to be Proctour for this high Monarchy to be established in
your Church, contrary to the example of Christ? defendyng the title thereof by
the Gospel and the Records of Martyrs, contrary to the example of Christ him
self, and the prescript rules of his Gospel? and yet in the mean time, not
vouch so much as one text out of the Gospel, or the Histories of the Martyrs,
to make your party good? Although I am not ignorant altogether, that you have
certain Sentences and words in the Gospel, which (by wringyng and wrestyng)
you do accustom to force to your purpose whether the Gospel will or no: yet
for as much as Haddon has sufficiently enough au^swered those places in the
first book, and since also nothing can be superadded hereto, that has not
already been spoken, it shall be but needelesse to rub that gall my more.

But what he means by Martyrs, or what kind of Martyrs he understands, I
can not well perceive. If his meaning respect those first and ancient Martyrs
of the Primitive Church, surely we have over few monumentes of them left unto
us: yet none at all making ought for that Romish Sinagogue. But if you
conceive of the Martyrs of this later age in our days, I am well assured, that
not only the monumentes, but the very blood of the^ also does long sithence
cry unto the heavens for vengeance against that unconquerable Ierarchy of
yours. I speak here of true Martyrs.

And as to the Faith and agreement of holy men, unless ye join also hereunto
a perpetual consent of places, and times, generally, and the truth also
withal: ye shall no more prejudice our cause, then if you tell me of the
consent and agreement of the Jews, cryeng out against Christ Crucifige,
Crucifige. And therefore in my conceit, your shall do far better, if in
steed of this consent of men (whereupon you brag so lustely) ye follow the
counsel of Augustine. August. against Petilian Epist. Cap. 3.
Let not this be heard amongst us (says he) This say I, this say you: but
thus says the Lord: and there let the Church be sought out.

Now what the experience of Osorius does see, let him self look thereto. Sure
I am that Cyprian seems to have experimented an other kind of experime^t,
Cyprian.
where he writes: Hereupon grow all manner of Scismes (says he) because the
head is not sought for, and me^ come not to the wellspring it self, neither
are the ordinances and rules of the heavenly Master kept, nor observed.
Wherein I think you see matter sufficient enough, by how much the testimony of
this Martyr, does differ from you: whereas you do rack all things to
human authority only, he calls all men back to the very founteines of
the Scriptures rather. And yet do I not deny but that human authority does
many times avail very much to bridle ye unruly raungyng of sects, if Osorius
would limitte this authority human within certain measurable bounds. But
he raketh all things now to the authority of the Romish See only, as though
there were none other authority else, that might stay sects and Schisms,
besides this Romish Pope only. Which Assumption is altogether untrue. And
therefore to make the same appear more evidently: Let us note the wonderful
Logic of Osorius somewhat more advisedly.

The Authority of the Romish See being taken away (says he) will be an
occasion that heresies will grow in use. Whether the authority of the Romish
See be Necessary for the taking away of Schisms.


How shall this be known? because Osorius does see it: for such are the
strongest pyllers of Osorius buildyng for the more part. Thus says Osorius:
Thus is well known to the world: who does not see this? Experience teaches
all men this. But what if some meery conceipted Carneades of the Academickes
school, will deny your bare Affirmatiues to your teeth? what if he will give
no credit to your opinions? no nor yet to your wapper eyes that are bleared
and dim with ra^cour and malice? as it is a kind of Philosophers (you know
well enough) very hard laced and scarce applyable to credit any manner of bare
Affirmatiues: Nay rather what if some other having been enured to contrary
experience, will contend with you on this wise? and say: That he does see with
his eyes, The Romish See the Metropolitan of Sects.
yt this Romish See (whereof you speak) is the chief Metropolitan of all
sects and heresies, what shall become of this your notable defense? The things
which are seen with the eyes (say you) which are known, which are notorious
in all men's mouths, which experience witnessing also does ratify to be true,
which are sensibly felt with ears and eyes: to call these things in question,
whether they be true or no, is meare ignorance: but to deny them is a point of
most shameless impudency.

Not so Osorius: we do not deny the things that men do see with their eyes:
But the things that you do Assume falsely, for things certain, concludyng
false and slanderous cauilles for mere truth, those things we do constantly
deny to be true: not because we trust not men's senses, which be of sou^de
Judgment, but because we give to credit no Osorius lyeng. But go to. Let us
move forewardes a little, that we may see the thing at the length that this
sharp sighted Lynx does so easily see.

Forsooth he does see (says he) that noisome sects and troublesome
controversies would forthwith raunge in the Church, if the authority of the
Romish see should be clean put down.

I believe it in deed. But with what eyes does he see this? with that left eye
I think, which is covered with a pynne and web of desire to slander: But if
he would vouchsafe to open again that right eye, I would not dought, but that
experience (whereof he speaks) would teach him a new lesson. Where the Romish
authority is quite banished, there is most rest.
For if this Romish authority were utterly abolished, he shall by experience
prove that this will forthwith ensue, which many of us through the inestimable
benefit of God, have proved to be most true in all places, namely: that commonweals shall recover their ancient privileges, consciences shall possess
their wonted freedom, men shall be restored to the sauetie of their lives: all
Christendom shall enjoy peace and tranquillity: he shall see horrible fires
quenched: whole pyles of Fagottes and fire co^sumyng ^ bodies of Christians to
Ashes to be extinguished: stocks to be set wide open: imprisonmentes,
rackynges, recantations and Fagottes to be shaken from men's shoulders: he shall
see the lives and goods of many thousands to be saved out of the ^awes of
death, and from the bloody bootchers knife: he shall see pilladge polladge,
confiscations of goods, Popish exaction, deceiptfull buyng and sellyng of
Pardons, fayres and gaynefull marketts of dispensations, taxes of Citizens,
spoylinges of the Commons, tenthes, first fruits of benefices, yearly
contributions of Bishops, great impositions of Monasteries, payementes of
pentions for Palles, for mysters, for ringes, for liberties: for exemptions:
Finally for whores and concubines to be diminished and utterly abolished: he
shall see their drousie superstitions, and ceremonies, and their triflyng
traditions, give place to the Orient bright Sun shynne of the truth: Temples
cleansed again from filthy Idolatry: Kings to become Kings, and Lords of
their own: and once again at the last to bear their sword the^ selves, which
before bare nothing but bare titles, and scarce titles only: he shall see
Citizens and Subjects delivered from strange Tyranny, and subject to their
lawful authority, and ^o them only to yield obedience, unto whom they ought
to do: Finally he shall see commonweals begin to take breath again, after a
certain sort now at the length, and the hearts of the faithful to raise them
selves up, at the joyful countenance of their ancient sauetie, and to give
most humble thanks to almighty God, for their most happy peace and
deliverance. Certes (Osorius) if the chaunges and chances of things (which
men see with their eyes and feel by practice and daily experience) may without
check be open to the view of the world, you should plainly discern and see
all those things, if you were here in England, and not in England only, but
in Germany, in Denmark, Sweuland, Scotland, Polande and the more part of
France, in Switzerla^d: finally throughout all incorporatio^s, and free
Cities this authority utterly abolished. Go to: And where now are those
sects and Schismatic dissentions, which you do object against us? If you
know not this to be true Osorius, or if happily you be ashamed to confess the
things that you know, I will confess the same for you, and will speak the
same as frankely, as truly. If I shall say, that even with you in the very
Court of Rome, in your Churches, in your Monasteries, Colleges, Rules and
Orders of Friars, briefly wheresoever that shauelyng mark of the Romish
Prelate is emprinted, or wheresoever that authority is of most force, that
there are whole swarms and sects most outragiously raungyng, I fear nothing
less, least that my words may seem to emporte more then the truth: The
Papacy nothing else then a certain mighty faction and armed power of kings.
Nay rather I am sure I have yet spoken very little. I should have spoken in
this manner rather: All and singular this your Papae^e, how large and wide
soever it is outstretched, is nothing else, but a very sect, and a certain
mighty faction, armed with the power of men, directly against the Gospel of
peace. But of this hereafter shall be spoken more at large. In the mean space,
because this place requires, that I answer rather for our own Preachers,
then accuse others: I return to the complaint of Osorius. Where making mention
of sects, although by name he express to sect at all, yet may it easily be
coniectured, what he does mumble inwardly in his secret conceit.

But I suppose, he would have the very same to be spoken, that we, as soon as
we turned away from that Romish Patriarche (throwyng our Ryder as it were, to
the ground whose spurs and snaffle we were affrayd of before) are now
raunged the field kickyng and flingyng into many brambles and thickettes of
contrary sects: whereof he means some to be Lutheranes, some Zuinglians,
others he entituleth with factious names of Caluinistes, Buceranes and
Swenckfeldianes. But as this slander is no new thing, so neither did those
names of sects grow, or arise from them, but are of your own coynyng. For
neither Luther, Zuinglius, nor Calvin did lead any flocks of Scholars at any
time, nor ever erected any Schools or sects in their own names, as being of
this mind, and profession always, that they could like nothing worse, then
that any man should abuse either his own name, or any other man's name
whatsoever, to the dissoluyng of the bond of peace, and unity of Christian
name. And therefore these be your own imaginations, void of all color of
truth, forged by your own selves not raised out of any other spryng, then of
that stinckyng puddle of malice, and slau^derous cauillyng. Wherein you feeme
to me to differ very little from the peevish affections of weme^: who if
conceive never so slender an offense, and wax whotte withal: fall forthwith
to plain scoldyng, and avenge them selves with cursing and brawlyng: not
unlike the custom of little boys, which amiddes their pleasauntest pastimes
iarryng for small trifles (as they will easily be moved) wax very angry, so
that (in steed of weapon) whatsoever comes next to hand they flyng at their
fellows heads. Such is the dealyng here against Luther, Zuinglius and others:
who neither varyeng from Christ, nor from the communion of the Gospel, nor
from faith in any respect, nor yet disagreeyng one from other in matter of
substance, nor in the principles and foundations of Christian doctrine, nor in
the things that apperteine to true Relligion, or worshippyng of God, finally
not in any Article of the Catholic Creed: yet because they hold not with the
Pope of Rome: hereof arises all that treason against the Majesty of the
Deuines: here of malice took the first roots in their hearts, and out of that
pestilent root budded out those heresies, sects, and schisms, not which be
so in deed, but such as seem to be so in the Judgment of the slaunderer. For
what so small a gnatte may there be that ra^cor and venomous hatred will not by
and by transform into an Elepha^t?

Behold (say they) what a stir these heretics keep amongst them selves.
The slander of the Sects and dissentio^ of the Lutheranes.
The Zuinglians scold against the Lutherranes, and yet do not the^e Lutherans
agree amongst them selves in all things: in which kingdom how many factions
may a man easily perceive? for scarsely the Ministers of one Church do consent
together firmly in all points. All which albeit be not as true, as they are
bitterly heaped together of these ianglers, to bring the Lutheranes into
hatred: yet see I pray you how injuriously they deal herein, that they will
not permit one man to swerve from an other in any particular thing
whatsoever? Which I am not assured if did happen to the Ap^stles them selves,
yea after the coming of the holy Ghost. In deed this was to be wished for (if
wishyng could prevail) that generally all might have consented, and concluded
together in one mutual uniformity. And yet upon this uniformity alone stand
not all matters besides, neither is ye Sinagogue of ye Scribes and Pharisees
for this cause of any better estimation, because they conspired together, and
were all of one mind to spoil Christ and his Apostles. Again neither did the
Apostles not rightly depart and sequester them selves from the Pharisees sect,
because certain small sparckles of dissension were scattered abroad amongst
them. And albeit a few Christians were molested and troubled throught some
small contrarieties, and variau^ces arisen amongst them selves, in the
swathlyng cloutes of the Primitive Church, though also the Corinthians were
divided and soundred in parts, as particular affection prevailed: yet was not
that cause sufficient enough to prove, that they might therefore renounce
Christianity, and reuolte to the Pharisees sect again.

If we make sects and schisms, as often as interpretours do vary in
opinion, in their several Expositions of the holy Scriptures, amongst so many
of all the Rabbines (which have wonderfully travailed in the explication of the
old Testament) how many (I say) of them do agree together in all points? what
a difference is there in their Commentaries? yea how often do the Hebrews them
selves vary in their Expositions? so that the old Proverb may be well
verified here: so many heads, so many wits. Amongst the Expositours of the
new Testament is somewhat a more agreeable and consonant agreement. And yet
amongst them all, how many are you able to name, that do not in some one thing
or other, vary and dissent? how many and how great controversies and
disagreementes in opinions were amongst the most approved Doctors of the
ancient Church? so that whiles every particular person endeavors to preserve
his several error inviolable, scarce any one is thoroughly clear from some
fault or other at the least. After the same manner may it be adjudged of Luther
and Zuinglius: who if in one only place of Scripture do vary a little, what
marvel is it? since you your selves (that reprehend others so much) offend more
often and more filthyly in many things?

But you will say peradventure, that this contention had not grown betwixt the
Lutheranes and the Zuinglianes, if they had kept themselves within the bosides
and Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. Truly I may easily believe you
Osorius. For the Bishop of Rome would long sithence have burn^d their bodies.
For this is the Popes best corriziue wherewith he eats out the canker of
controversies most speedely: And yet nevertheless: if the Jurisdiction of the
Pope of Rome be a matter so warrantable to knitte fast the knotte of unity
amongst men: From whence then comes to pass: Factio^s and Schisms in the
Church of Rome.
That within the very walls of that Court has been so many broils and
contententious debates? so many kinds and names of settes? so many
contrarieties of opinions? so many Brotherhoodes of Religions and factions
diverse in opinions? which the Romish See has so long fostered up, nor was ever
able hitherto to bring to any such uniform order, as that they might not vary
from amongst themselves in some point or other, by the space of so many hundred
years? For look how many conuenticles of orders be amongst them, so many
factions are they. The Dominickanes do not agree with the Mynorites, nor the
Benedictines with ye Barnardines. Yea every particular faction is many times
dyuided in it self. The Obseruauntes do hate the Coletes: The Covent Friars (a
third kind unlike to the other two) does envy them both: hereunto if you list
to add the Iangling opiniones of the Schoolmen: how great wars are commonly
betwixt the Scotistes and the Thomistes about Congresum and Condignum? touching
original Sin in the blessed Uirgine? about solemn vows? and simple vows?
betwixt the Camonistes, And the Scholemen touching auriculer confession? which
the one part affirms was established by man, the other part does say that it
was ordained by God: The old brabble about Nominales and Reales is known of
every body, common and stale now. In fine, what man is able to rehearse the
manners of diuisiones, whereof as every particular sect has his Patron, So
every Patron has his several assertiones, which are quite contrary to
others. So does Thomas de Aquino dissent from Peter Lombard, Occam cannot agree
with Scotus: Haliensis: opugneth Occam. Albert Pighius Impugneth Cardinal
Caietaue.

And to speak nothing of other things: Diverse co^tentiones of papists
amongst the^ selves touching the supper of the Lord.
in the one only matter of the Lords Supper: how variable are the
controversies and opiniones of their own fraternities? whiles some teach that
Christ is present, flesh, blood, and bone? others utterly deny that: othersome
ascribe unto him a body of dimensiones, others otherwise: some say that the
body is torn with the teethe of the communicants at the time of the communion:
others are to squeimish, at that they cannot abide it. There be some again
that say that the body of Christ is consecrated by the divine operation. And
that by this Pronowne (hoc) the bread is noted: others had rather to call it
indiuiduum Vagum. Some think that Myse may gnawe the body of Christ truly and
in deed, which others Judge to be to grossly spoken: Some are of opinion that
the accidents of bread and wine may nourish, many do deny that, and say that
the Substance of the bread remains.

But these things may seem but very trifles. I will come now to ye very
secrette closett and of this See, and will treat now not of the external
schisms and deuisions, of Friars, Moncks, and opinions, Whether Popes See were
erected by god or men.
but of the very See of the Bishop of Rome it self. For the first creation
whereof how soever Osorius paynt it out in words as that it was erected not by
any policy of man, but by the power of the holy ghost, yet has he vouched for
proof thereof not so much as a syllable out of the holy Scriptures, yea though
he did: yet should he get no more thereby, then if he cast his capp against
the wind: for although in the first book some reasons, wrongfully wrested,
See hereof before Haddons discourse in the first book. page 15.
seem to have been gathered by him to this effect out of the holy scriptures:
yet those have been both learnedly and plainly confuted by our Haddon already.
Yet because there is now nothing touched else, then that which does magnify
that holy Tabernacle only, it may be lawful for me with as good leave, to set
down mine opinion also touching the same See: Which See, (in yt case wherein
it stands now a days) I may boldly term to be not an holy sacred See, but
a deadly Sect rather, not ye mother church, but the Metrapolitane of all
insatiable covetousness: not instituted by Christ, but purchased by ambition,
raised by fraud, armed with power, and force of mighty Monarchs, defended with
blood and boochery: which carries a resemblaunce, not of true Peace, but an
horrible vysor of discention: which does not aswage co^tenciouse and troublous
sects, but which is rather an vncessau^t whirlewinde, and troublesome Tempest
of ye whole world: Finally is nothing else (how great soever it is) but a very
natural Sect: for if this word Sect do take his name as derived from the
word Sectari: in what one place throughout the whole scriptures are there any
names, Sees, or Tytles of any person set down (for a pattern for us to imitate
and follow) but the only example of Christ the son of God? Although Paul
did rebuke the Corint. as backsliders from Christ, and that worthily, which
called the^ selves, some after the name of Peter, some of Paul and some of
Apollo, considering that they were all members of one Christ: what
communication would ye same Paul use now to the Romanistes, who glory so much
upon the chair of Peter and the succession thereof?

Peter sat at Rome.
Peter sat at Rome (say they) and what matter is it where Peter sat or where
he stood? so that Christ sit in our hearts: And what if I deny Osorius that
Peter ever sat at Rome? by what argument will you justify that he sat there?
or if one or too small stories perhaps favor your cause: I will prove for
one, ten to the contrary, which perhaps you shall not so easily confute.
But to admit that he sat at Rome, what is it to the purpose, where Peter
sat, more then where he walked? unless in your conceipte, Peter seem more
holy sitting then walking: or wha^ he sat at Rome, then when he walked at
Cesaria? But he sat in such wise at Rome (say you) as bearing Souereigntie in
Rome. O wonderful and invincible defense. What a diversity is betwixt Rome
now, and as it was in the time of Peter.
But I pray you grant unto us that Rome is now in the same estate that it was
when Peter sat there: Such Tirannous Emperors and such Martyrs. And I will
surely wonder, if the Pope of Rome would ever crave for such a souereigntie yea
though it might be given him. But let us return again to Sects and tumultes:
because ye question does properly concern those matters.

And therefore forasmuch as your tongue vaunteth so gloriously of your deep
knowledge in trial, experience, and knowledge of the chaunges and chances of
this world, and of Ancient Antiquity (wherein you brag not a little, that
you are not unskillful) surely you could have alleged nothing more directly
against your self then this same, and more properly to serve to the truth of
our cause: for that no one thing has terrified us from pertaking with the
fraternity of that Chair of pestilence more, then the very same that we have
long sithence found true: confirmed herein by our own knowledge and daily
experience: Namely that Brambles and Briars of tumultes and Scismes do not
fructify, and take so deep root in any province or Nation in the world, as
within the Jurisdiction of this your Romish Ierarchie. And as I have spoken
somewhat already of other their trinckettes, so will I now touch a little of
the very Top Gallaunte of their Pontifical Ship. Let any man of sound
Judgment take a full and perfect view, of all the usage of the church of Rome,
as it is now, and as it has continued in long process of time. The Fruits
whereof what are they? but very tumults and Sects. Their daily practizes
abroad, what be they? but mighty Factions: Their endeavors at home, what be
they? but Scismes: and ciuell disturbances: where ye popes and Cardinals
themselves enjoy no peace, but are at wars with Christ: And in the same
wars also, are at civil mutynes, and vproares amongst themselves. It were a
very long and tedious piece of work to gather a breuiate of all the brables,
Schisms, and horrible tumultes frequented in that See, these many hundred
years, and to set them in order, as either the ancient Histories of elder
years, or the monumentes of latter time do minister wonderful abundance of
many, It shall suffice to speak su^marily (as it were) of a few, by means
whereof, a more perfect conjecture may be made, what is to be judged of all
that whole See.

A description of the Antiquities of Rome out of the Chronographers. Martine
Mounck of Chester, Rodulpe, Platina. Volaterranus. Blondus. Sabellicus.
Phrigio. Mercator. Antonyne Cardinal Benno. Barnes Hermane.
The principallitie of the Sea of Rome by what beginning it crept to so great
power and tyranny.
IN the year of our Lord God.369. Damasus was Pope of Rome. Who was chosen Pope
not without wonderful sedition, by means of the bitter contention of the
Clergy. At this season, the Church of Rome being but newly delivered from
cruel persecutions, began to pick up her Cromes, and in some reasonable
calm to grow and take heart. Yet was it not advanced to so great possessions
as yet, nor to so great majesty of Souereigntie. The name of Vicar either
general or universal, sounded not as yet in any man's ear: no man had as yet
attained so deep an insight, to be able to perceive, that this See was erected
by any warrant of Christ his own mouth: no man did as yet so much as dream
of the Election, of the order, nor of the name of Cardinals. These names of a
Prince of Bishops, of Vicariat or Vicar See, of Head of the Churches: were
not heard so much as to tingle in ye ears of any Christians as yet. All which
Titles were granted to pope Boniface the 3. enthronized through Ambition,
three hundred years after. by the gift of Phocas the Emperor Although in
deed some sparckles of this venomous Ambition began to be kindled as then in
the Heads of diverse Popes: So that whereas Vrsinus A Deacon practiced to be
promoted to the very same Popedom, It came to pass that a tumult being
raised, they fell together by the ears, When the name of Universality and the
order of Cardinals began.
tryeng whether of them should be Pope, not by yealding of voices only, but
even by plain handistrokes even in the very Minister of Sicimus, which
skirmishe continued so long until Vrsinus was vanquished, and the voices
prevailed for the stablishng of Damasus. Vrsinus. Damasus. Anno 369.


In the year of our Lord.420. was enthronized in that See Pope Boniface the 4.
of that name: against whom the Clergy conspiring, An other Pope named Eulalius
was chosen in the Minister of Constantine, in a like vproare of the clergy,
and was set against Boniface. How many and how great conflictes have raunged in
the Chur. of Rome about the choosing of the Pope.
Honorius The Emperor being troubled with this sedicion, did banish them both
out of the City, until by the commandment of the same Emperor, Boniface
the first Pope created, was restored to the Sea. Boniface. Eulalius. Anno. 420.


In the year of our Lord God.499. a great tumult was raised, that troubled the
whole City, and divided it into parts, about the choosing of too Popes
Simachus, and Laurentius: Simachus. Laurentius. Anno. 499.
whereof the one was proclaimed Pope in the Minister of Constantine, the other in
ye Minister of our Lady. Whereupon a Sinode being called at Rauenna, Simmachus
was created Pope. But the adverse part of the latter faccion, storming thereat,
called Laurence back again in an vproare. Theodorick the Emperor for
thappeasing of that sedition addresseth forth one named Peter Altinates to
Rome, who expelling both Simmachus and Laurentius should occupy the Popedom.
But Simmachus could not so be quayled: who gathering again a convocation of
Bishops together, spoke so lustely for himself, that he obtained the
Popedom again, Laurentius and Altinates being utterly bannished. Whereupon the
wars began to grow much more whotter then before. Much Christian blood was
spilte on both parts. Finally the cruelty waxed so horrible, that the very
Noonnes began to be a pray to the confederates.

In the year of our Lord God.768. Pope Constantine being convinced of Scisme,
and bereft of both his eyes: Stephanus. Constantinus. Phillip. Anno. 768.
and besides him also an other Pope named Phillippe being deposed by force of
Arms: one Stephen was made Pope, who gathering a Synod at Rome, does first
vnpriest, and afterward newpriest again all such as Constable. before him had
priested.

In the year of our Lord God.873. Pope Anastasius does invade the Popedom
against pope Benedict. Anastasius. Benedictus. 873.


In the year of our Lord God.907. Leo was Pope about 40. days more or less
against whom one Christopher raising up a power, and apprehending him, Leo.
Christoph. Sergius.
casts him into prison, and at last gets the Popedom: wherein he sat
skarse seven whole months, but being circumuented with like fraud by Sergius
his successor, and thrown into prison, was requited with the self treachery
that he offered before.

In the year 968. a convocation of Bishops being Sommoned throughout all
Italy: Pope John the 13. being detected of horrible crimes, and refusing to
make his purgation before Otho the Emperor: John. 13. Leo. 8. Anno. 968.
Leo the viii. of that name (being as yet a lay man) was in his place by the
general election of all ye Bishops, and the Emperors consent appointed Pope:
gave orders, and executed all other functions appertayning to ye dignity. Not
long after (yea even the very day of Themperours departure from Rome) the
Romans taking heart of grass again, breaking the oath, which they swear to
the Emperor (wherein they bound themselves that they would never choose any to
be Pope without the consent of the Emperor or his son Ottho) did against all
right and equity, through a Schism, appoint one named Benedict, Pope against
Leo. But there passed not many days, before the Emperor (besieging Rome) did
so torment and afflict the Romans, that they made a covenant with the
Emperor to restore Leo again, and depose Benedict from ye Popedom. After
whose death, in the year 966. John the 13. was aduau^ced to ye See. Who being
the same year taken prisoner of Ieofredus Earl of Ca^pania, through ye
counsel of Peter then Lieuetenaunt of ye City, and thrown into prison, Out of
platina, this John. the 13. was taken committyng adultery and was slain.
was within a whiles after delivered by Ottho, and restored to liberty: he
sat as Pope seven or eight years. Of this John ye 13. thus writes Platina.
This John from his very youth was a merueilous wicked man, and given altogether
to lechery, and did exceed all the Popes his predecessors in filthiness of
life: and being taken in aduoutry, was thrust through with a sword and slain

Benedict the 5. being taken prisoner was cast into Adrianes Doungeon. Anno.
973.
In the year 973. After this John: was enstalled Benedicte the 5 in an vproare
also, but not continuing Pope long: For the very same year, being taken
prisoner by Cinthius a Citizen of Rome, he was cast into Adrians Doungeo^. Some
say that he was carried into Saxony. After him succeeded Donus. 2. one whole
year: next unto him Boniface 7. two year: Donus. 2. Boniface. 7. ran away
with the Treasury of Rome. 975.
who fled to Constantinople with the Treasures of the Church of Rome.

In the year 995. The Emperor Otto did ordain Gregory the.5. a Saxone to be
Pope. The Romans in a Tumult and Schism, placed John. 17. Gregor. 5. John.
17. Siluester. Anno. 995.
This Ioh. about the x. month of his Popedom being slain, Syluester. 2. was
advanced in his place: by the practice of Crescentius and the Romans. But the
Emperor Otto the third retourning within a whiles after, put Rome to the Sack.
Crescentius was slain: Syluester his eyes were put out of his head, and
Gregory was restored. Phrig. Blondus. etc.

In the year 1047. Benedict the 9. having obtained the popedom by corruption
and bribes: and being altogether unlettered, did join an other with him named
Syluester to execute his office in ecclesiastical matters: wherewith many
being displeased, there was a third brought in upon the neck of them two, who
only alone should execute the office. Cardinal Benno adds moreover: that by
this means it came to pass, that the Church of Rome seemed to be divided into
parts. Out of Cardinal Benno.
The Church of Rome (says he) was rent in sunder by the means of these iii.
popes, through grievous schisms, mortal wars, and incredible bloodshed: and
under the color of honny, having swallowed up poyso^, was almost choked
with unspeakable Heresies.

The noise of these broils being blown abroad: to wit, two warring against
one, and one against two, about the possession of that See, king Henry the 3.
came speedely to Rome, and called a Synod: In the which all these iij. popes
Benedicte. Siluester and Gregory were condemned: and fourth is placed into the
Chair, named Clemens. 2. by whom the said Henry was crowned Emperor: the
Romans affaying themselves unto him hy an oathe, that they would never choose
pope without his consent: that so Schisms and factions (which were wont to
grow by reason of the popes Elections) might be utterly extinguished. But the
Emperor was skarse departed out of Rome, before that the Romans
(unmindful of their oathe) had poisoned the said Clement, Clemens. 2. 1048.
whom he had made pope the ninth month after, in the year 1048.

Benedict. 10 1058.
In the year 1058. Benedicte the 10. contrary to the decrees of the Canones was
chosen pope by the Romans, being thereunto brybed with money.

Alexander. 2. Cadolus. 1062.
In the year. 1062. Alexander 2. was promoted Pope by the Clergy of Rome: where
he continued 11. years, until the Emperor Henry, at the earnest suite of the
Romans in a general Council holden at Basile, did create the Bishop of
Parma to be Pope, with the general consent of the whole Council: which two
Popes divided the Patrimony of S. Peter with sword and slaughter even at Rome
in the meadows of Nero: until at the last in an other Council (after that
Alexander had acquitted him self reasonably well of the crime of buyeng ye Pope
dome, which our men call Simony) was restored again, and Cadolus Bishop of
Parma deposed.

Hildebrand.
In the year. 1083. Hildebrand being deposed the Emperor Henry the 4. (in a
Council holden at Bresse in Italy) did appoint Clement the 3. to be Pope:
Clement. 3.
But the Romans rebellyng against him, do choose an Antipope named Victor 3.
who being poisoned before two years were fully expired: Victor. 3.
Vrbanus 2. does succeed him: Vrbanus. 2. Anno. 1083.
a wicked man in all respects resemblyng Hildebrand: who reuiueth ye wars,
and prosecuteth the outrages, excommunications, and cruel decrees that were
begone by Hildebrand. Who also in a Council holden at Cleremount established
this ordinance amongst others, that no person of the Clergy should take the
Donation of any Benefice (our common people call it Inuestiture) of any secular
Prince.

In the year. 1100. Paschalis 2. entered upon the Bishopprike: he sat in
Peter's chair 18. years, Pascalis. Albertus. Theodoric. Maginulph. Vibertus.
False Popes Platina. Blondus. Gel^sius. 2. The Archbishop of Bacchara a false
pope. Anno. 1118.
during which time many false Popes were chosen. Plat. Blond. Amongst whom
were Albertus, Theodoricus, and Maginulphus. Whom Paschalis did excommunicate,
he kept continual wars against Vibertus, whom the Emperor Henry the 4. had
erected before to be Pope, and did excommunicate Henry him self, and raised by
Henry the 5. against his father. He was a warlike man, a schismaticke, An enemy
to Princes, proud and ambitious.

In the year. 1118. Gelasius 2. had against him a false pope the Archbishop of
Bacchara placed by Henry the 5. and Gelasius him self fleing from Rome, dies
in France.

In the year. 1124. Calistus. 2. Calistus 2. Gregory 8. false popes Anno. 1124.
pursuyng Gregory his Co^petitour with fire and sword (whom Henry the Emperor
had preferred to that dignity) invaded Sutrium, and wanne it by force, and
therein took the same Gregory also. Which Gregory being set upon a Camel with
his face turned to the tail of the beast, and made a mockery to all men (not
without great reproach to the Emperor) he caused to be carried to Rome, and
shearing him a Moncke, thrust him into a Monastery, into perpetual
imprisonment. Amongst all other one especial decree was published by this
Calistus. As the Son of God (said he) came to do the will of his Father, so
must Christians do the will of their mother. Did. 76. Cap. Ieiunium. Distinct.
76 Cap. Ieiunium.
So that according to this Divinity. As GOD is the Father of Christ, by the
same Reason ought the Church of Rome be taken for ye mother of all Christians.
He first Instituted ye order of Cardinals, The first institution of
Cardinals about the year. 1124.
twelve in number.

In the year. 1130. Innoce^tius ye 2. being pope (which before had to name
Gregory) Innocent 2. Anacletus. 1130.
an other named Peter son of Leo was ordained to the place by the Romans:
whom they called Anacletus. Betwixt them two was great stir and mortal
wars. Which Schism grew to a general reproach, and was notoriously infamed
by a Uerse for the same purpose:

Petrus habet Romam, totum Gregorius orbem.

Peter is Lord of Rome, and Gregory of the whole world.

This Innocentius amongst many other notable enterprises achieved, took the
City of S. German by force. Out of AEmilius his 5. books. Blond. Platina
Guil. Tyrius 14. book and the 12. Chapter.
He besieged Rogerius Duke of Apuleya in the Castle Gallutius, who^ within a
whiles after Guilliam Duke of Callabria did set at liberty, by raising the
siege, and took the pope prisoner. AEmil. Lib. 5. Blo^d. Plat. The same
Innoce^tius did keep a marvelous broyle in Syria amongst ye Bishops about
the alteration of the estate of the Church. Guil. Tyrius Lib. 14. Cap. 12. de
Bello Sacro.

In the year. 1159. Alexander 3. was chosen Pope in a schism. At what time a
certain man named Octauianus Victor 4. was sent for, placed and confirmed in
the Popedom by the Emperor Fridericke 1. Both whom Alexander the 3. does
^ursue with horrible curses. This schism continued amongst the false popes,
succeedyng in order no less the^ 20. years. The Emperor does invade all the
possessions of ye Church. As Soon as Victor was dead, Guido was created Pope
against Alexander. The Consuls of Rome brought in subjection to the Pope.
Blond. in his 6. book
After Guido again one named John, Abbot of Syrmia. This Alexander took truce
with the Romans on this condition, that the Consuls should not be first
admitted to bear rule, before they should prostrate them selves at the popes
feet, and swear faithfully to become bonnaire and buxome to the Pope, and the
Church of Rome. Blond. 6. book.

In the year. 1182. albeit the first beginning and entering of Lucius 3. into
the Popedom was somewhat clear from sedition: Lucius 3.2 Schismatic 1182.
yet within a whiles after him self did minister cause of great Tumultes:
because he practiced to root out the honorable name of Consuls out of ye City
of Rome. Vrbanus 3. called Turbulent. for his troublesome head. 1185.
not much degenerating from Lucius, was for his troublesome head called
Turbulentus.

But because this place does minister opportunity to treat of sects and
schisms: why do we protract any more time? For if a sect be defined truly to
be any opinion whatsoever, oppugneth the natural meaning of the Gospel: how
great a champion of sects may Pope Innocen^ius the 3. of that name be called?
Innocent the 3. the chief champio^ of all the calamities and troubles of the
church 1215.
I mean that Innocentius the most detestable enemy of the true Gospel above
all other, who in the year. 1215. in the Counsel of Laterane sowed the feeds
of all the broils and troubles almost in the Church, wherewith the whole
Christian Nation is molested at this day. Whenas first he established the
heresy of Transubstantiation: he yoaked Christians to auricular Confession:
commanded that Remission of Sins should be received none otherwise, but at
the delivery of a Priest: spoiled the lay people of the one part of the
Sacrament: was the first deuisor of this Tyrannical persecution by fire:
namely of all such as durst but once quacke against that Catholic See of
Rome. This is that Innocent Pope, who was the very author of all the bloodshed
and calamities in the Church, which has and does consume the Protestaunts and
Papists at this day.

Not much unlike unto this monster were his next successors Honorius 3.
Innocentius 4. Gregorius 9 most rebellious traitors against ye Emperor
Fridericke the 2. Honorius 3 Innocent 4. Grego^y 9. most rebellious traitors
against the Emperor Friderick. 2 The factio^s of the Guelsians and Gibellynes
raised by the means of this Gregory 9.
in whose time the order of Friars Beggars was instituted. Here also comes to
memory that in the time of this Pope Gregory 9. (of whom I made mention before)
and through his occasion chiefly, began the schisms and factions of the
Guelfianes, which mainteyned the authority of the Pope: and the Gibellynes who
sought the preservation of the state Imperial. By which occasion, how cruel
and horrible wars were arered (scarce calmed in an hundred years
afterward) the ancient Records and conference of Hystories, whereof you
vaunt a plentyfull knowledge, can manifestly declare unto you.

I come now to Celestine 5. which was Bishop but half a year in the year.
1294. whom after the first month of his Popedom succeeded, or rather rusht
like a ruffler into that See Boniface 8. who kept this Celestine in prison.
Platin. AEmil. But by what policy this Pope aspired to the Popedom,
Celestin. 5. Boniface 8. a firchrand of factions. 1295. Platina. AEmil.
I would desire, Osorius to tell me in his next Letters, if he write any after
to our Queens Majesty. For if this Boniface did cast that Celestine into
prison (as he said) not of any malice, but of purpose to take away occasion of
mutine, that might have growe^ by the confederates on the contrary part
touching the Popedom: why did he not restoare him again then, when the
tumultes were pacified? why did he craftily devise his exile, by a deuilish
practice of the sou^de of certain voices imagined to be sent from heaven into
the Chamber of the Pope? Marius.

This Pope Boniface ye botcher of ye Decretalls was so maliciously enflamed
against certain Cardinals of the houses of Colu^ne and Vrsine (as many as
remained fautors of ye Gibelline faction, being him self ye most factious of
all others) that he put to the sack, and razed to the hard earth all their
mansions and Castells, wheresoever he came. This is that most holy and
Angelicke Patriarch, who being at Genua upon an Ashewednesday, threw Ashes
into the eyes of Porcherus Archbishop of Genua without regard of reverence
either of the place, of the time, or the persons that were present: The most
impudent shamelenes of Boniface 8. against the Archb. of Genua.
speaking after this manner. Memento home quod Gibellinus es and cum Sibillinis
in Cinerem reuerteris. That is to say. Remember man that thou art a Gibellyne
and with the Sibyllines shall return again into dust. At the length in the
most cruel Itallian wars betwixt the Sicilians favoring the parts of the
Arragones, and Robert the Duke of Calabria (whenas this pope would not seek by
his authority to pacify the Timult, though thereunto required sundry times
very instantly) being not long after taken prisoner him self in an vproare,
and carried to Rome, did pyne him self to death for sorrow and anguish of
mind.

What shall I speak of Innocentius 6. and of Gregory 11. whereof the one in
the year. 1352. Innocentius 6. Gregorye 11. the greatest author of Schism.
1352.
did after an unspeakable manner of cruelty commit to flaming fire one John a
Friar Fra^ciscane, because he taught what would become of Antichrist and of the
popes of Rome. From the other diverse Cities of Italy revolted in a seditions
tumult, as Volaterane records, what shall I say of all that other factious
rabble of popes succeeding in order? who by means of certain civil
disturbances in the City of Rome, forsook the City, and translated the Sea
into France, continued the Election of popes in the French Nation, excludyng
the Romans 74. years. After this manner ye Court of Rome (playeng as it were
upon a rollyng Stage) albeit it changed their See now and then, yet never
found any place of assured rest. For it was scarce as yet returned again
within the walls of Rome from her long and werysome exile, but it was
wellcomed home immediately with a new Tumult.

Vrbanus 6. thrust into the Popedom by violence. 1378.
For in the year. 1378. whenas Vrbanus 6. was by force enthronized in the
Popedom, by means of the Italians, the French Cardinals mislikyng the same,
did choose an other one Robert Gilbonensis, to wit Clement 7. which held his
See likewise at Auinion. The unity of the Romish See by this means rent a
sunder, in that division and Schism, each Pope did excommunicate the other:
the variable people favored both ye popes. This schism continued by ye space
of 40. years. Vrban^ (to be aue^ged of ye Cardinals, The Sea of Rome divided
in Schism by the space of 74. years.
and ye wrongs sustained by ye procureme^t of John king of Sycile) procures
wonderful vproares. Charles king of Hu^gary raised an army against Ioane who
favored the claim of Clement: whom afterward Ludowicke duke of Angew
delivered. The same pope furnished one John Hachut an English man with munition
and men, who^ Vrbanus the v. had made General of his Army before) and sent him
with a band of Flore^tines to Naples against the said Ioane, of whom we made
mention before, and withal sounded the defiaunce against Charles the King of
Naples, because he would not make his nephew Prince of Campania. At the length
this Pope being straightly besieged by this Charles, was privily conveyed to
Genua. He kept 7. Cardinals in fetters, whereof five he drowned in ye River
of Tiber being tumbled and knitte up into sackes. He ruled the roast. 11.
years: and Clement sat 13. In this Schism also Princes were divided: Some
favored the confederates of Clement, some the faction of Vrbane. Germany,
Italy, and England, gave aid to Vrbane. Spain, France, and Chatelone stood
with Clement: they that took part with neither of them, were called
Newtralles. Those two Popes did thunder, each against the other wonderful
chappes of curses, and excommunications, wherewith they tare one an other in
pieces: they did curse, they did excommunicate, they called one the other by ye
names of Antichrists, Heretics, Tyrauntes, Thieves, Traitors Usurpers,
Sowers of Darnell, and Sons of Beliall: A cruel contention betwixt the
Cowled generation about the Conception of our Lady. 1400.
Which two lusty Rufflers being both dead at the last: the same quarrel
continued betwixt the Successors: until the year. 1409. To pass over in the
mean time the cruel horrible storm more then Schismatic, begone under this
Pope Vrbanus betwixt the Schoolmen of Paris, and the Dominicke Friars, about
the Original Sin of the most holy and pure Uirgine and mother of Christ Mary.

In the year. 1389. Boniface 9. Boniface 9.
was appointed to succeed Vrbanus. And after two years Benedict 13. was
appointed to succeed Clement. This Boniface (as witnesses Crantzius) governed
as a Bishop, but reigned as a cruel Tyrant, and procured many of the Citizens
of Rome (whom he suspected to be false to his person) to be apprehended, and
executed by the Ministers of the Law. He oppressed the Church with a new
contributio^ which he called by a new name Annates, first fruits: and thus it
was: that whosoever should be advanced to a Byshoppricke or Benefice, should
pay one whole years reuenew thereof in money. By means of which law, the
Histories make mention that he became as it were Lord of the whole world.
Blond. Platina.

In the year. 1405. Boniface 9. being dead, was enstalled Innocentius 7. a
Pope of two years continuance: Innocent 7. a seditious murderer. 1405.
I know not what a stir he kept with his own neighbors at Rome: whereof 11.
being thrown out of high windows by the hands of Ludowicke his nephew, and
by the procureme^t of the Pope, brake their necks. Gregory 12
After him not long after succeeded Gregory 12. A Pope of three years. All
this whiles yet lived Benedict 13. But when commandment was given by the
Council of Pyse, to both these Popes to depart from the Sea (and neither of
them willing to yield, nor come to any reason) being both condemned for
heretics: Alexander the 5. was chosen: Alexander 5 a troublesome pope.
and Gregory and Benedict banished both. This Alexander did most wickedly
dishinherite Ladislaus the most mighty King of Naples and Ap^lia, and deposed
him from his fathers kingdom. And gave the same to Ludowicke, Duke of Angew.
He sat 8. months.

In the year. 1411. This Alexander being dead, start up John 24. who partly by
corrupting ye Cardinals with money, John 24. by force and money occupyeth the
Sec. 1411.
partly with power of Soldiers, did by terror and violence enforce ye
Election to him self. By this Popes means Sigismunde the Emperor called a
Council at Constance the 4. year of his Popedom: in the which Council three
Popes being deposed, to wit Benedict 13. Gregory 12. and John 24. Three Popes
deposed at one time.
Martine 5. was enstalled Pope in the year. 1417. In which Council, wherein
this Martine was enstalled Pope, Martine 5. The Council of Co^stance.
we read that it was decreed. That the Authority of a Council lawfully
Sommoned, and gathered together, was above the Authority of the Pope: which
decree by what law or right might be established, I can not see if it be true
that our Osorius pleasauntly fableth: namely: That the Popes Authority is
instituted and governed not by human Decrees, but by the most manifest
ordinance of Christ, yea even by the heavenly Authority absolutely. The
Conuenticle of Constance did co^de^ne Jerome of Prague and John Husse to be
burned.
But lo here how fittly the old Proverb may be applied: Like will to like.
Such cooks, such platters. For it mattereth not very much, whether part have
the preeminence, the Council or the Pope. For they both conspired against the
direct Decrees of Gods word, and by general consentyng treachery condemned
John Husse and Jerome of Prague two holy Martyrs of Christ to be burnt to
ashes. And not long after the same Martine not showing him self the Minister
of Christ, but a warlike cha^pion, an impe of bloody Bellona, did sharpen and
set on edge the German swords against the Bohemians. And whenas the Emperor
Sigismu^de, at the same Council did use much treaty with the pope, for a
reformation to be had as well of the inordinate manners and presumptuous pride
of the Clergy, as of ye rebellious con^i^macie and licentiousnes of the laytie:
Martin not the Vicare of Christ but of Bellona.
It pleased this most holy Father (after much debatyng of the matter) to have
this Article of reformation of manners to be differred until an other time, and
forthwith brake up the Council, whether the Emperor would or no: and made
quick dispatch to Rome. 1418. as Volaterane records.

In the year. 1431. After this Martine, Eugenius bare the stroke, in whose
entrey to the Popedom began no small broyle to arise betwixt him and the
Cardinals Columnens^ by whose procurement, was a strong battle fought:
Engenius an other chicken of Bellona.
wherein many were slain and many taken prisoners. The pope escaped by taking
his heels: afterward a peace was proclaimed. Platin.

About the same time in the year. 1435. A Counsel at Basile. 1435.
was a Counsel called at Basile. But Eugenius despising this Council raised
up a contrary Council, first at Bonnony, then at Ferrara, and anon at
Florence: where amongst other things that Decree of Constance, which
determined that the Council was of more Authority then the Pope, was revoked,
and made frustrate. And therefore Eugenius refusing to come to the Council of
Basile, is deposed. Eugenius a Schismatic is deposed from the Popedom. 1442.
And in his place is adopted Amadeus Foelix 5. in the year. 1442. whereupon
spra^g up a new schism some enclinyng to Foelix and some holding fast with
Eugenius, the Germans were called Newtralles. This schism endured 9. years.


At this council of Basile before mentioned Sigismunde being dead (who^ the
wrath of the Lord did afflict with wonderful Calamities after the death of
John Husse) Frederick the 3. was chosen and crowned Emperor: by whose
authority the council of Basile was confirmed and allowed again: contrary to
the decree of Eugenius: At the very same season the Hu^garians contrary to
their oath and fidelity raised an army against Amurathes the Turkishe
Emperor, and were overthrown by him in battle and much Christian blood
spilt. The King of Hungary was s^ayne, and with him also Iuliane a Cardinal.
And Huniades himself was overcome to the great decay of Christendom, and
reproach of Christian name. From thence the Turk enuadeth Peloponesus, subdued
it, and brought it under his subjection. Egna^. By means of which one
bloodshed and Turkish victory chiefly, the power of the Christianes was much
more weakened then ever before, and all through the treachery of this pope
especially. The battle against the Heluetians and Basileans, by the
procureme^t of Eugenuius.
The same Eugenius teazed Jews the Dolphine of France to wage battle
against the Heluetians and the Basileanes, where was a mighty and cruel
battle fought: whiles Eugenius kept this stir, the Council of Basile
proceeded nevertheless. In the which the Cannon of Pragma was agreed upon,
confirmed and published before the whole Council, after the Testimony of Rob.
Gagni. in his 10. book. Whereunto Constant. Phrigio adds further, Rob.
Gaguinus, and Phrigio.
saying: which I would to God (faith he) had been hitherto observed and kept:
But whatsoever has any smack of sound doctrine is abolished. Thus much he. To
this also may be annexed, that which Thom. Rhedone^s. Thomas of Redon thorough
the popes Tyranny burned. 1436. Antonius and others.
a Frenchman a Carmelite Friar and a Martyr wrate hereof: who because he said,
that in Rome were many abominations, and that the Church needed much
reformation, and the unlawful cursinges of the pope ought not to be feared:
was (after many tortures) burned at Rome in the time of this same Eugenius in
the year 1436. out of Antonine and other parts. 3. title: Cap. 10.

I suppose that there is no man now that does not very plainly perceive and
see (though I would surcesse here to prosequute any more) how men may duly and
uprightly esteem of all this whole See and pontifical religion: which
seems for no other purpose erected, but to some discord, and raise up
vproares and Tumultes. Whereupon it seems so much the more strange to me,
that Osorius dare be so shamelesly Impudent, to object sects, and sedicious
troubles to our Churches, sithence himself cannot with honesty deny so many
cruel and mortal divisions of factions, so many contentious Seditions and
mutines, to have sprung up and continued even in the innermost bowels of that
most sacred See, being also of so long continuance, and which himself cannot
by any means blotte out to speak nothing in the mean time of those sects of
errors and wicked doctrine, moyling and turmoyling one against an other in such
an unmeasurable quantity skattered abroad, that there, is skarse any one thing
(wherein they agree amongst themselves, and differ from us) but that in the
same they flee clean away, not from us only, but from Christ himself also.

But to let pass these sects and factions of the Romanistes. I will turn
again to the objections that do properly touch us. For thus does Osorius
contend against us, accusing the Gospel that we profess, on this wise, as
though it yielded none other fruits but sects and troublesome co^motio^s: And
this he affirms comes to pass, for none other cause, but because we have
shaken of the authority of the pope. which if had never been banished, or if
might be restored to her ancient estimation in our Churches: These Tumultes
either had never been, or else might have easily been pacified.

All which tend hereunto at the last, to wit, that we should humbly submit
our selves to the Bondage of the Pope: for this is the pleasant bayte whereat
Osorius would have us feign to be hooked, this is his whole practice and
endeavor. But before he shall be able to allure us to that, he must furnishe
his hooks again with fresher bayte, somewhat more handsomely couched. For
with this touchangle he may fish a good while, and catch a fool at the last.

But go to, Let us either imagyne and confess unto him, that these sects and
Divisions of opinions do wax somewhat raw in many places, after that this
romish Authority is neglected: what shall he win thereby? does he surmise
this to be matter sufficient to make us forsake ye Gospel of Christ? and to
knitt ye romish halter upon our necks again? or does he judge it a
reasonable matter, (because there want not some in some places that are over
greedely given to sects and deuisions) that it may not therefore be lawful
for others, which teach sound doctrine, to profess boldly before the people
the rules, and order of good and honest life? But where has Osorius gone to
school for this Logic or Sophistry rather? to frame an argument from that
which is not the cause, as though it were the very cause, and to conclude a
mere fallaxe of the Accident, A non causa, vt causa^.
for a true and a known matter? which manner disputation if may be admitted, I
see no cause to the contrary, but by the same reason, the Orator Tertullus
might seem to hane had as good a challenge long sithence against the Apostle,
as this our Tullian Rhetorician does now maintain against the Lutheranes. For
in the Apostles time neither wa^ted stoare of false Apostles, and false
brethren, dogs, evil workmen. Philetians, Hermoginistes Simonistes, and
Nicholaitans: neither was there any lack of faccious Fyrebra^ds amongst the
Corinthians, which did practice to withdraw the Galathians from the simplicity
of the engraffed word, fayning themselves to be Jews, when as in deed they
were nothing less. After them ensued Chorinthians which denied that Christ was
come in the flesh: many Antichrists. Libertines. Seuerianes. Nouatianes.
Sabellianes. Nepotianes. Manicheans. Arryans. Pelagianes. Cataphrigianes and
Donatistes. And yet for all this, The fallaxe of the accident.
Christian Religion ought never ye worsse to be esteemed by reason of these
sects, and troublesome faccions, wherewith it was entangled: what one Age of
the Church was ever without some such, as entruding themselves among the other
godly teachers and ministers of the Church, would not now and then minister
much matter of discention, and division? for as one manner of wheat does not
fructify alike in every soil, so can there none so pregnau^t an earth be
found, in the which ye good and careful husbandman, shall sow the pure and
clean corn of the Evangelical wheat never so carefully, but that the same
Envious man will forthwith creep in, and throw amongst the same noisome
Darnell, and hurtful weeds: Neither does the wheat cease therefore to be any
more wheat, because it is intermedled with Chafe, and Darnell. Even so no
more hurtful is this wilful and overthwart waywardnes of contrary sects, to
ye sound doctrine of ye pure truth. Nay rather it could not appear to be a
true Church at all, unless it were assaulted now and then with such kind of
Batterye.

If it were so, that these dissentions of opinions did but now only peep
abroad, either by Luther as author, or by any his allowance: your objection
perhaps might serve to some purpose. But who has ever more earnestly or more
effectually oppugned those Phanaticall faccions of opinious, then Luther has
done? Let not this accusation of Osorius be filed up amongst the other his
false reproaches and lies, unless all ye writings and speeches of Luther every
where, yea and experience it self do Justify my saying to be true. Who did
ever more sharply rebuke ye seditious vproares of Mu^ster then Luth. did? who
did more seriously and zelously confute ye frantic articles, and unreasonable
requests of ye Boores of Germany? whe^as not one of all your generation opened
his mouth to the contrary, then Luther did? who appeased and pacified their
Tumultes, but the Protestants Lutheranes? Luther a special adversary to
Sedition.
what writing can be of more emportaunce then that of Luther against the
confederates of Mu^ster? After these sprung up also the sect of the Laweles
which through Luthers. industry, travel and writing, was by and by hushed up,
ye Author thereof being reclaimed. And it is well enough known, what means he
used for ye suppressing that te^ptes of Carolastadius and the Suenfeldians.
Zuinglius in his book entitled Elenchus contra Catabaptistas. Calvin. de
hereticis: Bullenger of Tiguirine in his inuectiue against the sects of our
time: the Basileanes against the Georgianes. The Heluetianes, and people of
Sauoye and Lumbardie: how severe and earnest pursuers were all these in rooting
out of wicked opinions, how estraunged and alienated from all desire of
Faccions, all these I say have given unto us notable preside^ts and examples
thereof. And to speak nothing of other Churches, what has been done in England
long sithence? yea and of late also toward the overthrowing, and confuting of
erroneous opinions, Let your Portugal Merchant certify you by letter, your
notary what soever he be, or in what corner soever ye lurcke, who^ I suppose
to be sent over into England, not for any other purpose, but to become Osor.
his spy. Go to, and where is now ye experience of Osorius, by the wh he has
found out in Luther (as he says) so many sects, and diversities of opinions.

But the names of Sects had never been so raked up together, no nor any sound
of any such should ever have been heard at any time. If abode had been made in
the Faith of the Pope and of the Romanistes. So likewise also I suppose that if
we had not been diliuered from that Ethnic Paganism of the old Idolatrye,
this Botche had never infected our Churches: neither had Jerusalem been ever
troubled at any time, unless Christ had been borne: neither had so great, and
so many swarms of Heretics flusht abroad, unless the Apostles had preached
the Gospel: why therefore are we not weltered back again into that puddle of
Paganism or Iewishnes, having shaken away from our shoulders the most sincere
and pure religion of Christ, according to the choppe Logic of Osorius, that
we may shroud our selves safely from the company of those wild faccious
Sects, and dangerous divisions?

But ( Osorius though fallen away at the last from his tackle of man's
experience) has gathered more courage yet unto him, taking handfast of the
Ankerholde of Christ his own words for the proof of the Popes Chair: so
that now this See seems no more humayne or terrestryall, but heavenly and
Angelical, Osor. page 187.
Affirming that this power is established not by the ordinance of man, but
chiefly by the very words and ordinance of our Lord and Savior Christ
himself. Surely if Osorius can persuade that to be true, he shall bear the
bell away. But by what reason will he make it apparaunt unto us: not with one,
nor with a simple and naked reason but, with a double horned Argument, that
shall cut like a sword: for besides the authority of holy Scriptures and the
Testimonies of all ancient antiquity also (whereof he boasts himself not a
little skillful) he affirms that he knows it to be true by experience. But
go to, it remains that you declare unto us, what authority of the sacred
Scripture that is at the length? and wherein that testimony of ancient
antiquity is to be found? Thou must needs attend a whiles, perhaps he will
tell thee hereafter gentle reader: For as now because Osor. is not at leisure
to tell thee, let it suffice thee, that ye man has spoken it: and vouchsafe at
this present, to interpret all his speeches to be very Oracles: as sweet, as
honny. And this much hitherto touching the Majesty of the Sea of Rome.

Of the Rom^nistes obedience rowardes Princes.
The next unto this has he placed in order the obedience that they yield unto
Princes: which I marvel if any man can read and not laugh at: so also I
believe sure that Osor. himself could not stay but laugh at himself: or else
doughtles he was disposed to dally with us, when he wrate these words so
pleasauntly devised, and so cunningly coulered. page 170.
But we (says he) do not refuse the authority of any lawful power. How
truly you speak herein, and how reuere^tly you esteem of princes how
obediently you behave your selves to the higher authority, and how humbly you
do acknowledge it, and how you refuse no commandment of the Magistrate: We
will take a taste, if it please you by the conference of faithful
Historiographers, by the course and affairs of experience whereof the acts
and monuments of Princes do make mention. Finally by search of antiquity it
self, whereof you make your self expert and well beseene.

And to begin first with the Empire of Greece: The Empero^^ translated from
the Grecyanes to the Frenchmen by the popes contrary their oaths
the lawful succession whereof continued from Constantine the founder thereof
about 500. years more less: if ye Bishop of Rome at yt time would not have
refused to be subject to the authority of the higher powers: why then did
Hadriane, and after him Leo 3. (having rooted out the kingdom of Desiderius
and the Lombardes contrary to their faith an allegiaunce) presume to be so
hardye, as to pluck away the imperial majesty afterward from the right and
true heirs? unto the which as well they the Bishops themselves as also all the
Italiane Nation had submitted and obliged them selves by oath, no less then
the Greeks: and why did they at their own appointemente translate the same
from the Greeks to the French nation? And although Charles him self, Charles
the Great.
unto whom the Diadem Imperial was given, seem worthy to be registered
amongst the most virtuous and famous Princes, as one that endued the Church of
Rome with greatest treasures possessions and liberties: Yet was not that cause
sufficient, wherefore the majesty of the sacred Empire should be vyolated and
oppressed with manifest injuries, Namely: sithe^s the overthrow of that state,
could not choose but draw after it wonderful troubles, and rancour of hearts.
Which thing happened in very deed not long after. For even by the means
thereof chiefly it came to pass, yt not only the Emperors of the East and
West were enflamed against each other with perpetual, deadly, and unquenchable
hartburning, hatred and enmity, but also that Greece (being left naked of those
helps) became an open Road to the Turks and Sarracens: for the suppressing of
whose powers, and recovery of which country, The Creeks invaded by the Turks.
I know not whether the whole power of ye Romanistes (when they have retched
it to the uttermost) will be ever able to prevail: But to admit that this
translation of the Empire came either of the special providence of God, or to
attribute the same to the worthiness of Carolus, or the Necessity of the times,
or to mittigate the matter with some plausible and colorable excuse: Yet is
not this excrable sawcines of these Romish Bishopps sufficiently accquited
hereby, which durst be so presumptuously arrogant at that time, or the Popes of
this present, which do imagine that their authority (which they claim from
Peter) may priuileadge their insolent usurpation over the kingdoms of the
earth, and their injurious transposing them where they list, nor does waraunt
their shameless challenge of lineall succession in the same authority, as
derived from Peter himself unto their Successors. But to release them of this
quarrel: let us proceed to that which does ensue.

The State of Greece therefore being on this wise rent and torn a sunder, the
Majesty of the French Empire begann from thenceforth to advance it self:
which being as yet free from the Tyranny of the Pope did preserve the royaltye
of the Majesty by their own prowess well enough: yet could it not guard it
self altogether so safely, but that it was now and then circumuerted with the
fraudulent crampes and injurious practices of this Sacred See. For whereas it
was established by most ancient ordinance even from the time of Constantine
the great, That it should not be lawful for any person throughout all
Christendom to take upon him the dignity of a Bishop, unless the Imperial
Majesty being thereunto solicited, had ratified the Election: An Ancient
ordinance of the right of the Emperor and the Pope.
whereas also the very same ordinance was concluded upon and confirmed betwixt
Hadrian and Charles the great, that the Pope should hold him contented with his
Byshoppely preminence, and authority over the Clergy and administer the
things that appertayned to the fu^ction of a Bishop, to the preaching of
sound doctrine, and the regyment and direction of ecclesiastical discipline:
but the Interest and authority of choosing and appoynting Bishops, should
be specially resyant and reserved to the Imperial Majesty, and to his
posterity according, to the received and approved constitucion of his
predecessors: And that no Election of any Bishop not so much as of the pope
himself, should be adjudged legitimate, unless the Emperor had given his
consent: nor that it might be likewise lawful for the pope being chosen to
call a counsel of Bishops, nor to make any innouacion or alteration of rites
or Ceremonies of the Church, neither yet to determine any thing without the advice and ratification of the Emperor: All these I say, being by ancient
custom, long before the time of Constantine the great: approved by custom,
established with Judgment, and enacted by law, decreed upon afterward by the
full consent and assent of both parts, not without ye public voices and full
acclamacions of the whole Synod, and recorded also as an especial Decree of
the sacred Council: who could ever have beleaued, that the Bishops (which
do owe a most humble and duetifull reverence to the higher power) would
enfring, or swerve one title so much from these their own decrees being so
clear, so manifest and so notoriously concluded upon? But now, such was the
time that nothing could make them to be myndefull of their duty: not reason,
not prescription of antiquity: not shame, not their oathe and fidelity: but
that they would attempt first to pick a quarrel agayust the same their
decrees delivered by Constantine, concluded upon with Charles, and with great
carefulnes and seueritte mayntayned by the Successors of Charles immediately
after the death of Charles, and afterward vyole^tly to break the^a sunder,
maugre ye power and Majesty of the Emperors? As has been abundantly declared
before in Stephen 4. in Pascalis. 1. Hadriane. 2. Martine. 2. Hadriane. 3. and
many other the Successors of the said Hadrian, although that France seemed in
this behalf somewhat of better courage and constancy in brydlyng the insolency
of the Popes, then Germany was. The Majesty of the Empire was translated from
France into Germany by the pope.


Afterward the whole offspring of Charles line being in co^tinuaunce of time
clean worn: the Majesty of ye Empire was turned over unto the Saxons. Where
the same conditions and couenauntes were revived by the Emperors Otto the
first, and Otto the thryd. For there is extaunt as yet a Decree remainyng of
Record amongst the popes Ca^nones, where the pope after the example of
Hadrian, does say that he does give full power unto Otto the Emperor, to Elect
the pope, to establishe the Sea Apostolic, and to confirm Bishops: and
denounces withal a great, and grievous penalty upon all them, that would be
so hardy as to Consecrate any Bishop without authority of the Emperor
thereunto first had and obtained. Wherefore all the predecessors of Charles
the great, and his successors good Emperors even until the time of Otto the
thryd, preserved with them selves the chief and only Jurisdiction of the Popes
and Bishops Election inviolable. And withal conveyed the state of the Empire
unto them selves, either by lawful succession, or by approved Election,
without all authority of the Bishop of Rome: whereof that Decree chiefly of
Otto the third concluded upon with Gregory 5. is a very plain and evident
demonstration: whereby it was generally proclaimed, that from thenceforth all
the right and Jurisdiction of Electing the Roman Emperor should remain with
the Germans only: A degree of Gregory the 5. Concluded upon with Otho the
third Emperor.
And that it should not be lawful for the Bishop of Rome to create any
Emperor, but such as ye states of Germany should advance to that dignity.

These things I thought good to recite touching the lawful Election of
Emperors and Bishops: to the end the Reader may with less difficulty
conceive and Judge aright of all that shall hereafter be spoken, and of the
whole substance of the Pontifical obedience. First whereas Osorius does say,
That this power is mainteyned not by any ordinance of man but by the
appointement of Christ him self. This is easily confuted by the Edictes of
Emperors mentioned before. By who^ it was enacted that the Election of Bishops
ought none otherwise be ratified and legitimate, then by the confirmation of
the Majesty Imperial. Now touching that which he has annexed in praise and
commendation of the popes obedience: That they do refuse no ordinance of any
lawful authority: Herein me seems he speaks altogether, as though he
never Read any of the antiquities of the former ages, or monumentes of
Histories. Otherwise who so will vouchsafe diligently to peruse the Acts of
the popes, those especially, which succeeded Otto, and Henry the third: what do
all their pollitique enterprises, Counsels and proud contentions emporte? what
do they savor of? whereunto tend they? what denounce they? nay rather what do
they proclaim and testify other then a perverse waywardness of a continual
bent rebellion against the lawful power of the Princes of the earth? And
although their arrogaunt insole^cy, being a long time reasonably well snafled
by the Greek and French Emperors (which would yield them no further
prerogative then the Ancient Constitutions permitted unto them) The wayward
Rebellion of the popes always against the Imperial Majesty.
could not raunge so licentiously to that hawtynesse and might whereafter they
hunted: yet nevertheless taking this yoke of subjection very grievously,
which did foreclose them all passable way to that largess of Majesty (whereby
they were in hope that they should oppress the Emperors) they left no
occasion unsought, nor flackt any opportunity offered, which might minister
unto them some matter of title or claim, to translate unto them selves the
dispensation of causes Ecclesiastical, and Election of Bishops: for if they
could once bring that to pass, they knew it would be matter of no difficulty:
either to hinder the Election of the Emperor, An old grudge of the popes
against the Emperors for the bestowyng of Ecclesiastical promotions.
that it should not proceed otherwise then they listed, or to depose them that
were Elected, if they liked them not. And having attempted this devise sundry
times in vain, at the last after the death of the Emperor Henry 3. they crept
covertly into an occasion of colorable entrance, effectual and plausible
enough, as they supposed, whereunto they bente all their force, endeavor, and
imagination to the uttermost of their power.

Pope Benedict 1. slyly entryng into conference with some of the familiares of
the foresaid Henry, Benedicte does rebel against Henry 3.
immediately upon the death of Conrade his Father, practiced forthwith to
dishinherite him from the Empire, and withal to advance in his place Peter
King of Hungary, presentyng unto him this precious Owch to set on his cappe.

Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa coronam.

The Rock gave Rome unto Peter, and the Pope the Crown unto thee.

Henry the 3. being dead left behynd him a son named Henry 4. a very babe and
tender of years. The horrible, conspiracy of pope Gregory 7. and the Bishops
against Henry the fourth.
Against this young Prince was a conspiracy practiced by certain State of
Saxony, with whom conspired also many Bishops, but chiefly above all the rest
Gregory 7. pope of Rome. The Emperor is conuented of heresy, for lewdly
disposing the goods and possessions of the Church, and geuyng Ecclesiastical
promotions to unworthy personages. This pretense was plausible enough: The
Emperor is cited to Rome to defend his cause, and by the Pope adjudged to
penance, namely: That renouncyng his Imperial dignity, he should do
penance daily, by the space of one whole year at the Church door as Peter
and Paul: Rodolphe suborned against his Lord and Emperor by the practice and
treason of the pope.
yea besides this also: that barefooted and barelegged he should personally
crooch and creep to kiss the popes feet: whiles this pageaunt was playeng,
the mean while Rodolphe Duke of Saxon is suborned to invade the Empire, unto
who^ the Diadem is sent with this Inscription.

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho,

The Rock gave unto Peter, and Peter gives the Diadem unto Rodolph.

The young Emperor understanding the matter, dispatcheth away into Germany.
Rodolphe being in five battles disconfited and put to flight whiles he lay a
dyeng, was presented with his right hand which he lost in the battle: which
when he beheld he spoke to the Bishops that stood about him after this manner.
This is the right hand wherewith I vowed my Faith to ye Emperor. Now is the
same hand become a witness and testimony of my breach of fidelity, and
detestable treason against my Sovereign, even by your procurement and
provocation chiefly. Rebellion punished.


After this when the other confederates of the same Saxon conspiracy (who^ the
pope had inueigled to revolt) to wit Herman of Luxemburgh, Ecbert Marquis of
Saxon, Duke Otto with his sons Conrande and Henry the gross, Echarde son
of Ecbert, Vdo, Geberde and others, had suffered like punishments (the
Emperors good fortune always preuailyng) The pope surceased not his practice
nevertheless: The pope being the firebrand of sedition does provoke the sons
to rebel against their Father.
whom sufficed not to teaze strangers to treason, unless he had seduced the
natural Sons of the Emperor, to wit, Conrade the first, and immediately
after his decease, Henry his other Son against the Father. Wherepon ensued
afterward horrible broils, and at the length the death of the Emperor also.

And yet that unhappy conspiracy of Henry the Son joining with the Pope
against Henry the Father, happened not happily on his side afterward. Gods
just judgment executed upon the son that rebelled against his Father.
For when Henry the Son did withstand the same inordinate Articles of ye
Bishops, which his Father refused: Lotharius is pricked forewardes against him
by new practizes of the pope, eue^ the same Lotharius who^ against his Fathers
will he had made Duke of Saxon before: who mainteining ye quarrel of ye pope,
after that he vanquished ye army of Henry ye 5. the Emperor now left destitute
of fre^des, and thoroughly weried out with the continual treachery of the
Bishops, was constrained to relent, and yield over his right.

The Emperors therefore being thus weakened, and for the most part brought
under subjection: immediately began to spryng up the Absolute power and Monarchy
of the pope, The popes absolute power.
about the year. 1094. by the special practice of Hildebrand and Vrbane 2.
which did forbid that no man from thenceforth should receive any
Ecclesiastical promotio^ (they call it Inuestiture) of any Temporal
Authority. When they had accomplished this with effect, they began to attempt
an other matter much more weighty, to wit, that they, to whom the Bishops did
owe due obedience before, should now become the popes Uassalles, and stand at
his courtesy. For whereas the Bishops were so subject to ye Emperor hitherto,
that no Election of any pope could be holden legitimate if the Emperor had not
ratified it: And again whereas always heretofore the lawful authority of
the Imperial Succession was derived from the Fathers to the Sons, without
any grant, allowaunce, or confirmation of the pope: These Sacred and holy
Fathers outragiously boylyng with an inward charitable zeal to unlade the
Princes of that heavy burden of authority, and to lay it upon their own
shoulders: what do they? forsooth under color of false surmise both horrible
against God, and outragiously presumptuous against men, they pretend yt this
authority to erect and set up earthly Empires and kingdoms, and to dispose,
and tra^spose them at their pleasure, where, when and to who^ they listed, was
given and cast upon them from above, not by any terrene ordinance but even by
Christ him self: and that it was now no more lawful for any man to clymbe to
the state Imperial, but at the will and lawful Election of the Pope. And
hereof are many Decrees extaunt abroad shamefully forged by them, and much more
shamefully countenaunced and faced out.

The Majesty Imperial subdued and subject to the popes.
The Majesty of the Empire being thus brought in subjection, and worn quite
out of countenance: the intolerable arrogance of the Bishops grew to such
outrage, that not contented to have plucked out their own necks out of the
colier of lawful obedience, drew also unto them selves, the Emperors interest
and lawful authority, in creatyng the Pope, in enstallyng of Bishops, in
calling of Councels, in disposing Ecclesiastical promotio^s, finally in
administryng all Ecclesiastical matters: and the Emperors them selves being
thus made subject unto the^ after a most execrable sort, did moyle, turmoyle,
and oppress: enforcyng them not only to swear allegeaunce, and obedience
unto them, but to prostrate them selves to kiss even their stinkyng feet
also: extollyng and magnifieng their own absolute power and Monarchy in the
mean space above all the kingdoms of the earth, gloriously vauntyng that the
Imperial Majesty was seue^ty times seven times Inferior and baser then the
glory of the Popedom was: De Mayor and obedi. Cap. Insolitae. De Mayor. and
Cap. vnam Sanctam.
alleging this similitude for a special Argument, that as God (said they) had
created two great lights in the firmament: and as the creation of heaven and
earth had not two begynnynges but one beginning: Even so now was left nothing
for the Emperor, no not in the lowest Sphere of the world, wherein he might
bear any preeminence, but that the whole Chaos of all power generally seemed
to be fast lock up, and ensealed within one only beginning. And that the pope
of Rome only (if we may believe the Popes Parasites) What kind of obedience
popes use toward Magistrates
must now be Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, to who^ is due the fulness of
all power, and more then Princely authority over all manner of subjects. All
which being so vndoughtedly true, ratified with the general consent of all
Historiographers, that no man can be able to deny it: I beseech you Osorius by
your beautyfull foreheaded, if you have not rubbed all shamefastnes away from
it: where is shame become? where is faith? where is Catholic obedience so
many times bragged upon by you? wherewith you affirm boldly, that you do not
refuse the commandment of any lawful authority? for the co^futation of
which words of yours, what shall I say unto you? so much as the lives of them,
who^ you defend most, do most of all bewray you to be a great liar, though I
held my peace. Chronicles and Hystories are full of examples, complainyng of no
one thing more grievously, then of a certain singular, continual, and
unappeasable rebellion of this your holy order, against the lawful Magistrates.

Call to remembrance Osorius how discretly and humbly Pope John the 12. A
conspiracy of John 12. most abhominably practiced against Otto the Emperor.
of that name behaved him self: who conspiryng first with Berengarius the 3.
and afterward again with his son, most traitorously supported their
treachery against Otto the first, being the lawful Magistrate: And how
afterward being sommonned to the Council by the Emperor, he disobeyed his
lawful commandment and refused to come. And for that cause being deposed
from his Ecclesiastical function, by the general consent of the whole
Council, did not yet so give over his traiterous practizes against the lawful
Majesty. Anno. 963.

It would make a great Uolume to gather together all ye seditions and
contentions one after other, that happened betwixt the Emperoures and the Popes
afterward. Contentio^^ raised betwixt the Emperors and the popes rehearsed
out of Hystories.
I will here and there touch and run over some, as many as shall suffice for
the present purpose. And first of all. What shall I speak of Gregory the 7. of
whom I can never speak sufficiently enough. Who after that he had contrary to
the ancient Decrees, and received custom of ye Elders, wrested and wroong out
of the hands of the Emperor Henry the 4. all right of choosing the Pope, of
disposing the promotions of the Church, and of calling Councels, not satisfied
as yet with this horrible treason, against the Imperial Majesty: Rusheth
moreover most furiously like a brute sauadge Tiger, against the Emperor his
own person, thundereth out excommunications against him: dispencing with his
subjects for their Oathe of allegiance, which they had sworn unto him: what
shall I say that this most arrogaunt Mastigo would scarce after three days
admit to come within the walls of Canusium the Emperor him self, A singular
president of the popes obedience toward the lawful Magistrate.
with his Empress and young Son, three days (I say) submittyng them selves
barefooted and barelegged, in frost and snow, at the gates of the City. And
yet being not herewith contented, did notwithstanding not absolute him from his
fault, which was none at all, without doing a whole years penance. Besides
all this the greedy Cormoraunt being not yet with all these reprochefull
injuries fully gorged, became so monstruously madd, as to provoke by all means
possible Rodolphe Duke of Sue^ia to drive him out of his Empire in the year.
1074.

Not long after this Gregory succeeded Vrbane 2. and Pascalis: whereof the one
did teaze Conrade son and heir of the same Emperor by his first wife,
Conrade and his brother Henry the 5. teazed against their own father through
the popes faction.
to wage war against his natural Father: the other after that Conrade was
slain, enlured Henry the 5. his other son unto like outrage against his own
Father the Emperor. In the year. 1300. O miraculous and Catholic reverence
toward ye higher powers: to speak nothing in the mean time of the wars
that Pascalis mainteyned against Ptolome, and Stephen Cursus a Roman Citizen
of great power: and again how the same Pope provoked Anselme Archb. of
Canterbury to prick proudely and insolently against Henry 1. Anselme against
Henry 1. King of England.
King of England.

After the death of the Emperor Henry the 4. succeeded in the Empire Henry the
5. who being no more courteously entreated of Pascalis, and Gelasius 2. and of
Albert Arch. of Meniz (through whose deadly practizes, and infinite seditio^s
the Emperor being thoroughly worn out) was driven at the last to that
extremity, that maugre his heart, he must agree to the Popes commandment,
Henry 5. is enforced to yield to the popes commau^deme^t.
yield to his will, stand to his courtesy, and deliueryng over ye preeminence
of the Imperial scepter, was constrained of necessity, to thrust his neck
into ye yoke of the Ponrificall tyranny. 1122.

By means of which submission and yeldyng of Henry 5. it is scarce credible to
be spoken, how monstruously these holy Fathers raised their crestes, what
outrageous atte^ptes they practiced afterward, whereby they might bring to
pass to have the Empire utterly trodden under their feet, which them selves
had miserably wasted, and taken out of the Emperors hands before: and withal
how they might reteigne unto them selves the authority of ye keys of the
whole Church, whereof they had unlawfully likewise dispoyled the Emperor;
prete^ding an authority from above given unto them by Christ him self:
whereby they were made Lords my Judges of all Churches, Bishops, Pastors,
Kings, finally Lords of whole Christendom in all causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal: Whereupon they enforced the Bishops to purchase
their Election at the popes handestand to these keys they annexed free and
absolute power to ordeyne, dispense with, and to coin new laws: the breach
and violatyng of the which must be taken for as heinous offense, as if they had
Sinned against the holy Ghost, according to the Decree of Demasus. For even so
they spoke of them selves: 25. Quest. 1 violatores.
besides this also they armed them selves with those terrible gunneshottes of
Excommunications, of Decrees, enioynyng of penance, and cursinges: and withal
did rake unto them selves a certain Heavenly power out of the very Heavens,
The popes of Rome do challenge a certain heavenly power upon earth.
and exercized the same upon the earth, so that from thence forth no humane
creature might be so hardy, as once to mutter against this new vpstart Peacocke
(whereupon the Decretalles of Gratian had bestowed no small plumes of gay
glitteryng feathers) even now hatched and peepyng abroad at the first, to
establish an absolute monarchy and power by the Decrees and Councels of Bishops
(of let purpose as it were) to overthrow the Majesty Imperial. Gratian his
book of Decretalls.


Now these holy Fathers being thus thoroughly guarded with this munition and
engynes, having also subdued the highest power of ye world, do begin to bend
their force against the Inferior powers and Potentates. And first Innocent 2.
Ionocent 2. overthrows the order of Senators in Rome.
choppes away at one blow the ancient order and dignity of Senators of Rome,
and does besiege Rogerius in the Castle of Gallucius, in the year. 1130.

How execrable ye insolency was of Alexander 3. The cruelty of Alexander 3.
against the Emperor Fridericke Barbarossa. The singular insolency of Hadrian
4. in banishyng the dignity of Consulshyp.
and the Cardinals against Fridericke Barbarossa, against whom being their
liege Lord and most worthy Emperor, besides horrible thu^der^rakes of curses,
they raised all Italy, and the Venetians, is well known to all men by the
Hystory thereof. Anno. 1159.

But I can not tell whether the unmeasurable insolency of Hadria^ the 4. did
exceed the outragies of all the rest. Who first sweepyng the City clean from
all Consuls, and dignity of Consulshyp, did challenge unto him self the whole
and only superiority, and rule over all: By means whereof grew wonderful
disturbance, and disquietnes. After this the same Pope d^d with a stern
countenance behold Frederick The Emperor, because he did unadvisedly take the
left styrrope in his hand when his holiness alighted from horseback, and was
grievously offended with him for the same. Not long after he arereth wonderful
tragedies against William the Prince and lawful heir of Apulia, persuading
Frederick against him first: And because he could not win The Emperor
thereunto: he provoke Emanuell the Emperor of Greece to bidd him battle. In
which Battle Emanuell was overthrown, and the Pope taken prisoner: Peace
being forthwith concluded with William: within a whiles after the said Pope
being wonderfully wroth against The Emperor (because in his letters he wrate
his own name before the popes, and because he presumed to swear the Bishops
of his own province to keep their due allegeaunce unto him, without consent
of certain Cardinals) he teazed all the Cities of Italy for the most part to
a traytorous reuolte, and to this confederacy conspired also the more part of
the Cardinals together with the pope, The troublesome seditions of Hadria^
the pope.
he himself skattereth abroad terrible flashes of flaming excommunications.
Finally the conspiracye is ratified with a solemn oathe: namely. That if the
Pope should dye none should be admitted into the Election, except he were a
confederate of this faction: by means whereof the knotte of this sacred
society, might never be severed. But lo a strange chance, whiles our holy
father is most busy about his excommunications, and cursinges, a fly slippyng
down into his throat, Hadrian choked with a fly. 1159.
stopped up his pypes, and choked him to death, in the year 1159.

After the death of Adriane, the sentence of the curse remainyng yet in force:
Frederick addresseth to the College of Cardinals, that the sentence may be
determined. But Alexander the Pope would not suffer Judgment to proceed, The
seditious tumults of Alexander the pope against Caesar his sovereign Lord and
Prince.
who as the^ had teazed up the Myllanoyes against Caesar, and ouerranne Italy it
self with a very bloody battle. In the which, the City of Myllayne was rased
to the ground, and Genua put to the sack, over and besides many thousands of
Roman Citizens slain. The Pope betaketh him to his heels and escapes away
by flight: whom whiles Otto the Emperors some does pursue by Sea, falling
himself in the hands of his Enemy, was brought captive into Uenice to the
Pope: Through which mischaunce, The Emperor enforced to conclude a peace, was
driven to yield to very hard and straight conditions: And though he prostrated
him self in Uenice at the Popes feet, the Monster nevertheless not contented
with this humble submission of The Emperor, besides this treads very
contumeliously upon Themperors neck with his feet: The unspeakable pride of
a seditious pope.
commanding to be proclaimed Super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis. etc.
Albeit neither the Emperor himself in this humble submission could altogether
suppress his heroical courage, but uttering again a singular president of a
worthy personadge, answered ye Pope on this wise. Non tibi sed Petro: noting
hereby, that this honor what soever so humbly offered, A president of the popes
pride far passing Tarquines pride.
was not done for any fear he had of the Tyrant, but for the reverence that
he did owe unto Peter: whom the Pope with open mouth entercepted most
arrogantly saying. Et mihi and Petro. This was done in the year 1177.

I beseech you heartily Sir Jerome: if you never have read these Monumentes,
where is that knowledge of yours in Antiquities, whereof ye brag so much? But
if you will confess that you have read them: what manner of obedience to higher
powers is this whereof you write? We do refuse no commandment of the Lawful
power. How truly ye speak, let this one History besides infinite other
examples teach you. Wherein enter I pray you into a due consideration of both ye
personages, of The Emperor and of the Pope, and mark well their speeches, the
gestures and behavior of them both: If any thing could be added to express
ye singular lenity and humility of the one, or the Monstrous Luciferlike
Insolency and arrogance of that other: were it possible to find a more notable
pattern of unspeakable pride in king Tarquin, or Leo ye proud? Finally in any
other mighty Monarche, or in Lucifer himself? And yet ye same Lucifer being
the Prince and Captain of all pride, durst not Michaell Tharchaungell reproach
with any word of despite, whiles they disputed together about the body of
Moses. But attempering the intemperate heat of speaking evil, used this
speech. Judas. ^.
Let the Lord rebuke the (says he) If it were not lawful for Michaell to
speak reprochefully to the Devil, what shall we say unto the^, which blushe,
not not only to speak evil, and curse the higher powers and Emperors (to
whom for the authority of their majesty, they ow^ due reverence and
obedience) but also most shamefully tread with their feet and heels upon the
necks of them, whose feet Christ himself (if had been present) would not
have disdayned to wash, and wype clean with some clothe? Nazianze^ can in no
wise digest the execrable hautines of such as (co^temning the authority of
the higher powers to the which they ought of duty assubiect themselves) will
presume so proudly to perch through intolerable pride, to make themselves
their coequalles: speaking on this wise. It is the property of all evil
servants to renounce mastershippe, and to rebel against superioritye, and
that which is superior in degree to make fellowlyke unto themselves. Nazianzen
Oration upon the holy Penthecost.


But what would Nazianzen have said, If he had been present with Theodore the
Marquis, and had beholden this goodly spectackle: and this so high authority
of the majesty it self, not only prostrate at the Popes feet, but trodden
upon also with the durty heels, of so proud a caterpiller? would he not have
cried out with open mouth (being troubled with the strau^genesse of the matter)
that very Antichrist was come plainly and personally to be seen?

We have spoken of Frederick the first: not much unlike unto whom may the
troublesome estate of Frederick the second be adjudged, The incredible fury and
outrage of Innocent 3. of Honor. and Gregory 9. agrynst Frederick. 2.
saving that the one seemed to be entangled with two Leopardes only, and this
endured the continual assaults of three most venomous Uypers. For immediately
after the death of Innocent the 3. Honor the 3. like a warelike hackster
sets upon The Emperor, ruffleth against him with his cruel Bulls of
excommunication, and cursinges, depriueth him of the title of Emperor, Extimo
Council. 49. Page 639.
and (as Marius reports) raged so furiously against him, that he supported
and mayntayned the rebels that revolted in Tuscane against the Imperial
majesty. After him Succeeded a far more mo^struous Hydre Gregory. 9. a very
proud man, a very helhound, whelped for none other purpose but to sow
treachery and treason: who as Frederick was addressing a supply into Asia for
the Necessary defense of the Christianes against the Saracens, calls him back
from his journey, immagineth devises of lettes, pyketh quarrels against him,
and accuses him of I know not what crimes, forces him to make his purgation
at Rome, puts him to pennaunce, stirs up unspeakable conspiraces
against him, wrappeth him in horrible curses, Finally raged in such outrage
against him, because he did depart without taking leave, and not fininishing
his pennaunce, that he sent a countermaund to ye Christian army in Syria, to
renounce him for their Emperor and not to follow his conduct: finally he
granted all such as would fight against him, life everlasting. The Emperor
thus miserably circumue^ted with ye cruel cramps of the Pope, was so hindered
from his journey, that he could by no intercession be released of that blind
and ridicoulous course, before he had with payment of an hundred xx. thousand
ounces of gold, The filthy gaynes of the pope.
stopped the throat of that insatiable Prelate, I should rather have said
ravening wolf, in the year 1226.

The same may be spoken of Innoce^tius 4. Innocent 4. does set upon the same
Frederick the Emperor.
Who nothing at all degenerating from Gregorius madness, does himself also no
less insolently ride upon the same Frederick and rayseth vproares against him.
For flying to Lions in France, does likewise thunder out new storms of curses
against him, and afterward forces the seven Electours to choose a new
Emperor in the year 1240.

With like rage Vrbane the 4. (whom men by nickname called Turbanus) being
enflamed, did cause the Frenchmen to make a road into Italy against the
Successors of the said Frederick in the year 1262. Against the Successors of
Frederick do Vrbane. 4. and Clement. 4. kept war.
this interlude being played, and Turbanus departed, forthwith stepped forth
upon the stage a fresh lusty ruffler Clement 4. A Byrd of the same feather,
filling the air with his croaking. For he like a jolly Cha^pion supported by
all means possible Charles Earl of Angeow with men and municion, and caused
him to lead a strong army into Italy against ye Nephews of ye same
Frederick: where Manfredus being slain, Charles by the authority of Clement
the pope is proclaimed King of Sicille, and Jerusalem: under this condition,
that he should pay to the Pope every year 40. thousand franckes: This being
done Conradinus the Son of Conrade true inheritour and King of Sicile
challenging ye kingdom of his Ancestors, The pope Clement does conspire the
death of Conrade, and Frydericke.
marches forward with certain Ens^gnes of Germaynes a long the Coast of
Viterbia: whom the popes holiness beholding, spoke openly that he was lead like
a Lamb to the slaughterhouse: hereupon the Trumpets sounding alarm, and the
armies joining in fight, and the Traitors discovering their treacherye,
Conradinus and Frederick of Austriche were taken prisoners. The Pope being
demanded, what he would have done with Conradine, answered like a most
horrible Tiger: The life of Conradine (quoth he) is the death of Charles.
Whereupon Conradine and Frederick both after sundry reprochefull skornes, and
villainies, were cut shorter by the heads, at the commandment of the Pope,
in the year. 1268.

Nicholas 3. does sow the seeds of discention betwixt Charles King of Sycile
and Peter King of Arragon.
Thus much of Charles whom Clement 4. did thrust into the kingdom of Sicile:
This is the same Charles whom Nicholas 3. (being offended with) does first
deprive of the Lieuetenauntship of Hetruria. The^ entering into compositions
with Peter King of Arragon, allureth him with the fairest speeches possible to
challenge against his ancient Title to the Kingdom of Sicile. Whereupon not
long after followed wonderful slaughter, and a conspiracy against the
Frenchmen, who at a watchword given by the sound of a Bell, were all slain in
Sicile men, women, and children: which slaughter though were performed in the
time of Martyne his next Successor, yet was procured and occasioned by the
means of the same Nicholas: who also entruded upon ye dignity of
Senatorshippe in Rome, which he forcibly had wrested out of the hands of the
Romans, and the said Charles, also into his own possession.

What shall I speak of Martine 4. who being a Frencheman borne, did maintain
the confederates of Charles very carefully against Peter king of Arragon, ye
force of wh Charles Pope Nicholas before him had utterly suppressed, he sent
out against Peter the curse of excommunication, because he addressed a Nauye
against him, the same did he also against Michaell Paloeologus, and raised
wars against the Fryollers: in the year 1284.

What shall be said of Honorius 4. who also does excommunicate the same Peter
of Arragon king of Sicile, sturring up against him Phillippe King of Spaigne,
in which Battle Peter being wounded, dyed within a whiles after. Anno. 1285.

Next unto these succeeds Boniface, which may be said to be a meet Successor
for such predecessors, equal with the proudest of his forerunners in pride and
in Tyranny: who drawing forth the first thread of his treason from Celestine
the Pope (whom he circumuented by wonderful craft and policy, and threw out
of his chair headlong into prison, there keeping him prisoner) straight ways
converted all his furious outrage against the Families of Columnensis and
Vrsines, as many as were of the faccion of the Gibellines, and after a strange
and unspeakable manner of beastlines, casting ashes into the eyes of the
Archbishop of Genua: was in each respect so far of to be commended. for the
duetifull obedience (wherewith Osor. does dignifie his Catholics so much) as
this glorious commendatione vaunted by Osorius is void of all truth. But I
come again to Boniface: The seditiouse troubles of Boniface 8. against
Celestine against the Family of Column against phillyppe the French king and
against Albert the Emperor.
who after had first excommunicated Phillippe the French King, did also sundry
times most proudly put back Albert the Emperor making great suite for his
confirmation, neither would in any wise confirm him, before he had promised by
covenant yt he should conquer France and thrust Phillippe out of his
kingdom. And no marvel if this pope could overthrow kings, forasmuch as he
challenged ye prerogative of both Gouerneme^ts, both spiritual and Temporal,
as appears in the sixth book of the decretalles, which amongst others
Gratiane has patched together: in the year 1294.

Moreover what shall we say by Clement. 5? Clement 5. does prescribe laws to
Emperors.
Who was so far of from acknowledging any obedience to ye lawful Magistrate,
that amongst his decrees he enacted that Themperours chosen by the Electours,
might be called Kings of the Romans, but could in no wise become Emperors
before they had received their name and dignity imperial of the Pope: besides
this also, that after the death of every Emperor, ye mean Regiment, until
the confirmation of a new, ought to be at the order and disposicion of the
Pope, and his Successors only. 1305.

Next after this Clement. 5. Succeeded Clement 6. being endued with no sparcke
or more Cleme^cy then his predecessor: ungentle by nature: fierce and full of
trouble, who most shamefully abused Ludouicke The Emperor, Ludouick the
Emperor, most shamefully abused by Clement. 6.
desturbed ye Imperial state vnmeasurably, and did excommunicate all Bishops,
and Princes, that held with The Emperor: deposed from ye Electorship the Arch.
of Mentz, because he favored the Innocence of The Emperor, and displaced him
from his Byshoppricke: enforced ye Archbishoppes of Treuers, and Saxone, to
determine upon an other Emperor to be chosen. And when The Emperor sent
Ambassadors to the Pope to be received into favor, The Pope drew him out an
Instrument with these conditions annexed, to wit, that he should confess the
errors and heresies of his Princes, and Cytties, (which were none at all) that
he should depart from his Empire, and should commit himself, his Children,
and all his goods and possessions to his mercy, and from thenceforth should
never meddle with any of them, without his permissio^ and suffera^ce. Which
articles, albeit The Emperor was not unwilling to yealde unto, yet because the
Pope perceived, that the States of the Empire would not accept it: his own
sacred holiness upon Easter day appoynteth an other Emperor Charles 4. Charles
4. appointed Emperor against Ludouick the true Emperor, by the procureme^t of
Clement 6.
At the last Ludouick being poisoned (not without the procurement, and practice
of this most merciful Clement) departed this life as Jerome Marius does
record, within a year after the Election of this Charles in the year 1347. At
the length the same Charles (whom the Pope anointed Emperor contrary the
ordinance of all the States) to thend to confirm the dignity Imperial to
his son and his Successors, so joins in league with the Electors, what with
fair promises and bribes: that he passes over the revenues of Thempyre to
the Electors: and this did he to establishe the Succession in him and his
posterity, as Aeneas Siluius does report. Again the Electors bound the said
Charles by oathe, that he should never require restitution of those revenues
again: which the Electors do enjoy even to this day. By means whereof it came
to pass, that the Romayne Empire being thus embased, and the Revenues of the
same empayred: The Turkishe outrage has long sithence freely possessed a great
part of Christendom without resistaunce: and is like to prevail further yet,
for as much as, the power and force of the Christianes being rent asunder and
skattered abroad, there is now none other power or Pote^tate, that is either
able, or dare adventure to withstand the mighty puyssaunce of that outrageous
furye. And the very cause of all these mischiefs have for the more part
issued out from that pestilent sincke of Rome: who building his ravenous neast
with none other furniture more, then with the scrappes that he skrapeth
together through violent seditious partaking of factions, and dissentions of
Princes, has brought Christendom to so small a handful now at ye last, yt the
Christian Princes iarring always emo^gest themselves: do seem yt they will
never be willi^g to be at one and agree togethers, for provision to be made
against the Turckes, nor will be able at any time to make their parties good
against the continual inuasuones and Roades which this Tyrant does daily
make into Christendom. But we have showed Records and examples sufficient:
which if be not true: Let Osorius himself confute them by his Antiquity,
whereof he vau^teth so singular a skill. But if they be most true (as they be
in deed) and if he shall never be able to disprove the^: where is now become
that wonderful obedience to the lawful Magistrate? where is that
consideration of the Majesty, which (as he says) refuses no ordinance of
the higher power? but does yield that unto Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and
yt unto God yt is due unto God? he adds moreover: For we believe, according
to the testimony of Paul, that lawful Magistrates are so established by the
ordinance of God, that he that resists the lawful authority outh to be
adjudged not so much to resist man, as to resist God himself. If these
words were as hartyly and unfeignedly uttered as you profess honorably in
words, I marvel the^ from whence came that so cruel rebellion, The only
popes of Rome, the common pestilence of Christianes and of all Europe.
of that Ecclesiastical Seignorie, against the Superior powers? and from
whence those mo^struous turmoyles of Empires, and so execrable alterations of
States, these many hundred years came at the first? The principal causes of
all which tumultes, commotio^s, and alterations, ^prang from no where else,
then fromout that boiling furnace of the Popes canckered contumacye, against
their liege Lords, and Emperoures. From hence came the wars of the Emperor
Henry the 4. and 5. then of Fridericke 1. and 2. from hence the battle of
Ludowicke of Bauiere, and Ludowicke of Austriche. In which vproares the
Majesty of the kingdoms was not only violated, the power of the same
weakened, and Princes combatyng against each other (like the brethren of Cadmus)
destroyed: but Churches also were miserably torn, and many godly consciences
driven into grievous anguish of mind, and most perilous staggering
uncertainty, through these outragies of the Bishops: who to extol and enlarge
their false forged dominion (conceived by as false forged opinion) were in
effect the very cankers and botches of the Church, and of all Europe besides.

What stroke then shall the authority of Paul (who forbids all
resistau^ce) bear amongst these ruffling Prelates? who delightyng and
sporting them selves privily to see Princes and their Subjects together by the
ears, How little the Romish obedience does agree with the Rule of Paul's
obedience.
and to rende and tear a sunder commonweals, and the public peace and
tranquillity of the Church with Civil discentio^s, seditious Bulls, and
pestilent Libelles: who through their privileges and immunities, exemptyng
them selves from public Justice, and Civil Laws, do use, abuse, Monarchs
and Tetrarches, like bondeslaues, after their own lust and pleasure: do bless
them: curse them: command them: entreat them, reward them, punish them:
allow, disallow: set up, set down, tread upon with the heels, yea with their
Papane power and Maiesticall prerogative, cast down into hell: betray the^ and
poison the^: how true this report is the Grecian, French and Germany Emperors,
plain patterns of their fury do evidently and aboundauntly declare:
Chilpericke the French king.
the smart thereof felt Chilpericke the French king, whom the Pope deposed from
his kingdom, and thrust into a Monckery. Henry the 2. king of England, Henry
2. king of England. John king of England.
whose Princely crown taken from his head you reteigned by the space of four
days. John king of England, who was first driven out of his kingdom by Pope
Innocent 3. and at the length poisoned by a Monk. Henry 7. Emperor of
Germany, whom ye destroyed by poison, as ye did Victor likewise, Victor a
Bishop.
whose life also a certain Relligious lozell of your own order cut short of,
a white or a black Moncke (for he was a Dominicane Friar) by ministryng unto
him the Sacrament dypped before in deadly poison. What shall I say of Phillippe
the French king, Phillippe the French king.
against whom Pope Boniface 8. did procure Edward king of England to mainteyne
mortal wars? what shall I speak of Henry 6. Henry 6. the Emperor.
Emperor of Rome against whom as rebels revolted the Bishop of Collen and
Leodicensis, in which tumult Leodicensis was slain. And for breuities sake to
pass over infinite other Dukes and Princes of Sycile, Arragon, Tuscane,
Calaber, Naples, Venice Germany, France, England, Boheme, Italy, Rome,
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Marquestes, Dukes, Counselors, Senators,
Consuls, whom I dare auow were never more horribly molested in all their whole
lives, then through the malice and treachery of your holy Fathers, and their
fraternity: So that this whole See of yours may seem to have attained that
loftyness of absolute power and sole superiority to none other end, then to
tear, rende abroad, and dissipate lawful authorities Potentates, and
Magistrates, established by the ordinance of almighty God.

What happened but of late days by the attempt of Pius the 2. I think is not
yet slipped out of your remembrance, Wicked practice of Pius 2. against the
Emperor.
who would not grant to the confirmation of the Bishop of Iseberg. unless he
would promise that ye Bishop of Mentz should never assemble ye Electours before
the Pope were made acquainted, yea and gave his consent thereto. Which if the
pope might have compassed once, doughtlesse he had won the spurs for the
suppressing of the authority of the Electours for ever. This insole^cy the
Bishop of Iseberg. did stiffely oppugn: whom (being for the same scorched with
the horrible lightening of the popes curses, and deposed from his Byshoppricke)
the Palatine Fridericke undertook to defend in this righteous and lawful
cause, Out of Records of Germany.
apperteinyng to the state of the Electours and sauety of Germany. By means
whereof when the matter came once to handy strokes, the just and righteous
cause prevailed. Now I beseech you Osorius. Such as challenge unto them selves
a Lieutenauntshyp not of one City only, but of the whole world: such as teach
that Emperors do not reign of them selves, but under the Pope: such as
affirm that all right to create Kings and Princes does belong unto them
selves: were these persons ever of the mind to give due honor to the high
powers, whenas they acknowledge no power on earth above them selves? whenas of
late years Pope Clement the 7. Henry the 8. king of England excommunicated by
pope Clement the 7.
bent his thunderboltes of excommunication against Henry the 8. King of
England: whenas also of late Pope Pius 5. Pius the 5. keeps a stir against
Elizabeth Queen of England.
waxed very wroch against our most Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and threw
out against her his truell curse, and seditious Bull: whenas he cutteth her of
from her Regal dignity, and the congregation of Christians: assaulteth her
with slanders and reproaches: names her pretensed Queen: proclaims her
refuge for runneagates: whenas he procures her subjects to become traitors
and teazeth them to arms against their natural Princess: yea whenas he
releaseth them in this behalf of their Oathe of allegeaunce: do these Prelates
obey the counsel of Paule^ Wherein every soul is commanded to submit it
self to the high powers? Which place of Paul Chrysostom interpretyng. Does
say that not only Bishops. Prophets and Evangelists, but also the Apostles
them selves are subject to the same law.

Let us briefly run over the remnaunt of Osorius Fable. Osori. page 170. B.
So that hereof it comes pass that we do Decree that nor only the Cannons
of the Bishops, but also the ordinances of Princes (being not directly
contrary to the Laws of God) ought to be obeyed most duetyfully. To this end
tends his talk: to witte^ That these holy Fathers may not seem (...); to
war against God. For whosoever resists the lawful Magistrate resists
God. And therefore you do decree, that the ordinances and laws of Princes
(being not contrary to the laws of God) ought to be as duly observed, as the
Popes Decrees. But you may pype up this kind of caterbrawle Osorius to such
as are not yet well acquainted with your Catholic maskings, in some other
world if it please you, in Noua Hispania, or else in Calecute. For with us
think not to find any so foolish to follow you fantastical all devise, and
to credit your affirmatio^s: who being overmuch enured to your ingglyngs, are
sufficiently instructed in those your wyly beguilye and are to well acquainted
with your ambitious hawtynes, your continual cruel combattes with Princes,
your suppressing of Kings, your exemptions from politic and Civil laws: so
many hundred years. Now that you have brought to pass by your unmeasurable
and insatiable Tyranny, The manner of Popish obedience to their Princes.
that the Monarchs and chief Potentates of this world are become subjects and
vassalles under your authority, daryng not to mutter, no nor so much as to
hiss once against your commandments, unless your fatherhoodes gape upon
the^: Osor. like a fine man steppeth forth, endeuouryng to persuade with his
sweet eloquence, that all ye Pack of their Popish priesthood is already
trussed up, and offers it self always most humbly applyable to all the
ordinances, and Commau^deme^tes of Princes, and higher powers, which are not
repugnaunt against the laws and ordinances of God.

But come of now, let us take a taste of this your Seraphicall obedience, and
let us set down for example, that which may come to pass hereafter, or at
least that, which is heartily wished for to come to pass in deed. Put the
case, that this your noble Sebastian King of Portingall (whom for the reverence
I bear him, I name a puissaunt Prince) should give you an express
commandment, that all Idolles, Pictures, and Images should be plucked out of
your Churches. Surely this commandment were nothing disagreable to the
ordinance of God: I beseech you tell me, what would Osorius do here? would he
obey the commandments? I dare scarsely believe him. But there is no such
matter commanded by your king, nor shall ever be commanded. What your Prince
shall do hereafter neither do you know your self Osorius, neither am I
inquisitiue to know whereabout your Noble King of Portingall does bestew his
time at this present: but I speak what he ought to do. And what if the Lord
(in whose hands are the hearts of Princes) do by secret inspiration of the
holy Ghost, enduce him to command it at one time or other: The Pope (say you)
would not permit it: yea Sir, I do believe this in deed. And therefore ye king
should not adventure to give any such attempt, though he were wholly bent
thereunto: Neither would Osor. obey, though he did it. Yet surely the word of
God would permit it, though the Pope and all his Cardinals do spurn and
kick against it. In the mean time, O wonderful authority of Kings in those
Nations, and O miraculous obedience of Catholics: whereas neither Princes are
at liberty, to enact and establish that in their own commonweals, that they
ought to do: nor is lawful for the Subjects to obey their Princes laws, in
matters approved by the word of God, unless the Popes authority being far
higher then either the authority of man, or power of God, be obtained first.
By whose crafty devises, after that the Lords and Princes be forced to that
issue, that it may not be lawful for them, to institute any ordinance, but
such as shall please the Bishops, and Priests: then are all those shauelynges
at elbow by and by, to execute whatsoever their Princes command them: whenas
the Princes may not command any thing in deed, but as they shall be guided
(and lead as it were by the lip) of their own Subjects. O singular and
superexcellent obedience of such Subjects toward their Magistrates.

Departing a whiles from Portingall, let us turn out pen toward Spain,
though swaruyng but little from the question. Not many Months ago arrived
there an English Ship richly laden with English wares, and in the same
besides sundry Passengers, were xx. Mariners more or less: who being under
sail on Seaborde, did worship the Lord after their country manner, The
horrible cruelty of the Spanish Inquisitours against English Merchants.
in their own mother tongue. This ship whether carried in her right course,
or forced by Tempest, arrived at the length upon the coast of Spain: The
Ship had scarce thrust her nose into the Haven, but by what occasion, I know
not, the holy Inquisitours being flocked together flew into the ship. They
Sommon the Mariners to appear before the Inquisition, and by constraint of
oathe enforced them to show the books of their Common Prayers: hereupon threw
into prison. Queen Elizabeth having intelligence of the matter, addresseth
Letters unto King Phillippe for the delivery of her Subjects: The King
desirous to grant her request, made answer, that there wanted no good will
in him to do what he might, to the uttermost, and that he had also to his power
and Princely authority, entreated for them very earnestly: The king of Spain
subject to his own subjects Inquisitours.
but that the Majesty of the Sacred Inquisition in his kingdom was of such
force, that him self must needs be obedient unto it: do ye not see here a
notable king Osorius? who may command nothing, more in his kingdom, the^
shall like the subjects: are ye wont in this sort to obey the co^mmaundement
of your kings? Yes ye obey in deed, but such ordinances, as your selves do
make, How the Catholics be obedient subjects to their own kings.
not such as they command: nor do ye otherwise obey, then as it may serve
your own turns, and when you list your selves.

About five hundred years sithence, more or less, how few kings have been in
this little Britain, that have not been grievously molested by beggarly
Monckes? and amongst all others by the Monckes of Canterbury chiefly? how
insolently did Anselme withstand William Rufus, Anselme.
and Henry 1. kings of England? how proudly did Theobald behave him self
against king Stephen? Theobald.
How great and unspeakable Tragedies played Thomas: Archb. of Caunterbury
against Henry 2. Thom. Archb. of canterbury.
Which Thomas your holy fathers for his treachery and Treason have shryned for
a Saint? The Bishop of Elye an execrable Traitor not only to king Richard 2.
his own person, Bishop of Ely.
but to all the Nobility of England besides, it is a wonder to see, what a
stir he kept: No man is ignorant of the manifold injuries that king John
suffered at the hands of Stephen Langton. Stephen Langton.
No less traiterous was Edmund Archb. of Canterbury against Henry the 3.
Edmund Archb. of Caunt.
Which Henry succeeded Edward his son, whom John Peccham resisted wonderful
obstinately, John Peccham.
leauyng after him a successor Robert: Rob. Wilkelse.
who degeneratyng nothing at all from his successors treachery, was at
continual jar with the king, each of them an Archbishop, each of them a
Traitor to the Majesty. What shall we say of Gualter the Archb? Gualter Archb.
whom sufficed not to take away Adrian Bishop of Herford from the Temporal
Judges, in despite of the king, and his Counsel, and to set him at liberty
unpunished: but he must also become a confederate of Queen Isabels conspiracy
against king Edward the 2. And to passover in ye mean space the sundry
outragies, conspiracies, and seditions against their own Princes by Ludeines
of that coat: was there ever so beggarly a Moncke, or so lousy a cowled
lozell that (being supported by the popes authority, and armed with the
granneshotte of his excommunication) would not quickly contemn, and set at
naught any Potentate, or Magistrate, were he never so mighty? Whereas an
ancient custom was established by solemn consent amongst the ancient
antiquity, that Byshopprickes, and the dignities and possessions
Ecclesiastical should not be disposed and given, but by special confirmation
of Kings and Princes: and that no Appeal should be made to the Pope of Rome,
for any cause without the kings consent. Popish ambition prevailed so far
forth (immediately after the enthronizyng of Hildebrand) That kings were
called kings only in name: but the rule, order, and administration of all
causes, caught away from kings, should remain with Monckes, and such like
shauelynges, who would both rule the roast, and the game. After Becker was
slain, King Henry 2. made earnest intercession with cappe in hand, to the
Monckes of Caunterbury (Priour whereof was one Odo) that for his sake they would
vouchsafe an Archb. of his admittaunce, and withal nominated him. The request
was honest, yea it was a request of one, which needed not to desire it, but
might of very justice by the prerogative Regal, institute and appoint Bishops,
within his own kingdom: All which notwithstanding, in contempt of the kings
authority, and without any regard had to his humble petition, was an other
chosen (not whom the king desired) but whom the Monckes them selves liked best,
The froward co^tumacy of Monckes against their king.
in the year. 1173. The like unto the same was done also in the Election of
Baldwyne the next successor in the year. 1184. In which Election the king was
compelled to yield to the Monckes, whether he would or no. And where is now that
Catholic obedience of Monckes toward their Monarchs? where is the
commandment of the Apostle: Wherein kings are commanded to be honored?

Out of Mathewe Paris^, upon the life of Henry 3.
I will add hereunto one example more: for to reckon up all would make a
great piece of work. Pope Gregory the 9. sent his Legate Otto by name into
England, as the other Popes were accustomed before him to do, to gather up
his harvest sheaues together (plentyfull enough I warrant you) they call it
Procuraria. This harvest was on this manner. That every particular Church
throughout all England, should pay one yearly reuenew of four Marks to the
pope: the sum was infinite. Letters were delivered to the Archb. And Bishops
commaundyng them to assiste the Legate in gatheryng this money, and withal
should provide three hundredth of the fattest Benefices to be employed upon iij.
C. Italians of the popes appointment. King Henry 3. understanding the matter,
calls a Synod of Bishops caused conference to be used with the Bishops in
their co^uocation house, and first addresseth his Letters to the pope touching
their answer, as well in his own name, as in the behalf of his Subjects:
when he could not this way prevail, he opens the matter to his Counsel and
states assembled in Parliament: writes to every particular Bishop, declares
unto them the great inconuenie^ce that would ensue by means of that
collection: humbly beseeches them that they would not be so earnestly affected
toward Strangers, as to seek the utter spoil and undoing of their native
Country, wherein they were borne, nor would so empouerish their own Churches.
Afterward he does threaten them, yea denounces the penalty of the laws and
ancient Statutes of his Realm against them openly. Finally upon their
allegeaunce charge them, that they deliver no money out of the Realm,
whereby the Common weal may be empouerished. If ye consider the authority of
him that does commau^de, what could be of more authority in a Realm? if ye
way well his purpose, what was more profitable for the Country? or more
agreeable to Gods word? Let us now behold a singular president of Catholic
obedience: which if were as plainly discernable in the lives and manners of your
Clergy Osorius, as you have notably painted it out with your pen. I would not
think you to be more worthy of credit, the^ your Catholics worthy of
commendation. Now how ready and diligent they were in performing the Kings
commandments, the matter does more then sufficiently declare it self. For
it was so far of, that the pope would yield any jot at all to the Kings
Requests, that he seemed to grow into great choler against the King, yea and
to threaten him for the care he had of his own Realm. The king of England
(says he) which does kick and spur^e against us now, has is Counsel: Math.
Parisiensis.
But I have my Counsel also which I will follow. etc. and withal sends over
Letters with express Bulls to the Bishops, and to the Bishop of Worcester
chiefly: whereby he was commanded to prosecute the popes practice by all
means possible, at a day prescribed thereunto, which was the Assu^ption of our
Lady: against which day Auditte must be given of this sacred Receipt. Addyng
also thereunto, that whosoever should withstanding his proceedings herein,
should be presently accursed, The proud rebellion of the pope and the Bishops
against the king.
yea if it were the king him self: what think you of these dealings (right
reverend Father) is this to obey Princes commandments suppose you? or rather
to command Princes what they shall do?

What may we say to that request, whereas the same Henry according to his
princely prerogative (and as of right he might lawfully have done) advanced
into the Bishopprick of Canterbury one Richard, who being repelled by the
Monckes, and in despite of the king, an other (A Moncke of the same house
named Gualter) being enstalled, the king not a little displeased with the
dishonest refusal, made means to the Pope by his letters and Ambassadors: who
after his wonted manner, more inclinable to the Monckes, then to the King,
could be by no means reconciled: A tenth of all moueables in England and in
Scotland granted to the pope.
the King, because he would not seem to be overcome of his own Monckes in his
own Realm, was enforced to grow to composition with the Pope, and to grant
him a tenth of all the goods moveable in England and in Scotland. The most
holy Father undermined with this crampe, yielded by and by. But it shall not be
amiss for the better declaration of the matter, to set down the very words
of the Author: Our Lord the Pope (says he) being inwardly inflamed above all
things to suppress the hautines of the king, reco^forted with these promises,
was made to consent. This much Mathaeus Parisie^. Mathaeus Parisiensis.
Which grant how pestiferous and pernicious became afterward to the Realm,
can skarsly by any estimate be comprehended An. 1229. Raunge at random now
(Osorius) and spare not to utter whatsoever shall come into your harish
Eloquence, as lowdly as ye can, of the humble obedience and ready inclination
of your Clergy toward the Laws and commandments of Princes.

But ye annexe a tagge to your point, Which ordinances are not contrary to
Gods laws. And what may be construed I pray you of that, where Charles the
great, and Otto the first, one a French Emperor, the other a German (to
the singular benefit of the Empire) did ordain, yea and that not without the
general consent and agreement of the bishops and the Councelles, that no
person should be chosen pope of Rome, without the consent and confirmation of
the Emperor: and that the right of appoynting Bishops, and the determination
of ecclesiastical causes, should be ordered by the Temporal authority: This
ordinance so holy, The ancient laws and ordinances of Emperors enfringed
by Popes.
so faithfully instituted by them, so long, and so firmly observed, and kept
by their Successors, eue^ unto the wars of Themperours Henry the father, and
the son, and the Popedom of Hildebrand, yea and Cannonized also amongst
your decrees: will you affirm to be contrary to the Law of God? if you do
grant it: how came it to pass, that they were established by your popes,
which could not err? if you deny it: Did. 63.
how chanced that Hildebrande and the other Lordinges Successors of that See,
did abrogate the same so wickedly? And with what face may the ordinances of
Princes be said to be duetifully observed of them, who do so little shame to
speak against their own Princes, and oppugn their ordinances? who account
it no small part of their Majesty to delight, and pastime themselves in
scorning their Laws, deryding and denienge their requests? In like manner to
be so bold to Infer somewhat of our own Country Laws. It was an ancient
custom here in England time out of mind, that the Bishops and the subjects
of the Realm should swear their allegeaunce to their king, according to a
form thereof prescribed. And also that no person whatsoever should be so
hardy to appeal to Rome, without the kings commandment. Moreover that in
Election of Bishops, and disposing of Ecclesiastical promociones (namely
such as were of greatest estimacion) should have the first and chief voice
before all other. etc. out of Parisiensis.

Of these ancient ordinances, you shall hear what our Ancient kings do
testify in the Chronicles themselves. Out of the English Chronicles.
For in this wise King Henry 1. speaks. There is an ancient custom (says
he) of my kingdom ordained by my Father that no person shall sue any appeal
from us to the Pope: whosoever will attempt to enfringe this custom, does
offend against our Majesty, and the Crown of England. He that will seek to
dispoyle us of our Crown, is an enemy and Traitor to our person etc. Now again
Let us hear the words of ye same King to his Subject: What have I to do with
the popes letters? I will not break the Laws of my Realm etc. And out of all
question, These constitutions remained sound, safe, and inviolable, until the
time of Hildebrand: By force of which ordinance Lanfranck was appointed
Archbishop of Caunterbury, by William King of England. Du^stane enstalled
Bishop of Worcester by Edgar: Odo by Adelstane. Oswalde made Archbyshoppe of
York by Edgar. without any consideration had of the Bishop of Rome. So were
also other Bishops admitted by other kings. Which ancient laws and
ordinances of Princes, if your clergy had ever determined with themselves to
obey as inviolable, what meant Saint Anselme, Saint Beckett, Langton, and many
other Archbyshoppes, and Moncks of York, Canterbury, and Dover? what did they
mean I say, who roonning to Rome in their often chase and rechase, sweating
and turmoyling, spent and consumed great Sommes of money about pacifieng of
tryfles? wh would have been concluded at home with less charge, and more ease,
if they would have harkened unto their own princes, and obeyed their lawful
laws and ordinances, rather then have been so much addicted to the pope. But
what do I moyle my self in this huge and unmeasurable Gulf, measuring Sands
and Seas? Do you not see and plainly perceive, what a large world you have
opened unto me to treat upon, when you allured me hither, that I should out of
hystoryes and ancient records unfold and displaye abroad the controversies,
priuye grudges, Injuries conspiracies, Treasons, Accusacions. Quarrelles,
Reproaches Slanders, Poysones, Armies, Battelles. Excommunications and voyadges
practiced, sustained, supported, and continued by the Clergy against Emperors,
Kings, and higher powers? All which notable enterpryses and attemptes of
yours, If I would but Imagine in my conceit, that I might be able to
comprehend and utter in writing, I might well be counted as wise as a woodcock
that would occupye my self about nombring of the swelling waves of the Lybyan
seas, or seek to know the continual course of the flashing foame, and the
boisterous billows of Eurus blastes. And as though these wandering wyndes had
not either blown abroad sufficient store of lies, or not incredibly monstrous
enough: yet crawleth forewardes nevertheless in his continual course of
lyeng, this glorious paynter of praises, to poolishe and make gallaunt this
holy mother Church of Rome, with all kind of gorgiouse glitterings and
beautiful plumes. Meaning the same I suppose, that Plato did sometime in
Socrates: Osor. The Troumpetour of the Romish Ierarchy.
to express the pattern of a perfect philosopher: Xenophon in Cirus the Image
of a perfect Emperor: Cicero of a perfect orator in Crassus: Curtius of a
perfect captain in Alexander: and Isocrates a president of a perfect princely
prince in Nicockles: so would he take upon him to blaze out the beauty of this
pontifical Sinagogue: by the which he might represent a resemblaunce of a
singular and incomparable shape of a most pure and true Church, without
wrinckle or spotte, painted as it were in tables with conning Craftesmans Art
most merueilous to view.

Now therefore touching the institution, and disciplyne of this Church we have
heard already: as the which being erected first by Christ, enlarged by the
Apostles, established by the Martyrs, amplified with doctors, and defended by
thinspiration of the holy ghost, does persevere in one vnyforme faith always
unvanquishable against all the assaults of all heretics in the world. It
remains now that we note Osorius his discourse touching the external
discipline thereof: to wit, worshipping, ceremonies, and Rytes: in the defense
of the which he utters the liveliness and quickness of his wit. And here
at the first choppe appear unto us the most notable Schools, of Monckes,
Friars, and Noonnes: Page 170.
Orders of Saint Bruno. S. Benedict, Saint Frauncis, Saint Dominick, Saint
Brigit, Saint Beguine, Saint Barnarde, and Friars Carmelittes, which although
seem to be but ordinances of men: yet because they hinder nothing to the
study of Gods law, but are profitable helps rather to such as are desirous
to aspyre to true godliness, it stands with good reason to think that they
did spring from the holyghost, who was the first founder of them. And here lo
is new matter now to utter fresh eloquence, with Rhetorical bravery of
Comendatory acclamations. Uerely I do believe that Osorius wanted some fit
argument, to whett his excellent wit upon, when he fell and was forced into
these straightes, to become a prating proctor for Monckes. I speak of these
Monckes who have been lately hatched, long sithence the time of Basile and
Barnarde. And therefore that he purposed to utter his skill in this lean and
barrayne, matter as many others have done before him in feigned devises, and
counterfayte toys: not because they thought there was any thing praiseworthy
in the same, but to sharpen their wits and to make a show of their pregnancy
of style, by way of daliaunce: and by trifles to try how they were otherwise
able to declaime in matter of emportau^ce, if Necessity should require
thereunto. So did Homere sometime describe the battle of myse and frogs:
Vergill his Gnatt. Ouide his nutte: So did Policrates praise Busirides: Glauco
one of the sect of Plato commended unrighteousness: Fauorinus the Fever
quartan, and Thersites: Sinesius magnified Baldnes: of this sort we read to be
the tragical comedy of Seneca in the praise of Claudius, deifieng him.
Apuleius extolleth the Ass. An other commends Grillus, Another compares a
Byttell with an Egle. And there want not some which were willing to delight
themselves and others, in blasing the praise of Folly. But all these are but
Tryflers in respect of one of late years, named John Casus Archbish. of
Beneuentane, yt popes legate unto the Venetianes: who shamed not to take upon
him to magnify most horribly and with more the^ detestable impudency, not Fevers
quartaines: nor Baldnes and want of here: but that stinking filthiness, that
shame it selfewill not permit a man to speak with tongue, whose nimblenes of
wit our Osorius seems in this his resemblaunce somewhat to be inclined
unto: undertaking to commend these his companio^s as the fellow Citizens of
Loathe dwelling in Sodom. But to let these filthy matters go, not meet for
chaste ears: let us return to our matter again.

The picture of the cross must be worshipped
Besides this Rabble of couled generation, that be never sufficiently commended:
there are added also to amplify the royaltye of this Romish Sinagogue, other
ornaments not a few, and of no small emportaunce: first and above all others,
the honorable sign of the Cross: advanced not in Temples, and houses only,
but set abroad also in high ways, and crossed upon men's foreheades also.
Over and besides this crucifixe (because man's memory shall not want matter to
be occupied upon) provision was made that Innumerable Images and pictures of he
Gods, and she Gods should likewise be placed in Churches of the
Catholics, Images of Saints and Sanctus^es.
holy remembraunces of holy Saints (I warrant you) whose pictures they do not
only worship very religiously here upon earth, but Invoke the Saints
themselves, in heaven: And these they do make their patrones and proctours in
heaven, as need shall require: men very provident and circuumspect surely: for
if the Intercession of Christ alone, or the sheeding of his precious blood
fail happily to find favor with his father, they shall forthwith step
forth and help them at need, and become mediators for the sins of the
people. Emongst these Saints dwells Saint Tho. Beckett Archbishop of
Canterbury, Lord for the blood of Thomas grant our prayers to wend etc.
for whose bloods sake the Church does desire, that their prayers may wend into
the very place, where Tho. did ascend. There also dwells S. Anselme, Saint
Dunstane. Saint Christopher, Saint Margarete, and Killdragon, Saint George,
and a great number more like unto the^. Of which every blind man, may easily
see by many famous histories, yt some were Traytoures, some Factious and
seditious, yea some also, that were never borne as yet, and are very
braynesicke Imaginations, not of men, but pield devises of old Dottards only,
to occupy idle heads withal.

But because Osorius does so stoughtly defend these Idolles as necessary
helps, and means, to raise up men's forgetfulness. Herein I do meet with two
occurrantes, at the which I can never wonder sufficiently: No Nation in the
world has any pictures or graven Images in their Churches but Papists only.
first, whenas no pictures, nor any manner of Graven Image (as far as I can
learn) are to be seen in any Temples, or Sinagogues of ye Jews, Turcks,
Sarracenes, Moors, Moscouites, Tartareanes, in Asie, in Aphricke, in Europe,
finally in no part of the whole world, no not so much as in the Temples of
Infidells, either of the living or of the dead: I do much maruayle, how the
Papists only can be dazeled with such a monstrous blindenes in
understanding, and drowned in such a Bottomeles gulf of phanaticall
forgettfulnesse, to seem in their own conceiptes skarse religious, unless
they bedawbe their Temples on every side, with pictures, and Poppettes:
moreover if those Mawmettes, and signs of Saints, be erected in their
churches for none other end, but to put the beholders in remembrance of the
Saints themselves (as Osorius does stoughtly maintain) I meruell then what
that should mean, Osorius does defend pictures to be as Kalenders of
remembrance.
that in the Churches of the Papists, the rude and unlettered multitude of
Christianes are permitted even to this day to prostrate themselves before them,
to set up burning Tapers, to cense them with Franckencense, to perfume them
with sweet Odours, and to hang pelting gamboldes upon them, made of wax,
wood, ledd, or other metal? Why is Jerome reported to knock his breast when
he kneeleth before the Crucifixe? why do men gadde to and fro, hither and
thither, on pilgrimage unto them? why do they visit, praise, pray unto, and
kiss the^ with their lips? why do they buy of the^ myrackles and ease of
diseases for money? what greater honor was ever given to the Gentiles Idolles in
times past, even amongst the Infidells, then is now a days frequented, in ye
Churches of Christianes? Is all this nothing else, but to make men mindful?
and to help the memory? Osorius page 17.
But the Israelites were commanded in times past to reserve in their houses
some remembrance of their Auncestoures which might awake their forgetfullness
for the benefits that they had received. This is true in deed: The monument of
the Brasan Serpent, and the books of Salomo^ de curandis morbis abrogated by
Ezechias for the abuse.
So was the memory of the Brazen serpent reserved a long time: but when
crawling and kreeping Supersticion began to abuse the same to plain
Idolatrye: Ezechias is worthily praised for banishing this same very monument
from amongst the people: Even as he did most prouidently provide, that the
Books of Solomon entitled de curandis morbis should be abolished likewise,
as soon as the common people began to abuse them to wytchcraft, and
enchau^tment, as it is reported in the Greek Commentaries.

But let us proceed to the Remnaunt of this Catholic description. To wit,
to the things that appertain to faith, to works, and the Sacraments of our
most sacred mother the Church. For neither is the Faith of the Catholics,
such as is plainly seen to be of those heretics, which does either diminishe
all hope of attayning honest life, or utterly all fear of ^afety: Osorius page
171.
but it does work this rather, both to make men more willing to embrace
virtue, and yet desiste not nevertheless to stand in the mean time always in
fear of the severity of Gods Judgment. And why so I pray you? For whosoever
are carried with ardent faith unto Christ, How the Faith of the Catholics is
joined with hope and fear.
those does he beautify with most abou^dant stoare of virtue: Moreover whenas
the same men do know, that the same Christ will be a severe Judge against them,
which will not do his commandments, they are always in continual fear.
Well: and whereunto tends all this (Osorius) so maisterly debated touching
Faith, Hope and Fear? for I confess plainly, that such is my dull capacity,
as is not able to conceive you more then an Ass, unless you open these
things that ye treat upon more distincktly, and plainly: and except ye come
at length somewhat nearer to the matter, whereupon you debate. If you mean
thus, that Faith does not weaken any man's hope so, but that he may, and ought
(through Gods assistaunce) live godly and virtuously, in this world: who will
gaynesay you herein? Nay rather what one thing does ye Faith of the Gospel
emprinte in us more deeply, then a desire to live godly? or what does it teach
more carefully, then that there is no good work, but such as is coupled with
Faith, and begone by Faith? But if the sense and meaning of your words tend
to this end, that ye think all the force of Faith to consiste only in this,
Confidence of works by Osor. Faith.
to open every man's hope to attayn that perfection in this life, which for our
works sake, may make us righteouse in the sight of God: I am altogether
against you, and dare boldly affirm, that this is not the voice of a Bishop,
or of a Deuyne, but of a most filthy heretic: Moreover where you annexe Fear
hereunto, if you understand it thus, that Christian Faith ought always to be
lincked together with the fear of God, this will no man deny. But if you rack
out Fear of Gods severe Judgment (not adding any distinction) to that
extremity, How fear ought to be joined with the faith of the gospel.
that it leave unto us no assurance of our sauetye, but deteigne all men in a
wavering mammering, ye seem to me: That your affirmacion the^ should emplye
thus much, that in the Scriptures is no promise at all, even as though GOD
would now deal with his elect, by the only rigor of the law, and not by
promise and Grace.

No less blockishe is the same also which marches next in rank, touching
Works: Of works.
wherein the dignity of this Church deserves singular and wonderful
commendation, if it be true that is believed to be true in that Church. Osorius
page 172.
For the Catholics do believe (says he) that the good works of godly
personages are such, as are not defiled with the least infection of
vncomelynesse, but be of all parts so upright and holy, that they make those
men both righteous and holy, by who^ they be exercized. But touching this
matter, and the matter of Freewill also, has been spoken sufficiently already.

Of Ceremonies and Sacraments. Page 171.
The next Fable that ensues, concerns Ceremonies and Sacraments: in the
which the holy mother Church of Rome does observe this order: That it believes
that the holiness of all the Ceremonies and Religion of Sacraments, not newly
instituted, nor yet devised by the wit of that fine man Haddon, but most
ancient and of greatest antiquity, and preserved by the full and general
consent of all holy Fathers, ought most purely and reverently be worshypped.
etc. So that no man may dare be so bold without singular impudency, as once so
much to grudge against these Ceremonies so holy, so ancient, of so long
continuance, even from the age of Euander, as I suppose: instituted (as he
says) by wonderful travail of holy Fathers, and established by so autenticke
consent, though otherwise they be grown into never so huge a quantity, that
they may seem to ouerwhelme the Christian people, with the unmeasurable rabble
of them: and albeit many Christians are so wedded unto the^ (yt bidding adieu
to Christian Faith) no small number do repose their chief ankerhold of
holiness and righteousness in those trinckets: yea though also they strive to
preserve them, much more stoughtly and courageously then for the law it self
and the commandments of God.

And so runnyng lightly over those Ceremonies, he presses foreward to the
Sacraments: of Confession first, and next of the Euchariste. But when we fall
(says he) First, what means this word, Fall? For if the consideration of
all your righteousness, be settled in an interrupted course of living well, in
the gifts of holiness, and righteousness, powered into you even by Christ him
self, as your Assertion does emporte: by what reason can these Falls, and
spots of filthy life stand together with so great, and so many ornaments of
righteousness, received of Christ him self? or in so great righteousness, what
needs any confession? But for as much as you be men, let us ascribe this to
the frayltie of man's nature, that as men you may lumper and trippe: Go to then,
to what Sanctuary do ye afterward flee for relief? Forsooth to a rotten
plancke, that may save a man amyddes the swallowyng gulf, being thrown over
boorde into the Sea: Of Confession.
To the Judgment of the Priest (say you) And why not unto Christ rather?
Osori. page 172.
Forsooth because (in his absence) entreaty is made by Proctours and Advocates.
But was Christ absent, whenas John does send us back again unto him
notwithstanding? speaking on this wise. 1. John. ^.
And if we have sinned: we have an Advocate with the Father Christ Jesus, and he
is the propiciatory Sacrifice for our Sins: Why did he not say, we have a
Priest upon the earth, if there were either any first, or second Table, besides
Jesus Christ only? In deed he works by his Ambassadors: as he sometime
taught by the mouth of his Apostles, and by them wrought miracles, and even now
also proclaims his Gospel, by his godly Ministers: yet does he nevertheless
work in heaven continually, though he work by his Ministers here on earth.
Furthermore neither does he so use the service of those Servants and
Ministers in all things (whose external Ministry he necessaryly employeth to
many things) as though he could of him self do nothing without their
service. Lastly: all be not his true Ambassadors, which by foreign badge, and
cognizaunce, do vaunt them selves to be his Ambassadors.

But let us proceed, and what do ye now, when ye tumble in heaps together to
confess your selves to the Priest, as to an honorable vmpier? what does he
give you at the length? Page 172.
Making first a straight Inquisition of the Sins, he does by force of his
wisdom search out the wound, which being disclosed, he applies a plaster
thereunto according to the quality of the grief, as seems most convenient.
But what if you happen upon such a Priest (as be now a days over many) not
much unlike unto them, who^ Plautus does describe in a certain place. Plaut.
in Bacchid.
Fools, wittlesse, naturalles, blockisse, doltishe, asses, dronckardes? etc.
But let us admit that there is no Priest, but such as is most worthy of this
function. This Priest then according to the capacity of his wisdom,
considering ye quality of ye trespass, what plaster does he apply to ye
soar? a very wholesome one I warrau^t you. For according to ye dignity of his
person (for he represents the person of Christ) he pardons and absolueth
the offendour clean of all sin: yet so, as enioyning certain penance to
the new cleansed soul: so that the trespassour may understand, that he is
bound to make satisfaction for ye trespass. In which doing I can not marvel
enough at your manifest giddynesse of idle brain, being so barreine not only
of discretion, but void also altogether of common sense and feelyng almost.
The offendour (say you) is acquitted by the absolution of the Priest.
Undoughtedly to be absolved by a Priest is a very gay Jewel, if it be true (as
it is true in deed) that God does give absolution first. But to assure us that
you tell truth, what do ye allege out of the Scriptures? Forsooth the words
of the Gospel: Luke. 10.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you despises me. I do
hear you, and do acknowledge these words to be the words of Christ. But we
must return again to the principal point of the question, how shall I be
assured that this Priest of yours is trnly of that number, whom Christ does
point unto us by this pronowne you? The Charecter of the priest.
You will say that the shaven Crown ought to be a sufficient warraunt unto us.
Ueryly neither do I reject this outward vocation, which is made by men:
neither ought we to expect the same manner of Ambassadors to be sent by Christ
now, as he fent his Apostles heretofore. And yet for as much as the Beast
mentioned in ye Apocalips, The Character of the Beast in the Apocalips.
has his proper peculiar mark, which Christ does curse: will you show me no
better mark for your Priest, then a bald scraped scalpe? sithence Christ
sends us to the consideration of fruits, and Spiritual marks of Doctrine
and Truth? But I will not much strive with you here. Let all Crows be white
for me, and let the absolution of the marked Priest be an vndoughted Oracle for
me also. This is the point that I stand upon and demand.

Whenas the Trespassour does obtain of your Priest this absolutio^, whereof you
spoke before: From whence does this absolution receive the effectual
operation? from the priests mark? or from the Faith of the Repentaunt rather?
If from the priests mark only: then what does Faith and Baptism work in us?
or whereunto serves the Article of the Creed? I do believe Remission of
Sins? Again if it depend upon the only Faith of the Repentaunt, to what
purpose is this Priestly Confession? But if you will couple both these
together, as that in your imagination the one can be of no force without the
other: how will this kind of couples agree with your doctrine? who (making so
curious and exact a distinction of all the other parts of penance) will in
all that Sacrament leave no chinker at all for Faith, to peep through? no nor
will be acquainted with the name of faith in any part thereof? And what if a
Jew, or a Turk do with a sorrowful co^trite heart, join the Confession of his
mouth, and withal satisfaction of the guilt, as you term it? be his Sins
washed clean away therefore? I do not think so: what if a Christian man being
endued with a pure faith, bewaylyng his offenses unfeignedly and withal his
heart, lookyng upon Christ with the eyes of Faith (as upon the brazen Serpent)
do crave pardon of him, without any hochpotte of priestly Confession, shall he
obtain no salve for his soar? If you deny this, as your Lombardine
questioners do. Then would I feign learn, where was that priestly Confession,
before it was first instituted by Innocent 3. and thrust into the Church to be
freque^ted.1215? where was this so vnaduoydeable necessity then, when Christ
spoke unto the woman, thy faith has saved thee? Math. 9.
And in an other place speaking of an other woman, Where he forgave her many
sins, because she loved much? Luke. 7.
And again where excludyng all other by helps, he willed the Master of the
Synagoge to believe only? Mar. 5.
and said unto an other all things are possible to him that does believe. Mar.
9.
And to the sick of the palsy, all sins are forgeuen thee, Luke. 4.
without openyng mouth to any confession at all? what? shall we say that Sins
are not therefore forgeuen, because this word of confession was never heard of
before? or shall we say that God has not heard their confession, because there
wanted priests at that time? If it suffice not to open the secrets of the
heart unto GOD, what do these words of Chrysostom emporte? where writing upon
the 51. Psalm Homel. 2. Chrisost. upon the 51. Psalm. Homel. 2.
If thou be ashamed (says he) to confess thy Sins to any man, confess them
daily in thy heart: I bidd thee not to confess them to thy fellow servant,
which may reproach thee: confess thee to him that may heal thee. And again
in an other place, I bidd thee not to come before the people, nor that thou
accuse thy self to others: But I will have thee follow the words of the
Prophet, saying: Open thy sins unto the Lord. Confess thy faults therefore
unto God: open thine offenses unto the true Judge with hearty prayer, not with
thy tou^g, but with a remorse of conscience. etc. And yet I speak not this, as
though that private confession of sins ought not be received in the church as
unprofitable: whereas the counsel of a godly Minister is desired, or
consolation required by troubled consciences: where the exercize of private
absolution (which is the word of the Gospel) is by authority of the Gospel
uttered by the Ministers. And yet I do so allow of it, as that this name,
private Confession, (wherewith you have wickedly entangled Godly consciences)
may neither participate with any nature of a Sacrament, nor be delivered to any,
as commanded by Gods law: Moreover neither so necessary at all times, as
though without it, sins were not forgeuen to the contrite and sorrowful in
heart, grou^dyng them selves upon the infallible fortress of Faith.

Wherefore if you be so far in love with this sacred ear confession Osori.
you may a Gods name go to your Priest, as often, and as much as ye list. If we
content our selves to be washed in ye blood of Jesus Christ: if we repose all
our hope and affiaunce whatsoever in him alone, trouble us not nor hinder us, I
beseech you. For thus are we directed by the authority of the Scriptures, to
believe, that to be dypped over head and cares in this most comfortable and
sacred font, is sufficient for the clensing and purging of our sins: and
again that neither this most blessed blood of Jesus Christ is any other ways
effectual unto us, nor appliable to our comfort any other ways, then through
Faith only: which is to believe in his name. Whatsoever Resemblaunce of truth
your decrees do express unto us, doughtlesse the Scriptures cannot lie: Acts.
15.
wherein we are taught that our hearts are washed clean, by Faith: and that
remission of sins is received through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus. Acts.
26.
Addyng moreover the testimony of all the Prophets, that it must come to pass
that as many as believe in Jesus Christ: shall obtain forgiveness of their
sins. Acts. 10.
So, that needelesse Stole of your Catholic confessors, is altogether
fruteles toward the cleansing of our consciences. In the mean space if the
soul be afflicted with some more grievous scrupule, wherein brotherly
consolation may seem to be requisite, we gaynsay no man that will go to some
godly and learned Minister: nay rather we do heartily allow thereof, and we our
selves also do the same many times: yet such is our repair togethers as
tends rather to seek counsel, and comfort, then for any necessity to crave
pardon for our sins. The Reformation of Confession.
Neither do we compel any man to do so, nor do we make (to speak Chrisostomes
own words) a necessity of Freedom, neither make we a Sacrament thereof: Nor
yet require we a Beadroll of all their Sins, neither do we enforce any
person to state times of the year: Finally we do not burdeine them with any
clogge of satisfactory penance, which of all other is most horrible. Wherein
it is a wonder to see, what is be fallen upon you, and the rest of your
Catholics (Osorius.) I think verily that Dame folly her self (if could
speak with tongue) would never utter, nor do any so wittles a foolery, The
Superstition of Satisfaction.
as having first pardoned and acquitted the offendour clear from crime, to
enjoin him afterward to penance, whereby he should be compelled (after
pardon received) to make satisfaction notwithstanding: and so to send him after
into Purgatory, where he must satisfy to the uttermost far thing. I beseech
you (Right Reverend Father) for the honor of your great wisdom, if all the
filthynes of your consciences be thoroughly cleansed first by Confession, to
what purpose serve any satisfactory and penal laws, where the offense being
pardon, remains naught now to be satisfied? If they be not thoroughly cleansed,
whereunto then avails that Priestly Stole, and Priestly crossing? what
becomes of that absolution which you promise? who will ever say that his
offense is forgeuen, which must be forced to make satisfaction by some manner of
composition? Moreover if Christ have made full satisfaction for our Sins, A
poena and culpa.
and if his satisfaction be a general release of punishment and crime: what
other need is there of any human satisfaction? Again if Christ's
satisfaction be not a full satisfaction, but that there must be enjoined a
Temporal punishment, then do I demand further, what is it that the Priests
Stole and Crossing, or the Popes pardons ca^ give more to the releasing of
punishment and crime, the^ the blood of Jesus Christ the son of God was able
to give?

But to proceed: Now that this Catholic people have with this sponge of
penance clean purged all the spots and blottes of conscience so happily:
what? do they stay here? No I suppose: but steppyng foreward from virtue to
virtue: The minds being furnished after this manner, Osori. page 172.
they do forthwith address the^ selves to that most holy mystery, of all
other most miraculous, the Euchariste: not rushyng rashely thereunto, nor with
unwashed hands (as the Proverb is) but with fear and tremblyng, do humbly
kneel upon their knees, and with great reverence open their mouths to the
priest, ready to receive that heavenly banquet, in yt which they taste not any
bread at all, no wine at all, no nor any other terrestrial matter, nor yet
that substance which they do see with their eyes, and handle with their
fingers: but all substance of bread and wine being utterly driven away, they
do at one morsel receive and swallow down the very same body of Christ, which
was borne of the virgin Mary, and ye natural blood shed out of his side
(though under the form color and kind of wine and not of blood) contrary to
all sense and feelyng of eyes and hands, yea the very body in deed,
naturally, corporally, and substauncially present: the very same Christ (I say)
full and whole, in quality and quantity, with all his dimensions, even as he
sits now at the right hand of the Father, so that Christ may seem now to
dwell no longer in heaven, but to have translated him self into much more
precious and purer tabernacles: And hereupon this comes to pass. That
Priests, Monckes and Bishops, as the very familiar guestes of Christ, Osori.
page 173.
Nourished with this heavenly food, and daily more and more stre^gthened
thereby, do attain those heavenly and everlasting treasures so happily, do
withstand the rage of lust so stoughtly, and keep their vowed chastity most
purely.

And no marvel: for whosoever be so nourished with the most sacred body of
Christ, and carry him about daily not in their minds only, but in their
bodies also: how can it be chosen, but that of very necessity, From whence
that so holy life and so great chastity of the papists does proceed.
All drowsiness of sins must be shaken from them, and an heavenly dawnyng of
clear light must shine in them, and must needs be replenished with heavenly
treasures, and out of the same yield most glorious fruits of righteousness.
All which to be true the presidentes of their Angelicke holiness, and chastity,
scattered abroad every where, (of the which the common people tell so many and
so commendable tales) do manifestly declare. Let not this be forgotten among,
that whereas in the sacred holy Mass is such a miraculous operation also,
which (as it were a certain sovereign Panax, and a casket full of Pa^doraes
treasory) may serve to cure ye greefes of all malladies, The incredible force
and efficacy of the Mass.
is medicinable for the pestilence, for all noisome co^tagions, preservative
against thu^der, against Infidels, against misfortunes, against Agues, a
present remedy to obtain seasonable weather, liquour of life for ye sick, and
a clear acquitall to the dead from all pains of Purgatory, a medicinable
drenche for sick Horses and Swine: what marvel is it, if these daily
worshippers of so heavenly a treasure, being guarded with the garrison of so
inestimable a Jewel, do become such creatures, as in whose manners nothing can
be espied, but altogether chaste, and maydenly? yea poolished and beautified
with all blossoms of virtue?

But amongst these, this one thing chiefly happens very strange and
incredible to be spoken, especially in those Bishops, and Massemongers, who
being environed about with so many comfortable Sacrifices daily, whenas they be
otherwise ravished with so ardent and zealous affection toward all other
parts of Relligion, toward Masses, toward pypyng and singyng, toward
Confessions, and such like holy exercizes: that to hear any Godly Sermons, to
Preach the Gospel of peace (wherein the glory of Christ and the sauetie of the
people consists chiefly) they are so hard frosen, and so thoroughly benommed,
as that they seem scarce warm: yea and altogether without sense and feelyng
of their duty toward Christ, or of any careful regard at all of their
flock, or of any remorse of conscience to perform their function. I speak
not here of Oso. nor of a few others like unto him: against who^ this complaint
happily may not so truly be enforced, namely sithe^ce this Bishop is careful
and diligent in curyng his own charge (as him self tells us) But of other
Massemongers and shauelynges what will Osorius him self say unto me? who to
the great fraud and detriment of the Church, do so carelessly, and negligently,
attend their charge, yea and never come at it at all? They do perform their
duties by the ministry of others. Osori. page 173.
(say you) And such as of them selves are less able and unfit to preach, do
yet procure good wise and Relligious me^, not of Bucers or Martyrs Relligion,
but such as are nouseled up in the readyng of holy Scriptures, Doctors, and
holy Fathers of the Church, who have skill to teach the people pure, chaste,
and Relligious doctrine. Be it as you say Osorius, but in the mean space where
is that power and efficacy of that wonderful Sacrament, wherewith men are so
inflamed, and so raised up (as you say) to all earnest and studious endeavor
of godliness, and to the desire of attainyng all heavenly Treasory? At the
least where is that charity (which being always ready and inclined to do
good to all men by all means possible) ought not deteigne, and foreclose other
men from the knowledge of holy Scripture? And what shall we say then to those
pastors and shepheardes (who having charge of Christ's sheep, either of them
selves can not, or will not feed their flock) do not only not open their
mouths them selves unto them, but also do forbidd them the use of the
Scriptures, in that language wherewith they be acquainted? whereby they might
more easily attain to the understanding of the same by their own industry.
This contumelious injury being not in any respect collerable in the Church of
Christ, nor defensible by any coulourable excuse, yet this delicate Rhetorician
(to help the ignorance of the unlettered) seems to have found out of his
perspectiues, a certain old wormeaten quircke, or shift, framing his
Similitude from the pearcyng light of the Sun. Osorius reason to prove that
the rude people should be restrained from readyng the Scriptures.
Which being either vnpearceable for the clearenes thereof, does blind the
sight, if the eyes be over much bente thereunto: or if it shine not at all,
profits not to the^ that are enclosed in a dark dou^geon, or do turn their
eyes from it. In like manner they which turn away their dazeled eyes from the
bright light and knowledge of holy scripture, or do force the eye sight of the
mind thereunto more earnestly then is needful, do wax blind altogether.
Wherefore sithence it is so, he concludes herupon, that it is a very great
point of wisdom in them to foresee, that the Rude people be not altogether
defrauded of all light of Gods word, nor yet that they may be oppressed with
the overmuch clearnes thereof.

For Answer. For as much as the word of God is (as your self do confess)
the light of the world, I beseech you Osorius what can be more appropried or
peculiar to light, then that it spread it self abroad over all places and
persons? or what can be more contrary unto light, then to be pent up under a
Bushel? And what else does your discreet foresight and provident provision,
but shut the word of God close under a Bushel, when as you procure so pretely,
that the sacred Testament of Christ may not be delivered in any other Language,
Unknown tounges in the Papists churches.
but such as the vnletteredd cannot understand? And what is this else I pray
you, but that the rude multitude shall see no light at all, but be overwhelmed
with a perpetual dazellnes of sight, whiles he that reads, may not
understand what he does read? and whiles also in your Churches, Masses,
Ceremonies, Supplications and Sacraments, they see nothing but utter
darckenesse, and hear nothing, but in an unknown Language? Osor. page 173.
but in holy Sermones (say you) we do enstruct and teach them as much as shall
seem Necessary to the endeavor of godlynes, and Charity. As though amongst
all other, this were not the least portion of your care, whenas Bishops be
for the more part busily exercized about other affairs, some very flowbackes,
some bussardes, and blockheades, vnappt altogether to teach: and whenas
Priests attend their singing and piping, no time can be spared for
preaching. Small care had of preaching the word in the popes churches.
I speak of many of this sort: For the whole charge of teaching is thrown
upon momish Monckes, flattering Friars, and others such like Religious
Rackhells, altogether almost. And these do teach the people in deed. But what
do they teach Osorius? the word of God? or the traditions of men? do they
preach the Gospel? or do they seek to please seely women? do they persequut
their Enemies, and revenge private griefs? or preach the kingdom of heaven?
or do they scatter abroad old false fables out of the legend of lies? or out
of pupilla oculi^ or out of manipulus Curatorum? do they barcke against the
Lutheranes and Zuinglianes? and with full mouth keep a stir about the real,
natural, corporal, Identicall forms and presence, more then metaphysticall, in
the Sacrament? For these be commonly the Theames about which their whole
prating preaching is spent.

But go to. Admit that amongst those are many also, which in their preaching
do express these things, which be available to the endeavor of godliness and
piety, and for that cause do set open, and display to the view of their
audytory, the glorious crown os eternal Glory, and the horrible pains of
everlasting Torments: Yet sithence the people and unlettered are admitted to
hear such preachers, why may they not also be permitted to read at home in
their houses, the Prophettes preaching unto them in the old Testament? and the
Apostles, yea Christ him self in the new Testament, teaching them more
perfectly? forsooth you descry me here a great and dangerous Rock, to wit,
least being dazeled with the brightness of that light, which they are not able
to endure, like as men that bend the force of their eyes directly against the
sun beams, they may be overtaken with blindness. Truly I do know and
confess, that there be many things of such nature, as will require a
necessary moderation, and quallification of light. Of which sort is the
inaccessible brightness of the glory of Gods Majesty: So was also ye Apparition
of Christ, when he was manifested unto Paul: the brightness whereof exceeded
the reach of man's capacity. Not much unlike unto ye same, is ye clear
beholding of ye unspeakable righteousness of God: and the contemplation of our
own Sins without confidence in Christ: Whereof Barnarde speaks very
fittely, in a certain place: The sentence of Barnard. To much light or no
light at all.
the prayer of a Sinner is hindered two ways (says he) either by overmuch
light, or by no light at all: that Sinner is enlightened with no light, that
neither sees his own sins, nor confess them: Again that Sinner is blinded
with to much light, which sees his sins to be so great, that he does
despair of release from them. How light must be quallified according to
Barnard, that there be not too much light nor to little.
Neither of these two do pray truly. What then? this light must be quallified,
that the Sinner may behold his sins, and may pray to be forgeuen them. In
these therefore Osorius and in others like unto the same, you might well have
required a certain quallification. But where was ever any danger to be feared
of overmuch lightsomnes in any man, that were willing to read the Scriptures?
Psalm. 19.
The Psalmist does call the light of the Lord, a bright light enlightening the
eyes, not blynding the eyes: And again, Psalm.
Blessed is that man called, that does exercize himself in the Law of the Lord
day and night.

And therefore, forasmuch as the kingdom of Christ is ye very principal matter
handled through the whole Scriptures: No man ought to be forbidden from reading
the Scriptures. Ephesians. 3.
what man is able to bend the eyes of his mind or of his body sufficiently to
the searching out of the glory of this kingdom? Whereas Paul himself writing
to the Ephesianes of the incomprehensible Majesty of this glory, desires
nothing in his prayers more earnestly, then that God would vouchsafe to open
the eyes of their hearts, whereby they might perceive and know the height,
length, breadth, and depth of the knowledge, and love which is in Jesus Christ.
And the same Paul does pray in an other place, that the Ephesians may know,
Ephesians. 1.
Where is the unmeasurable greatness of his power toward us etc. But where can
a man attain to any more perfect, or plentiful knowledge hereof, then in
reading the holy Scriptures? We hear the saying of our Master Christ,
commanding all persons without exception, on this wise. Search the scriptures:
What? And shall we suffer the Romish Philistines to stop up again from us
the Cesternes of holy Scriptures, which ye mouth of ye Lord has discovered
unto us? Albeit I know that there be many which do wickedly wrest, and wrieth
the holy Scriptures, to their peuish sensuality, and corrupt heretical
affections: Yet forasmuch as this comes to pass, not through the fault of
tounges, in the which the enlightened efficacy of the holy Ghost does speak
indifferently to all creatures ingenerall without exception, but through the
perverse waywardness of some men, abusing good things for the most part, to
an evil purpose: I see no cause why the reading of holy scriptures (in what
tongue soever,) may be any thing prejudicial to the lay people: so yt they be
endued with an earnest godly desire, wh is the best interpretor to the
understanding of Gods word: On the contrary part, where so ever wa^teth this
godly affection of mind; (which is governed by the holy Ghost,) there the
reading is very perilous doubtless, yea even in the learned themselves.
Therefore where these wise fathers are so provident to preserve the unlettered
from gathering a dimnesse of understanding, by reading Gods word: I cannot
discern wherein their wisdom may be praised. To my judgment they should do
much more wisely, if themselves would employ their careful endeavor to read the
scriptures, The cause is found out why the Bishops do fle so much the light
of the scriptures.
least themselves (which do take upon them to be guides of the blind) do
become most blind of all others: So also if they do eschew those things
chiefly, which they find to be manifest untruths, and contrary to the
sincerity of the written word. But now whereas these godly Catholics do so
behave themfelues, as that they cannot choose but feel the Gospel of Christ
directly repugnant against their intolerable pride, their horrible cruelty,
their peevish decrees, their stately dignities, their unmeasureable
covetousness, their pompous trayue, and their unspeakable lust, and portlye
Lordlinesse, their filthye superstition, and abominable Idolatry: what marvel
is it, if they provide so circumspectly, that the greater part of the people
may not become acquaynted with the Scriptures? because they may more freely
disport themselves, in that general blindenes of men, and rule the roast as
they list.

There remains now to treat of, the Authority of Popes and Bishops, What
kind of authority it is of the Popes and Bishops in the Popish church Osor.
page 173.
because Osorius does make a fresh challenge herein, and offers the field
with a new onset, albeit of the same matter has been spoken sufficiently
already. And because as seems by his writing, the same does consist chiefly in
this: that it may restrain the lictiousnes and unbridled lust of men, and may
exclude from the congregation of Christians such as persist their wickedness
wilfully and obstinatelye. etc. Doubtless mankind may think that the state
of man's life is come to good pass, if it be so that the general ordering of
public chastity must hang upon your authority and regiment, ^ seems to me to
be of this condition, as if the oversight of the common treasory should be
credited to a Spe^dall, or a Dicer: or the Liuetenau^tshippe of a Province
should be committed to a notoryous Traitor. And surely hereof I think it comes
to pass, that we are so much beholding unto them, for the unspeakable
virginity of our maidens, and for the incredible chastity of the matrons: yt we
have also so few hoorehunters, and adulteries committed in our parishes: that
there be no Brothell neastes of filthy fowls in the city of Rome, and that we
hear of no priests Concubines, within, nor without the walls of that City:
so great, and so wonderful silence used in holy confessions: So yt it is
altogether needeles now to rippe up ye remembrance of that Constantinopolitane
Deacon and matrone for whose cause Nectarius the Bishop there did abrogate
all manner of private confessions. Out of the Trepartite history. 9. Book.
cap. 35.
And that I may now pass over in silence innumerable other in no respect more
chaste examples, and factes of Bishops and Priests, which being
notwithstanding not unknown unto your selves, ye lulle a sleep in
confesu^ons: As it is not my part in deed to rippe abroad the rude reuelles of
your lives, nor to stir abroad the stinking dunghill thereof: pype up and
play your pageauntes as privily ye list, though not so chastely as ye ought,
yet as covertly as ye can: Si non cast tame^ caute.
your mysteries appertain not unto me. There is one that beholds you, whose
eyes ye can neither deceive, nor escape his judgment. This one thing will I be
bold to speak, that it is not all gold that glistereth: nor are they al
gelded which vowing yt vow of chastity, are presmounted to Bishops and
priestly dignitye. Nay rather it is greatly to be feared, least among those
self same counterfeyt Eunuchs, are over many, which under the visor of
yealing Eunuchs play the parts of crauine Chereas.

But if those flames, and firebrandes of lust and lechery he thoroughly
mortified by this pontifical provision (as you say) herein surely I do commend
your diligence, and allow well your providence. But this makes me to wonder in
the mean space, what should be the cause, that (whereas you yield over all
other forrayne heinous offenses to the sword of the civil magistrate) ye
reserve to your coram, and court of conizau^ce, only all manner of
presentmentes touching lechery, incest, adulteries, fornication, and other such
filthy stench of inordinate incontine^cy. And I know not whether there lurk
also any other mystical matter of closer conueyau^ce to be decided by that
Censure Apostolic. For where this your unmarried life (which you profess
contrary to the common course of nature) is subject to so many the more
horrible filthiness, you have been very wisely circu^spect in this behalf, to
sequester the civil magistrate from intermedling herein, reserving the
consideration thereof to your own courts and conu^stories, and that of some
singular suttlery and policy, as it seems. By means whereof if any thing
fall out unhonestly handled amongst men of your coat, the same may be coucht
close in your covert confessions, but if any lay person shall chance to tread
his shoe awrye, the commodity thereof may redound to your coffers as profitable
for the pursse: wherein although (to say the truth) I cannot tell what
certeintye I may determine of your dealings, yet this one thing does minister
me much matter of suspicion: That amongst so many daily and hourly whooredomes
and adulteries (whereof some lay men now and then pay for the pottadge,
especially the poor) never any priest hitherto has been known to be cited to
your courts for whooredome or adultery, or put to any penance for the same.

But to confess thus much unto you, which cannot well be denied: that in all
well ordered commonweals, consideration ought to be had of no one thing more
circumspectly, then that provision to be made upon some grievous penaltye for
the punishment of filthy lust, and unbridled licentiousness of lewd living:
yet do I not see any such great necessitye, why the authority and oversight of
such punishments, should be more appropriate to the jurisdiction of your
consistories, then to the temporal magistrate. And to admit that in some
respect, it may be lawful for you to determine in such cases of incontinency:
Yet this imports no such necessity, as that the christian people should
aduau^ce your pontifical royalty to so outrageous an excess, or that the
popes and bishops them selves should magnifye their majesty with such Pompeous
Lordlines, so far above Kings and Emperors, as to ouerlord the^: or that they
should ouerflow in such an unmeasureable excess of Possessions and treasure:
or that they should become so mighty Monarchs of the world, ruffling in so
glorious and glittering a show, waited upon with so huge a train of attendauntes
and service: or that they should in so princely palaces lead so delicate and
sumptuous lives, in idleness and lust, pampering up palfraies for their
pleasures, and dogg^ for delight: or that they should not be contented to be
carried on horse back, but (as the Ark of God in the old time upon men's
shoulders) being hoyst up aloft upon the shoulders of Dukes, offerre themselves
to the gaze of the multitude, not so much to be uewed, as to be kneeled unto,
and worshipped. And can you say now that this Seraphicall majesty was either
delivered unto them from others? or raked to themselves by their own tyranny,
for the punishment of lust, and not rather to support and mayntayn it? As
though if popes and bishops were orderly used (as sits meetest for their
personages,) the world should want meet magistrates to punish fornication and
adulteries: I speak not this to the derogatio^ of the authority of godly
ministers, and bishopps, which I do heartily with they may thoroughly enjoy, yet
would I the same to be no usurped power, but a true and lawful authority. How
far the lawful authority of the church extends it self.
Neither, do I desire the authority of good and Godly Bishops to be empayred,
(that authority I mean whereunto they are authorized by Gods word), but I like
not that Tragical Tyranny of counterfeit Cloysterers, and popish prelates. Let
them therefore enjoy that authority that Christ has endued them withal, a
Gods name: so that they employe the same to public commodity and advancement
of Christ's glory, and not to their private profit, and cherishing of idleness
and Pomp.

And forasmuch as the countenance of every Ambassador depends upon the
majesty of the person whom he represe^teth, surely the authority of such as
represent the person of Christ upon earth, must needs be of very great
estimation: For this was the legacy that Christ himself the Testator of the
new Testament bequethed unto them. Luke 10.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. And
again, whose Sins soever ye remitte, the same shall be remitted. etc. Ioh.
20.
This is a great authority doubtless: but due consideration must be had of the
causes, whereupon this authority must be exercised, and of yt persons with whom
it must be reu^ant. That is to say: in none other persons, but in those, to
whom the same Testator speaks, saying: Receive ye the holy ghost. etc.
Moreover ye whole force of this Euangelical authority does consist in the power
of the holy ghost, The Ecclesiastical dignitye wherein it consists.
not in the glorious ostentation of Pomp: and must be employed to edify
withal, not to destroy: to subdue all hauty arrogance, extolling it self
against ye knowledge of God, unto the obedience of Christ: not to cut the
throats of the poor flock, which seeks nothing else, but the obedience and
glory of Christ. And therefore such as represe^t the majesty of Christ upon
earth, if they be bold of counterfayting and hipocrisy, must needs be exalted,
yea and in great authority. But in the mean space, let such braggers and
boasters be well advised, what, and whose person they do represent, There is
one power of the church, an other of this world.
not the person of Moses, but of Christ: not of a controller, but of a
teacher, a comforter, a favorer, a refresher, and of one that is full of
compassion: not of a furious fretter and raging revenger of every gnatte in the
Sky. For he was a mild Servant, but preserving all, poor, yet enriching
all: boasting very little, but giving abundance: Iniuried of all, but
injurious to none: Humble in heart, meek in speech, base to behold, but in power
mighty, teaching with authority: so void of al color to aue^ge, that he would
pray for his enemies, and not so much as brusing a broken reed under his
feet: enlightening all men coming into this world, burning none. And the day
shall come, when he shall come again in glory, to judge both the quick and the
dead. All which notwithstanding he remains one self same person still, which
continually cries out in the gospel, John. 5.
it is not I that do accuse you, before the father, but there is one that does
accuse you. Now such as will take upon them, to represent the person, must
resemble him likewise in manners and life. And yet the Church of God is not
without her Jurisdiction I confess. But in this Church I reckon to be reu^ant
as well Emperors and Princes, as Popes and prelates. Moreover a distinction also
must be made here betwixt the flesh and the spirit: that without confusion of
Jurisdiction each authority may enjoy it own privilege. But of this hereafter
by the sufferaunce of God.

Having thus ouerrunne the principal points that concern the censures,
consistories, and chaunceries of the holy mother Church of Rome. It follows
now in order that with like diligence, we harken to that which is vsuallye done
in Churches. Wherein the godly reader is to be forewarned (by some preface as
it were, to keep his cou^tenau^ce somewhat gravely a while, and not to smile)
whiles our Osor. recke^ up in rank, yt comely kale^der of his church
holidayes, and solemn ceremonies of his double feasts, in a long brabling
beadroll. And yet has he not i^^bled up all the ceremonies thereof, nor his
ever able to number them. For they are as infinitely past number, as they be
ridiculous and Apish. But brauyng out the better sort of them, he fetches
their pedigree from a wonderful far compass, you will say, that the man was
either at excellent good leisure, or destitute of some necessary matter to
occupy his pregnant wit upon, which would undertake so weerysome a course for
his Rhetorical ^uffe, in so tunable trinkettes of these Romish Relics.

And first of all beginning at the Kalendes of Dece^ber: at what time the
Church of Rome making preparation for the coming of the Lord, Of the Rites and
state holy days of the Romish church, Osori. page 174.
and so forth proceedyng foreward to other state feasts, as every of them
comes about by the course of the year, from the beginning to the end, does
accustom it self to great solemnity and prayer, and sets down in order
the high and solemn ceremonies celebrated in every several feast for renewyng
the joyful remembrance of Divine things. But in the mean time, how idelly
the common people bestow the time in these feasts, How great occasion of
idleness and dronkennes the multitude of holy days do engender.
how they plye yt pau^che franckly, tappe the can freely: hoppe and dance
lustely, swill and swincke soundly, make meery mightily: drink dronke
deuoutely: scratch and byte boystorously, moyle and turmoyle madly, dyce,
card, and surffett sumptuously, more like bellygoddes, then godly, defilyng
them selves more in filthy behavior beastly, then in ten other workyng days
employed orderly: Osorius makes not a word so much slyly, and herein has he
not played the fool, very wisely? Moreover he makes no mention at all of the
manner of the prayers used in these Sacred Saturnalles, in their croochynges,
maskyng Masses, Anthemes, Songs, Sonettes, Sacrifices, lamentable Dirges, in
their gaddynges and Processions, how odious and filthy vnseemelynes, how
horrible Idolatry, How blasphemous and Idolatrous the songs of the Romish
Churchebe.
impiety, and superstition, isvsed in those Prayers, Hymns, and cunnyng
chaunting, even abominable to be named. Wherein I so much the more commend
the wisdom of the man: who thought better craftily to cloak those
clouteries, then to display them to the view. As when in that solemn feast of
S. Thomas Becket the Church prays very devoutly, that the blood of S. Thomas
may make a way for their prayers to wend, where Christ our Lord and Savior
before did ascend. And again making Invocation to Thomas him self, it
prays on this wise, O sweet S. Thomas give us thy helping hand, confirm
them that stand, raise them that are fallen, reform our manners, conversation,
and lives, and direct us into the way of peace. etc. Not unlike unto that where
amongst other Co^fessours S. Swythune is called upon, that he would vouchsaue
by his godly intercession, to wash away our sins: Where S. Rock is spoken
unto. Honor and glory be given unto thee, holy S. Rock, how glorious is thy
name, blessed Rock, which with thy intercessions and prayers have skill, to
cure all diseases? come down and preserve us from botche and pestilence, and
grant us a sweet and wholesome air. Whenas also S. Albane is commanded to
power out his prayers, for the sauetie of the faithful: When Wenefred is
called upon, that she will bring them to the heavenly joys, which do
celebrate her memory: Whenas in the Feast of all Saints prayer is made to the
Saints, that their merits may bring us to the kingdom of heaven. etc. And
that the holy company of Martyrs, the confession of Priests, and the chastity
of the Uirgines, may cleanse us from our Sins. etc. Again in the Anthemes
song of the blessed Uirgine Mary mother of Christ: Let the Reading of the
Gospel help us through the merits of our Lady. And again where they pray,
that the merits of our Lady may bring us to the heavenly kingdom. Again in
the Feast of the Invention of S. Stephen, in the Legendes of Dunstane, in the
miracles of S. Nicolas, and S. Katherine, in the Assumption of our blessed
Lady: in the Feast of Corpus Christi: in Relics Sunday, in the Feast of the
five wounds of S. Asisian, what monstrous Fables, what an incredible quantity
of detestable lies, what manner, and how fruitelesse and wittlesse trinkettes,
toys, and trifles, what guegawes and more the^ childish maskyngs and mommeries
in the rest of your holy days are heaped up and haled together, to delight
and please simple women and fools? I suppose surely one Homere were not able
to reckon up all the rabble of them in one whole Iliad.

But let us hear Osorius him self telling his own tale of his holy days.
The holy Fathers (says he) did make preparation for the coming of Christ.
This is true: and we know that he is come long sithence, and do heartily rejoice
for it. What does Osorius and his holy Fathers, look for else? That Christ the
Son of GOD shall be yet looked for to come again in the flesh? No. But that we
call to remembrance the hearty and earnest affections of the holy Fathers that
were before us. What a jest is this? As though it sufficed not them, which did
look for the coming of Messiah to have their rejoicing in Christ if they were
holy men in deed, unless they leave their solemn and holy Feasts behind
them to be celebrated, as well as yt memorial of Christ? or as though we may
seem not to have done our duties sufficiently, if we do embrace the coming
of our Savior with all mindefulnes and faith, unless we stick fast in the
shadows that went before?

At the length our minds being in this sort prepared for the coming of
Christ: Christemasse day.
Christemasse day forthwith approaches. Yet eue^ here in this very entrey may
some scrupule arise, whether Osor. Rale^der do halte ye or nay. For Christ was
not borne in the day time, but in the night. But I will not trouble Osor. holy
days about this. In which feast day according to the solemnity of the day,
Organes and other instruments of Music sound very loud: Psalms and Hymns
are song in pricksong and descant: Notes are warbled and song as loud as the
throats can stretch. The Belles from the Turrettes on high make a wonderful
ianglyng, and fill the whole air with their noise: So that now in so great and
pleasant a melody of Organes, songs, notes, voices, and ringyng of Belles,
nothing wants, but our Osorius to dance in the middle of the Quier with his
myter on his head: to speak nothing mean whiles of waxelightes, of their
gorgeous attire in Copes, and Uestimentes, of the furniture of Aultars with
Silver plate, of perfumes, burning of Frankensence, and odoriferous smelles, of
the glorious variety of Silver and Gold, of their solemn Processions, and
their gay maskyng at Masses. For upon this one Feast every shauelyng may say
three Masses, according to an ancient custom. And all these tend to this end
at the length, to raise us up to behold the mighty Son of God in the
weakness of a very young sucklyng Babe lyeng naked in the Cradle. After this
sort forsooth do our Popes and Bishops use to make a show of Christ their
Savior unto the people, horn in extreme poverty, them selves ouerflowyng in
unmeasurable Riches: lyeng naked in a Cradle, them selves like Monarchs
dwelling in Princely Palaces: wrapped in ragged and beggarly swathlyng
cloutes: them selves glitteryng in purple, gold, and precious stones: contented
with a little milk, them selves engluttyng Partriches, Peacockes, Woodcockes,
Phesau^tes, and most delicate Cates, always stuffing their crawes with most
exquisite vyandes: lyeng in a mau^ger, whiles them selves sing sweetly in
Churches with Organes, Shawmes, and Trumpettes, ^ullyng in melody and
delights. A good fellowshyp Christian Reader, is not here a notable show of
Christ? As though Christ the Son of God appeared for none other purpose, but
to become a gazyng stock, and to keep men's memory occupied with the only
outward history of his being on earth.

But the first day of January, which is the eight day after the birth of
Christ, and so forth in the other feasts: what is done in every of the solemn
Feasts, but a remembrance of yt thing done before? Of the Circumcision of
Christ: of geuyng him a name: of the Child being sought out by the wise men,
of the blazing Star that guided the wise men, of purifieng the Virgin that
was most pure of her self, and other circumstaunces belongyng to the same: we
call to remembrance also Symeon embracyng Christ in his arms: the rejoicing
of Anna, finally the Oracles and Prophecies of them concerning Christ. And what
more after all this? And all these are celebrated by the Church (says he)
after a most solemn manner, yea and with tor^helight, and waxelightes, burning
on midday forsooth to the view of the beholders, to the end, the remembrance
of the same may be more deeply emprinted in their mynds. Behold here a new
asse^bly, new joys, new trippyng and dauncyng, new sightes and shows, goodly
spectacles and helps are set out for weak memories. But such they be yet, as
do only feed ye eyes of the beholders, edify their minds nothing at all: to
wit: Hymns, Prayers, praises, sweet songs, and sweet lessons I confess,
but such as ye unlettered multitude understand not so much as syllable: The
Organes pyping in the mean space, the Belles Ringing: And why do ye not shoot
of Gunnes as well to awaken the people, if happily they fall a sleep in the
Church? But how much were it better for the people Osorius, and more beseeming
your personages, if the rabble of the holy days were cut shorter, which rather
enge^der sleuthe and idleness, then piety and godlynes: and that ye would
convert your Ceremonies, Masses, Diriges, blessings, prayers stretched out in
a superfluous lauishnes of babblyng, Hymns, Canticles, Uersicles, and these
Festival melodies, into wholesome and holy Sermons, whereby you may train the
godly and well affected hearts of honest Christians, through some godly
exhortatio^s and instructions, from that fruitelesse gazing upon palpable
poppettes, to know the principal points of true holiness and everlasting
salvation: which might rather edify their faith, the^ delight the ears and
the eyes. Now what avail all these vain toys, though upon Ashewednesday they
Cross and besmeare their heads and foreheades with Ashes? Page 175.
Ashewednesday.
though they carry about Palms and scatter flowers from out their Turrettes
upon Palmesonday, though on good Friday and Easter Even they wash the feet of
the poor, Palmesonday. Good Friday.
though they consecrate oil and fire, wash the Altares, bless the Fontes,
creep to the Cross barelegged and barefooted, and offer eggs also? Easter
Eue^ Easterday.
what avails it if Easter day be celebrated most melodiously and solemnized
most sumptuously? what if Asscention day and Whitsonday, Ascension day.
Whitsonday. All Holle^day.
and the Feast of all Saints be passed over with no less bravery? if besides
this outward show and vain glorious pomp nothing be ministered else to raise
up Faith to the contemplation of matters of far greater importance? For
what may we think, when Christ was first Circumcized, when he was first named
A Savior, when in flood Jordan he was Baptized of John: and manifested again
to be the Son of God by a most excellent voice from heaven: when as he was
tempted of the Devil after six weeks fasting: whenas having finished yt
triumph of his Resurrection, and asscended into heaven, he powered upon his
Apostles cloven fiery tounges, may we think (I say) yt all these were done to
none other end, but yt we should in remembrance of them, keep idle holy days
in pastyme and play? And yet we do not much find fault with the memorials of
those things in godly affected minds, whe^as they be rightly taught unto them,
as certain helps, and aids of godly exercizes: eue^ so also we do not
utterly reject those holy days approved of ancient time, by use and custom:
yea rather we do in many places reteigne and keep the same Holy days as they
do, albeit not with like ceremony, as far as we may without reproach of
superstition. For even we also do assemble our selves together, and come to the
Church celebratyng the memory of the birth of Christ, his Resurrection, and
Ascension, and the Feast of Pe^therost also, but not as a memorial alone,
(whereof we ought to be myndefull every day and every hour) but seeking an
occasion of the day, to hear somewhat that may conduce to sound and pure
Religion, and the edifieng of our faith unto salvation.

What thinge^ be reproved in the papists holy days and ceremonies.
And therefore we do not simply deny, and reject these holy days, but the manner
of solemnizyng the same, the stinking abuses, superstitious worshyppyng: ye
multitude of holy days, your so^ges and sonnettes for the most part
idolatrous, your prayers and inuocations most manifestly repugnaunt and
injurious to the glory of Christ: those we do utterly abolish, and not without
cause. The Jews had their solemn holy days in times past, though in number
not so many, yet prescribed by God him self. They had also their blood
offringes and Sacrifices, Fastings, Easter, Solemnities, and the brazen
Serpent: whereof as long as they followed the lawful use (as being certain
signs, and mean instruments, and shadows leadyng to the ends, whereunto
they were instituted) they were acceptable enough unto God. But after that by
turnyng catte in ye pan, they placed the chief worshyppyng of God, and
principal mark of true Religion in those things, which of their own nature
were the last, and of least value: how horrible and execrable they became in
the sight of God no man can tell you better, then Esaias y^ Prophet: Esaias. ^.
What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, 'I am full of them:
the Burnt offering of your Rams, and fat of your fattlinges, the blood of
your Calves, of your Lambs, and of your Goats I would not have: when you come
before my presence, who sought for these things at your hands to walk so in
my Courts? offer no more any Sacrifice in vain: your Incense is abominable
in my fight: your new Moons, and Sabbathes, and other holy days I will not
away with: your assemblies are wicked: my soul hates you Kalendes and solemn
Feasts, I am grieved with these things and ouerladen with them. And when you
stretche forth your hands unto me, I will turn away my face from you, and when
you multiply your prayers, I will not hear you. etc. And yet God him self
ordained all these things in his own law. What then? Does God condemn the
things which he commanded? No truly: but because they wrested and forced
those things to an other end then they were instituted for, because they were
fastened wholly to those, and had settled the chief foundation of Religion in
these Rites, neglecting in the mean time the greater and high matters of the
Law: this now was it that the Lord could not away withal.

Go to: Lets us also now take a through view of your notable Feasts and
solemn worshyppynges, Popish worshyppyng compared with the worshyppyng of the
Jews in the old law.
and let us compare your ordinances (who live now under the Spiritual law)
with that people that lived under the carnal Law: For they neither worshypped
their Sacrifices nor burnt offringes, at any time: they never painted the
resemblaunce or counterfaite of Gods cou^tenau^ce in table, or picture: they
never bedecke their Temples with Images: they did never set down any visible
signs or portraictes of Patriarchs, or Saints to be gazed upon: neither did
they ever gadde on Pilgrimage to visit the^: to their Psalms and Prayers they
had nothing patched else: nothing intermixed from else where: they made no
intercession to Saints and Sainctesses: they never made invocation to the
dead: In their Lessons was never any thing heard but Gods scripture only: nor
any thing pronounced out of the Scriptures, that was not in their mother tongue
intelligible enough of all sorts young and old indifferently. Briefly there
was nothing exercized, but by the express prescript and commandment of Gods
law: so that the state and condition of the Jewish Feasts may seem to be
far more ^afie and tolerable, then yours, if we have respect to the only
outward form and superstition of minds. And yet as I said before, I do not
stand so much in this point, but that Christians may have their holy days, and
solemn Feasts, wherein they may refresh them selves, and be raised to the
remembrance of Gods benefits, and manifold mercyes bestowed upon us, so that
ye same be observed without prejudice of faith, in simplicity of unfeigned piety.
Neither am I so curious to have yt comely traditions of our elders to be
abolished, so ye true Religion, remain mean whiles vndeffled: The
superstition of the people in their state holy days and ceremonies ought to be
reformed.
the use whereof consists not in outward ceremonies, nor in corporal
exercises: nor in places and times, but in spirit and truth: and so, that false
preposterous and hipocriticall devotion be abandoned, wherewith God waxed wroth
and was highly displeased. For how many christians may a man see, which do
measure the chief worshyppyng of God by any other ends almost, then by their
daily frequenting churches, often? hearing of Masses, keeping the euens and
holidays orderly, fasting the Ember days carefully, Osori. page 175.
reiterating their Paternosters and Aues often and solemnly: pouring out their
Sins into their priests bosoms in Lent treatably, croochyng and kneelyng to
the Crucifixe barefooted and barelegged humbly: Receiuyng the very body and
blood of Christ under the forms of bread and wine once a year, yea even in
their death beds devoutly, and that besides there remains naught to be
superadded to attain perfect salvation believing steadfastly, nor that they be
ought indepted to Christ vdoubtedly, but suppose unfeignedly that they ought
forthwith for these causes receive heaven for their meed of very duty.

I beseech you: If Esaias the Prophet lived now again amongst Christians, or S.
Paul the Apostle: and should behold these our serions and toylesome triflinges
in our temples, these cunnyng counterfaytes, Images, Alters, bread
worshippinges, and the whole face of Christian Religion so transformed into
Apishe ceremonies: and should see how pretty holy you will show your selves in
trinckets and toys, and how retchles and unmindful of the principal points
of doctrine: how niggardly skraping from relieuing the poor, how vnmeasurably
prodigal in buildyng of Temples, in decking of Monasteries, in enriching of
churches, in costly coapes, in Jewels and plate, in dawbing of walls, in
glyding of posts, how excessiuely sumptuous: In corporal exercises which are
of small value how foreward and courageous: but in the exercise of true pietye
(which is profitable for all things) how little or no care at all employed, as
that it may seem we have either forlorn all mercy and compassion, or that
pity and mercy have forsaken their own intralles and vowelles. Moreover in
judging our brethren, how frowardly headstrong, in burning and killing, how
^oo^cherly cruel and Sauadge. If Esaias the Prophet and the Apostle Paul (I
say) did behold these things, and withal did see before their eyes, such and
so much christian blood sucked out and spilt by your means: so many thowsandes
of martires murdered, and sent under the Altar: would not he most rightfully?
or would not God by the mouth of his Prophet, in much more fiercenes and
veheme^cy of stomach, redubble ye saying against you more justly, then he did
sometimes against ye Jews? I will not accept your holidayes, your sabbaothes,
and solemn feastinges: your asse^blies are wicked, my soul hates your
kale^ds and sole^nities, I am grieved with the^, and am ouerlade^ with the^. Why
have we fasted, and thou have not beholden us? Esaias. 58.
Behold in the day of your fasting, your minds are inclined to wickedness: You
fast to contention and strife, and oppress your brethren cruelly, wrongfully
and without cause. Be your washed: be ye cleansed, remove away the evil
imaginations of your hearts out of my sight. What would Paul have added
moreover? who endued you at the first with a far other manner of doctrine, if
he should now behold your doctrines, your rites, inuocations, decrees, masses,
multitude of holidayes, your ceremonies, worshippinges, croochings and
kneelinges, and the disorderous abuses of all your religion: if he should note
that the co^fide^ce and affyaunce (wh he taught to be placed in Christ only)
were by you transposed and translated into an infinite heap of advocates and
proctors and rent even in sunder by you: Would he acknowledge you for
Christians I pray you? or at least standing in great fear of you, would he not
exclaim again upon you? You observe days and months, Gala. 4.
I am afraid of you. etc.

But it is well: Osorius does now at length begin to speak somewhat to the
matter. I do confess in deed (says he) that al those things whereof I have
made me^cio^, and all others of the same sort which I have omitted (for I think
it not needful to rehearse al by name) are not of any such great perfection:
Osor. page 176.
for they be certain principles, and certain ^ecessary helps for us, where
with as yet our weak and mortal estate has some familiarity and
acquayntaunce, and of this we have good proof by daily experience. etc. The
long process therefore that you made of state feasts, and other gadding
holidays in ye year, belike are of ye quality then, (as you have said Osor.)
of yt wh though you seem to have rehearsed very many, yet have you not
remembered all: In deed in this you speak the truth: For you have ouerskipt
almost an innumerable multitude besides these, to wit: the feasts of the
Sayncts and she Saints: And first of Saynct John Baptist, the feasts of the
Apostles and Martyrs, moreover of Confessors, Uirgyns, Bishops and Abbots:
of the invention and exaltation of the holy cross, of hallowing of Ashes, of
Gangeweeke and procession, of Saint Michael, of Saint Peter's chair, Saint
George, Saint Nicholas, Saint Katherine, Saint Thomas, of the assumption,
co^ception, nativity and Annnuciation and visitation of our blessed Uirgine
Mary: of the patron of the church, dedication day, and Relicksonday. And who
is able which tongue to express all, which in such clusters are crepte into the
Calendar, that it might justly have been feared, least (if the popes holiness
had continued a while longer in good credit) all working days should have
been turned into holidays, or everlasting Jubilees.

But forasmuch as Osorius is contented to pare away these skrappes, as not
altogether so necessary for his commentaries, we will be contented also to make
as little account of them, and to return again to Osor. description wherein
the same also which he does very fittely deny, is not altogether true, namely:
that the things which he rehearsed, are not valuable as perfect, but are
certain principles and necessary helps provided for such as groaning yet
under the burden of flesh and blood, are not thoroughly humbled in spirit. But
I beseech you (good honest man) what manner of speech is this? what kind of
helps be these whereof you treat? is it even so Sir? Principles of Osorius
Religion.
to carry candles burning at high noone in the eyes and gaze of all men, call
you this a help for weak memoryes? or rather a plain president of ridiculous
superstition? to worship the crucifixe barefooted and barelegged), to fall
groueling before Images, to set up tapers and ca^dles burning before them, to
part stakes of the honor due unto God, with he Saints and she Saints, to
make vows unto them, to crave their help in mishappes and misfortunes, to
(...) as much to their merits, as to Christ himself: to nourish the
^^norau^ce of the unlettered in an unknown tou^g, to remove the unlearned
multitude from the reading of scriptures, to carry them with dumme and cold
ceremonies where ye list, to feed the ears with music, and song, whose
souls you ought to have fed with the word of God, and enstructed unto faith:
finally to make a greater brable and stir for the breach of these holy days,
and neglecting those ceremonies, yea to hate your brethren more deadly, rack
them to more tortures for these peevish Bables more spightfully, then for not
performing the law of the Lord: Will you persuade us to account these to be
principles of piety? or shall we boldly call them rather mysteries of iniquity?
and plain blocks and lettes of true Religion?

What shall we think of this? that not contented yet to have so largely
debated of the celebrating of holy days, and the manifold Fruit of the same,
he proceeds further and beats the nail to this issue, that he makes now
of the very same principles, a very necessity, which erst he vouchsafed no
place toward the attayning of perfection. So that now these shadows and
signs of holy things (though of themselves imperfect) do yet yield great
helps to perfect pietye not only in these that are weak, but seem also very
necessary for the most perfect men, and most purely catholic, toward the
attayning of perfect Religion, How much commodity and necessity there is in
outward ceremonies and signs in Osorius judgment.
Because man's mind has always some familiarity and acquayntaunce with
transitory things of this world. Which if be not poolished with this most
excellent skanning of mysteries, waxes of her own nature very dull quickly,
and is overwhelmed with forgetfulness. And no marvel: For as much as this new
and wonderful light of the Evangelical knowledge (which has transsigured
those Lutheranes) has not yet shined so brightly in the eyes of those me^, nor
are as yet so thoroughly carried away from this corporal familiarity, as that
they ca^ want these signs of heavenly things without great peril, as these
Celestial and Divine men can do, For with this skoffe does he note them (whom
Luthers doctrine has enstructed) by a certain figure called Sarcasmus.
Sarcasmus a nipping skoffe.


But to answer your pleasa^ut scoff (good master Bishop. An Answer to
Osorius mock.
) First what acquaintau^ce and familiarity you have with the state of murtall
men let other men judge: The papists acquayntaunce with mortal fragility.
Surely I could heartily wish that you Massemongers and Shauelinges would take
less acquaintance of your neighbors wives and daughters, with c^^cubynes and
drenches of Baudrye: to stay here, and to rippe up no more of your horrible
dealinges. But if you be not as yet estrau^ged from ye assaults of ye flesh, as
you do affirm, nor have yet so mortiffed the flesh, but the general ftaylty
of nature will violently carry you away typsituruy, as well as other men, now
and then, into the natural infirmities of the flesh, what means the^ that
rash temeraryous rushing rudely into vows, wherewith very solemnly you swear
sacred and perpetual virginity, both to God and unto men? The vow of chastity.
As though there were nothing to be feared in you, of that natural and general
disease of imbecillitye, and weakness, that is otherwise common to all men
ingeneral? Which if you do as faythfullye perform, as you do rashlye swear,
and vow (being a matter above the reach and capacity^ of humayne ability) I
cann see no cause to the contrary, but that we may reply these Surnames upon
you much sooner, to wit to call you Celestial men and more then Divine. For
as concerning Luther and others of his profession, howsoever it pleases you to
mockemeary (being a very merry man, trick and trym altogether for holidays,
and all kind of pleasureablenes) yet did they never challenge to themselves so
Celestial and Divine natures, but that (as men compassed about with weak and
frail bodies as all other mortal men are) they wa^ted their introductions,
yea and enured themselves to the same not unwillingly.

For both Religion, and the Church of Christ has her rudymentes, has also her
ceremonies and introductions, What Ceremonies are necessary with the Christians.
not only profitable (to say as you say) but very nacessary also. I speak of
those rudimentes and ceremonies chiefly, which Christ himself delivered to his
Church, in number but very few, but in use of greatest force and
effectualnesse. Namely: Baptism and the Supper of the Lord: Baptism. The
Communion. All Ceremonies are not to be condemned: yet in the allowaunce of
Ceremonies: Reason and choice must be ^^d^
the one whereof Christ did institute as a pledge of our profession: the other
as aperpetuall memoryall of himself. For other rudimentes of piety which are
practiced in external actions, Christ left none besides these, of any express
commandment. And yet if there be any other ceremonies profitable and
appliable for the present time, the Lutheranes do not altogether abolish them:
But the matter does bewray that these ceremonies, rytes, Gamboldes, holidayes,
and new fangled ceremonies (which your Clergy does daily patche upon the
old) are for the more part, not only fruitles, but also very Botches and
Cankers of the pure and true Religion. And this much hitherto of the holy and
sweet mother church of Rome, and of the universal Regiment of her faith,
ceremonies, and holidays. Of the which because Osorius seems to himself to
have spoken sufficiently, returning at the length to the Lutheranes, bends
his declamation against them, raked and skraped from out of the very bowels of
Rhetoric: wherein he thrusts himself upon the stage to play the part and
to expostolate with Luther in such wise, as that in all that notable furniture
of words, skarcely ought can be found else, then was sometimes especially noted
in Anaximenes by one on a time to wit, to have whole fludds of words, but not
a dropp of good matter.

It were great pity to rehearse the whole speech a fresh, then the which
nothing can be more ouerlauish and babbling. The effect thereof (as briefly as
may be compiled together) tends to this end. These Lutheranes do seem to
have taken upon them, a very great and labor some burden: Who seeing the
Church of Christ lame^tably enta^gled in such dissolute lice^tiousnes of manners
and doctrine, Osorius spightfull ^nuectiue by a Rhetorical figure wrest back
upon the Lutheranes.
almost ready to fall to the ground, could not only be co^te^ted to be
agreeued thereat, and with bare prayer and well wishing hearts help to
vnderpropp it, but that they would attempt to put their hands thereto also, and
by their industry, practice the reformation of that which was past al recovery:
and because they saw that the inue^tio^ of man was not able to cou^teruayle so
great an inconvenience by any means, Page ^77.
they undertook the matter by the only word of God, renouncing all human
policy and industry. Go to and to what end are all these so far fetch and
false also Osorius? at length our Tertullius goes forward. But because the
efficacy of Gods word does consist, not in bravery, and braggery of words, but
in virtue, in the duetyes of life, and the works of righteousness. Osor. page
178.
He does desire therefore, that some president of this divine workmanship may
be showed him, wherein some show at the least of this recovery and preservation
of the Church, may show it self. But forasmuch as there could not possibly be
a Reformation, unless those obstackles were utterly taken away, which gave the
first occasion of this general craze: even as in Physic, wholesome potiones
are not ministered, before superfluous and noisome humors be thoroughly purged:
and in buildings, like as unless the old walls and rotten posts be first
plucked down, no new building is supplied: even so and after the same manner
the Lutheranes did purpose with themselves to proceed with their work. Which
Osorius mislyketh nothing at all. For he thinks it expedient, that
superstitions be utterly cut of: because virtue commonly has not greater
Enemies then her own counterfaytes. Moreover where he sees many abuses taken
away, scattered abroad, and krusht in pieces, neither does Osorius reprove this
in the^: so long as this alteration is profitable for the Christian common
weal: and that in stead of these which be removed, some supply be made of
better. Now what is thrown down he does see plainly: but what is new
builded he sees not: yea it is apparaunt enough what things are moyled up
by the Roots, but what is planted in that place, he confesses he cannot as
yet discern. But this he does see, namely: the authority of the Bishop of
Rome to be afflicted: Monasteries and Nooneries rooted up: and their goods
and possessions haled away: the devotion of ceremonies and Religion of Churches
defiled: Images, Pictures, Crosses and altars broken in pieces, and trodden
under foot: the holy ordinances, Laws and traditions of the Church
abrogated: finally no hope of true devotion, nor any freedom of will to be left
sound and safe: Where in this life nothing is left so holy, but is defiled with
some spot: no ability of will so great, which is not yoaked fast with fatal
and unavoidable Necessity. All which so many, in this wise disordered, rent and
torn a su^der by the Lutherans, albeit do move many men's hearts to rue: Yet
Osorius of his ouerflowing abou^dau^ce of patience and co^sta^cy, could take
all this in much more better part, and be less a grieved thereat, if he could
be persuaded that the loss and overthrow of those things might agree with the
safety of the Church, and the majesty and glory of the Gospel. But now
perceiving the matter to fall contrary: hereupo^ he is both grievously and with
good cause offended with these Sectaries Lutheranes who having undertaken so
great a Charge as to restore to the former health and integrity the disciplyne
of the Church being grievously syck and weakened: has so performed no jot at
all of that their promise, as that all things rather become worse and worsse,
and the new supplies far more ill favored and weak then the old
buildinges: But how will this right reverend father prove his saying to be true
at the last? For sooth whereas the purity of the Gospel, Osor. page 179.
and the whole means of reforming the Church consists in this, that men may
be taught to leave the beholding of earthly things, and raise up their
minds unto heaven, to embrace modesty, to be endued with an earnest desire to
live chastely, to yield due obedience first to the Church, afterward to the
princes and Magistrates temporal: to prepare themselves a way into heaven, by
meekenes, patienee, gravity, constancy and other heavenly virtues: These I say
and other heavenly ornaments like unto these, if would appear, either in their
churches where they teach, or in the manners of them, which are professors of
their doctrine: No man could be ignorant then what men might judge of this
new Gospel, and the fruit thereof. But now whereas he does plainly see that
the professors of this new Gospel, are not only not made better, but also
much worsse, and much more filthy of their conversation: as amongst the which,
lust rages more outragiously unpunished, presumption of mind more ready to
commit all manner haynousnesse: more vproares, and much more troublesome:
more theeuery, moreover more conspiracies against Princes: finally more
horrible atte^ptes (if Report be true) be hard to be every where: the world
may easily judge by these so manifold and so great tokens, that these men have
entered upon a vain enterprise, and undertaken much fruitless labor in that
lamentable moilyng of things which they have subverted. etc.

Behold here (gentle Reader) though not every word, yet the force and effect of
every word fully set down, and the whole purport of Osorius Inuectiue, unless
I be deceived. All whose superfluous and needeles bablyng, whereas he might
have concluded together in one Sillogisme, yet this idle trifler chose rather
to come aloft with Peacocklike ruffling of his Rhetorical plumes, blazed
abroad after a sort, and to swell in bravery of eloquence: In the which he has
placed the whole main battery of h^s eloquence with shot and powder, Osorius
bauld Rhetoric.
and by all means possible else to beat down if he can, the gladsome light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ. But all in vain: for mightier is the force of
the Verity environed about with heavenly garrison, the^ that it can be dashed
out of countenance with Irishe hooboobbes, or wandryng crakes of lofty
speeches. Let Osorius bend and enforce all the cramps and artillery of his
eloquence, and shoot of all his powder and shot: yet is this cause of more
power the^ can be vanquishable with such smoakes: These be but Apsen leaves
Osorius, which you have scattered abroad, mere slanders, swollen and puffed up
with rancour and malice. You must gather a fresh supply, or else flee the field.
Where the chief trust of your fortress is crazed and faulty, there the more
you teaze the adversary, the sooner will he make a breach upon you, and you
shall be less able to endure his assault.

You say that these wonderful men took upon the^ a very great and dangerous
enterprise. The confutation of Osorius inuectiue.
And who be these wonderful men, whom you note? The Captains (I think) of
these Evangelical affairs. Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Zuinglius, Calvin,
Haddon and other like sproughtes and issues of the same plants. And why do ye
not join in number with them Paul, Peter, John, all the Apostles, and
Prophets, nay rather Christ him self the author and grau^de Captain of this
Gospell^ For as much as the other never attempted any thing, but under their
conduct and sta^dard. Go to: and what is that so great and perilous an
enterprise, that this lusty gallants of the Gospel have entered upon? may a man
be so bold to know it? First because they took upon them the Cure of the
wounded Christian Church. I do hear you: but you have not declared yet, who
they were that wounded her first. But abroad with your peddlers pack. Moreover
that they would settle the Gospel in her ancient renown and Majesty: that
they would restoare the ancient earnest zeal to godlynes, the abou^daunce of
Charity, and that desire to live the heavenly life, wherein the Church
flourished in the Apostles time: That the Gospel being cleansed, and the
superstitions thereof wholly rooted out, they would revive the lively sprankes
of the ancient Church being utterly extinct. etc. Truly if these notable men
did take this enterprise upon the^, if ever they made any such promise, if they
made any such vow or oathe, that they would bring these things to pass. I
confess they undertook a very great and hard enterprise in deed. But where
did you ever Read any such matter in all their books? or which of them did
ever make any such promise of him self? Tell the truth Osorius, was this any
promise of theirs? or a false forged devise of your own? was it their brag?
or the unshamefastness of your slander? was ever any man yet so madd as to
conceive in his secret imagination, or to dare to make any such promise to
reform the Gospel? then the which no one thing in the world can be more
sincere and pure.

When Luther began first to peep abroad, Luther.
he attempted against the Popes Pardons, somewhat franckly, yet modestly
notwithstanding, not so much allured there unto by any his own motion, as
provoked by necessity of coaction, nor yet offryng any challenge, but being
iniuried first, and almost wearied out with the importunacie of others.
Afterward being for yt same cause co^uict by Leo the^ Pope of Rome, he purged
him self, but very humbly, as was declared before: And this was to clear him
self Osorius, not to purge and cleanse the Gospel: with like submission and
humbleness he testified his innocence and uttered his conscieuce before the
Emperor freely, standing then in peril of his own life rather, then making
any brag or vaunt of him self. Phil. Mclancthon being Sommoned to appear
before the Council, Phillippe Melanctho^.
rendered a Confession of his Faith, not so much of any hope to do any good, as
enforced by necessary constraint of obedience to make answer for him self,
being in no less hassard of his life then Luther. The same in his common
places of Divinity, what vaunting or bragges has he uttered? Bucer, Martin
Bucer.
and before him then Huldricke Zuinglius, Huldricke Zuinglius. John Calui^e.
also after them both John Calvin and many other Deuines besides those, for
the earnest desire they had to know the truth, applied their wits and
industry to the readyng of holy Scriptures. For what could they do more
co^me^dably? wherein when they had well travailed, read, and understood them,
immediately began the covert conueyaunces of fraud and desceipt to be made
manifes^ none otherwise then as things that lurcke before in darkness, do at
the enlightenyng of a candle or torche immediately discover them selves.

Now let Osorius tell us what he would have these faithful Pastors do? should
they be mumme and say nothing? their conscience would not permit them: For
this had been not to teach the flock of Christ, but to forsake it: not to
guide, but to beguile it: not to play the Shepheardes, but wolves and Thieves:
should they truly then and freely undertake to defend the forlorn estate of
the Verity? Eue^ this is it, this is the very thing they undertook (if you be
ignorant thereof Osorius) and besides this nothing else. Whereas you say that
this was a great and a hard enterprise, you speak herein but the truth. For
whereas Verity is a matter of great importance, and does commonly enge^der to
it self hatred: surely they could not have attempted any one thing with more
peril of their own lives, nor more dangerous for that present time: yea I
ca^ not well tell whether the Apostles them selves professing the Faith of
Christ first, or the Prophets when the^ reproved men's traditions,
superstitious observation of ceremonies, to much affiaunce in Sacrifices, and
the blind and preposterous opinions of their people, did ever enter upon matter
of more difficulty or danger. And therefore as touching the substance of the
matter, I do confess that it was a perilous and an hard enterprise when they
undertook the defense of the Verity. And yet they never attempted it of any
such courage, or confidence, as to dare to promise any good success of their
labors to any others. For neither was the state of that time so appliable, as
would permit them to promise any thing of the^ selves, though they would never
so feign: wherein if they could escape without loss of life, albeit they
achieved naught else, yet they might well judge that they had done a notable
exploite. So far was it of, that they could ever imagine, or dream of so
great a renewyng of the Church, of the utter overthrow of the pope and Idolles,
and the like successes that ensued thereupo^: the which thing Luther shameth
not to confess simply without all dissimulation, Luther upon the 15. Psalms
of Degrees.
as that he could never so much as hope for the hundredth part of those things
which God of his meare mercy and goodness brought to pass in them. Whereby we
do you to understand Osorius, that these matters were not begone by man's power
or policy, nor through any lightenes or braggyng of men, but performed and
perfitted by the only work of the holy Ghost doubtless. And therefore this
Tertullus making his foundation with a manifest lie does with like deceaueable
falsehoode proceed to the rest of his declamation that so he may seem never
unlike him self.

You (says he) have afflicted the Authority of the Bishop of Rome. etc. How
the Pope is afflicted by the Lutheranes.
O affliction: O cruel torments: O holy Martyrdom: O grievous passions and
wounds, which this Godly Pope does suffer for Christ's sake. Whiles I was
readyng these words of yours Osorius. I began to be suddenly in some doubt:
whether this were an ouerscape of your pen, or the oversight of Theobald your
Printer: whenas in stead of the Pope afflicted. You would have said the
Lutherans afflicted or at least you should have said so. Certes if you
indifferently and uprightly render a just account of all the imprisonmentes:
setters, gibbettes: burning plates: pyles of flaming wood: reca^tatio^s,
beheadings, boocheries, fires, repeales: armies: tortures, hosts, rackynges,
and persecutions by fire and faggot, it will easily appear whether part has
afflicted, and does daily afflict the other. But because mention is made here
of the afflictions of the Romish Authority: it were needful for me to
enquire of Osorius first, what kind of Authority Osorius does define unto us?
For if he mean that Jurisdiction which the Bishop of Rome has over his own
See of Rome, and the other Provinces aunexed to the same, limited him by the
Council of Nice: no man will strive against him for this Authority. But if by
this name of Authority, he will have to be signified that high and universal
Authority, which the Pope does exercize and usurp equal with God him self
over all Churches, Provinces, Pastors, and Bishops and above all general
Co^^cels: This Authority for as much as the true written Verity does not give
unto him in any place, yea rather oppugneth it very mightily: Apoc. 1^.
and does call it the Sea of the Beast, to the which also it threateneth a
vyall of utter darkness: it can by no means be avoided, but one of these must
needs come to pass, either that this unmeasurable Authority of the Pope,
must give place to the Scriptures of God, or that this universal Bishop shall
triumph and have the victory, the Scriptures of God being utterly vanquished,
and put to sci^ence: For as much as these two Authorities being so directly
contrary each to other can not stand together.

The authority of the Romish See can not agree with the authority of the
Scriptures.
For if Christ would not permit any superiority amongst his own Apostles,
will he suffer it amongst Bishops? If the Lord himself came for this
purpose (as the scriptures do witness) to become a minister to others: to wash
the feet of his disciples, if he refused to be a king, being sought upon
earnestlye for the same: will there be any so proud a Disciple of Christ, that
will with his heels tread upon the necks of Emperors? and will blaze abroad
Scepters and Diademes of S. Peter, in the poor and base Church of Christ? what
although the Pope of Rome will take upon him, more then the Authority of the
Scriptures will allow him: shall it not be lawful therefore for godly Pastors,
and learned Deuines, to profess freely (by ye testimonies of ye holy
Scriptures) that, which they see with their eyes, and feel with their hands,
but that they must be accounted scourgers of the Sea Apostolic? But how much
more wisely should the Bishop of Rome have done, if wormyng out this ragyng
ringworme of madd ambition, and keepyng him self within his own limittes and
bounds of Scriptures modestly, he would endeavor to bring to pass, to become
faultlesse him self? and void of all just reproach of deserved infamy? Now
being so pestered with botches and blaynes on all parts, what marvel is it, if
he complain of pinching at ye least touch of an ulcer? Moreover neither should
our Osorius also demean him self in any respect less discretly, if laying
aside this foul fashion of flattering, he would more simply and plainly deal
herein with Authorities, and testimonies of Scriptures, rather then with
disordered affections: nor would enter into so contentious a brablyng about the
Popes Authority: before he had by good and warrantable proofs made manifest
to the world, by what right the Pope were able to mainteyne his challenge
touching the said Authority.

Concerning the overthrow of Mo^ckeries and Nunneries, The complaint of Osori.
concerning the overthrow of Monckeryes and Nunneries,
and their goods and possessions scattered and spoiled: although I can not
deny, but that they might have been in some places converted to better uses:
yet are there no small number of Regio^s, and free Cities, where those goods
and Selles are converted into Schools of learning: hospitals for Strangers
and sick persons, and other good uses, far more seemly and profitable, then
when they were receptacles and dens of idleness, sloth, I dolatry and
superstition.

I speak not now of the lives of these Caterpillars, I touch not their
hypocrisy, I stir not out the stenche of that puddle. Because these are
external and incident to ma^s nature. As for these being natural diseases of
the belly, and the flesh I leave to the^ selves. But I enter now into the due
consideration of the very inward and best part of Monckish profession: to
wit: the Rules of the order, their ordinances, their Statutes, and the very
foundations of their Religion: I mean the whole course of Monckery, which I do
altogether accuse. Against this I do with full mouth exclame, and from the very
bottom of my heart profess, that this order of Monckery is wicked and
detestable, finally such and so wicked, that if all things else within the same
were found, yet this their very lurking in dens, after that manner of living,
can have no manner of partaking with the kingdom of Christ. Of other
Monasteries other may Judge better then I: but of such as were in England, I
can speak fully, of mine own knowledge: the first foundations and erections
whereof if a man behold, it will evidently appear, that they were instituted
for none other end and purpose, It was not to be marue^led that Monckeries were
so soon overthrown as that they stood so long.
then for the redeemyng of souls out of Purgatory, for Remission of sins,
and for obteinyng of life everlasting. And what could have been devised more
cruel against Christian Relligion? or more repugnaunt to Christ's Gospel?
Therefore as touching these Temples, Dens, and buildyngs of Relligious houses,
I do not so much marvel yt they are thus razed to ye ground: as I marvel
more at this, that they could so long continue, to so great prejudice,
co^tumely, and reproach of the Son of GOD. But it is even the self thing,
whereof the Lord him self did long sithence Prophecy: Every building that my
heavenly Father has not planted (says he) shall be plucked up by the roots.

Of the holiness of ceremonies with Osorius.
But what holiness of Ceremonies: do you tell us of here Osorius? If ye mean
those old shadows of Ceremonies prescribed in old time by God, surely these
vanished quite away, immediately upon the discovery of the clear light and
bright beams of the Gospel: And yet they did not so vanish away (as I supose)
That ceremonies for ceremonies, shadows for shadows, or news shapes should
supply the old: for what had this been else, then from Iewishnes to revolt back
again to Iewishnes? But if you mean of Ceremonies devised by men: surely of
such you may read the Scriptures grievously complatnyng every where. Luke.
They do worship me in vain teaching the Doctrines and traditions of me^. John.
And in an other place: The hour comes, and now is: whe^as the true
worshippers, shall worship the Father in spirit and truth. And how often do we
hear Paul the Apostle calling us back from those hungry elements of
ceremonies? and that very fervently? Collos. 2.
If you be dead with Christ (says he) from the elements of this world, why
are you then holden back, with ceremonies, as though you were living in the
world? And to the Galat. Galat. 4.
How is it that you turn again to the weak and beggarly ceremonies,
whereunto again ye desire to be in bondage a fresh? Now by what reason can you
ascribe holiness to those things, which are called in Paul Beggarly Elements?
and are only corporal exercizes, scarce profitable to any thing, and which do
rather make a Jew, then a Christian man? For what is Christianity else, then a
spiritual life and worshipping? Even as God him self whom we do worship is a
Spirit. And the armor wherewith we mainteyne his warfare is spiritual: and
our inheritance and country is said to be heavenly and not earthly. For
although we be clogged yet with infirmities of the flesh, we do not live as
bondslaues to the flesh. But are risen again together with Christ in Faith,
Spirit, and Truth: seeking not the uisible things of this world but heavenly:
neither betrayeng the freedom wherein we were called: and again not abusing
the freedom (wherein we do dwell) to the lust of the flesh: But what freedom
of Religion is this, if we be holde^ as yet bo^dslaues to the Traditions of
men? Paul cries out. That one of us should not Judge an other in meat and
drink, or in the part of the holy day, or new moon, or of Sabbathes: And will
Osorius tie necessity to ye keepyng of these. Be I not here taken at the worst.

I speak not this, as though I thought simply, Men's traditions and ceremonies
are not altogether sequestered from a Christian man's life.
that no constitutions of men, nor ceremonies are tolerable in the Church,
without the which there can be no Congregations nor Churches of Christians in
this life. But this present treaty concerns those ceremonies not which are
brought in by any kind of necessity, but by way of superstition: not which
come in for decency or order, but are instituted as especial matter of piety
and godliness: In the which many men have grounded their hope of Salvation,
the chief foundation of Relligion, and haven of affiaunce: wherein they flatter
the^ selves, and condemn others: upon the which the greater part of
Catholics now a days do fawn over greedely, nor do only dwell upon them,
but eue^ bury the^ selves alive in the^. And eue^ these Ceremonies do so
nothing at all agree with the pure and sincere Relligio^ of Christ, as that no
pestilent botche can be more deadly co^tagious unto it: Of yt which many famous
and godly men have sundry times complained bitterly, and not without cause. For
wise men, and men of experience did perceive this to be true (as it is most
true) that the effectual force of the Gospel was extinguished, true piety
neglected, and not the consciences only, but the lives also of men
endaungered, through none other so perilous a contagion, as this glitteryng
pomp of gorgeous Ceremonies. Amongst the which this is one, that Report
tells of two persons in France, How great a peril is in ceremonies.
who not many years ago were in danger to be burned, for none other matter,
but because they did eat flesh two days in Lent, being constrained thereunto
by necessity of sickness. Behold the fruits of Ceremonies: to wit: that
for men's Traditions, we shall break the Commandments of God, reco^ptyng
murder to be a more tolerable offense, then to leave a peltyng co^stitution
of a Pope undone. I could rehearse six hundredth like examples out of ye
Monuments of our own Martyrs chiefly, who were more often and more sharply
punished, for despising men's Traditions, then for breakyng the Commandments
of God: Christian Relligio^ almost wholly turned into ceremonies.
in so much that a man would think, that the whole face of Christian Relligion
had been estraunged into Ceremonies, or else to hang more upon these, then upon
the word of God.

Images Crosses Altars throwe^ down.
And whereas you say, that Images, Signs, Crosses and Altares are thrown
down. I think verily that Luther and the other ministers of the Gospel
cannot be duly charged with this slanderous reproach: forasmuch as they never
put their hands to the breaking or plucking down of Images, nor is it
convenient for any private person to presume upon any innovation in Christian
commonweals or Churches by force and vproare. But if the Magistrate do
execute his office godly and peaceably, acording as he may lawfully do, in the
things which he does perceive to be consonaunt with the word of God: What
makes Osorius here with us (being but a private man himself, and a mere
stranger) to keep a skolding or meddling with our matters? If the famous king
of Portingall Sebastian be of the mind to remain a fawtor and follower of
those Romish superstitious Rags in Altares, Pictures, Signs, and worshippyng
of Images: He has on the one side the testimonies of the Scriptures, on the
other side the Parasiticall pratyng of Monckes, let him follow which he will:
let him do in his own Realm, upon his own peril, what him pleases best:
On the other side: If the most virtuous Queen of England Elizabeth, (by the
guiding of Scriptures) have thought it more convenient to expel and Banish out
of her Realm, the stinking pilfe of durty superstition (the sight whereof no
Christian Prince can endure without great peril and danger of himself and
his subjects:) Truly she does nothing herein, but that she may safely do, and
justify the doing thereof, by the manifest authority of the sacred scripture,
and singular examples of most famous and renowned kings: Unless peradventure
Osorius does make small account of the commendable remembrance of Ezekias,
Ezechiah. Josiah. Iozaphat.
Josias Iosaphat and others, which brake down and krusht in pieces Altares,
Idolles, Groans, and the Brazen Serpent. Or the example of Gedeon also, Gedeon.
who though were not a king, did yet cut down the Groaue, and tare abroad the
Altar. What now? The same which was lawful for the kings of the Jews, in the
carnal law, shall not be as lawful for our Rulers and Poten^ates in the
spiritual kingdom of Christ? shall that which redou^ded to their glory and
praise in the old law, be condemned in our age in Christian Princes for
Sacrilege?

And what if Osorius had lived in that season: when as Epiphanius Bishop of
Cypres, Epiphanius in an Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem.
(seeing the Image of Christ against the manifest authority of the Scriptures
(as he said) painted in a veyle) rent it in pieces with his own hands? what
if he had lived in the time of Origin? or in that flourishing age of the
primitive church? at what time Augustine, Lactantius, Ambrose Eusebius would
not suffer in the church, this kind of Pa^anisme? at what time as yet was not
any shadow so much of an Image, in the temples of Christians? Or what and if
afterward he had happened in the Court of Phillippicus, Leo Isaurick an
Emperor of Greece, and of his son Constantine the fifth? or of Leo the 4?
Phillippicus Leo Isaurick. Constantine Leo. 4. Greek Emperors against Images.
Images banished by the councils of Constantinople, Elibertine and francksord.
What if he had been present at those three councels Constantinople, under
Constantine the fifth Emperor, or at the Elibertine and Franckfordine
Councels, under Charles the great? in the which, Images were utterly Banished
out of Churches, by most manifest arguments out of the holy Scriptures, and by
the general consentes and voices of the whole counsel: at what time great and
invincible reasons were alleged to prove directly that the Images of Christ,
of our Lady, of the Apostles, and Martyrs, (as never instituted by any
tradition of Christ, of the Apostles, no nor of any yt ancient Fathers) ought
not in any wise be brought into Churches, or being brought in, not to be
permitted and suffered in any respect. The Catholic Church (say they)
standing amids Iewishnesse and Gentility, Out of the council of Constantinople.
does neither allow the bloody Sacrifices of the Jews, and in Sacrificing does
utterly abandone all manner of Gentility and gaze of Images. And again a little
after. Whosoever shall practice to erect Pictures, or Images of Saints, after
the error of the Gentiles, shall be adjudged a Blasphemer. etc. And so
concluding at the last. We (say they) that are invested in Priestly dignity,
being assembled together, do with one voice determine and decre, that all
manner Imagery, of whatsoever metal, wood, or stuff, devised by the wicked
practice of paynters, shall be utterly abolished out of the churches of
Christians, as execrable and abominable. And whosoever shall presume to set
up a^y such Image, either in the Church, or in his private house, or secret
closet, If he be a Bishop or a Deacon: Let him be deposed: If he be a seculer
or a lay person, let him be holden aceursed: and turned over to the punishment
of the Imperial constitutions: as one that does wilfully impugn the
ordinances of God, and break the Rules thereof. etc. Not unlike unto this,
was the decree established in ye Elibertine counsel: Ex Elibertino council.
can. 36.
It seems good unto us, that Images ought not be in Churches, and that no
thing be painted upon the walls that is reverenced or worshipped. etc. Of
these I say, and of other the like decrees of councels, if Osorius had been an
eye witness himself: or would yet vouchsafe to peruse the monumentes of
ancient Fathers, he would surely conceive an other opinion of Images, he
would believe the testimony of Lactantius, Lactant. instit. book. 2. cap. 19.
who says: that there is no Religion, where any picture is in place. Again he
would give creditte to Chrysostom: Chrisosto^e.
saying: we do enjoy the presence of Saints by reading their writings: having
therein a present view not of their bodies, but of their souls. To this may be
added the testimony of Amphilochius, Amphilochius.
Bishop of Iconium: We esteem it not worth the labor to paynt any corporal
shape of Saints in colored tables, because we have no need of them but we
ought to be mindful of their good lives. And from this differs very little
that which Theodore Bishop of Ancyra teaches: Theodore Bishop of Ancira.
We think it unseemly to paynt in material colors the countenaunces and
counterfaytes of Saints, but we ought to delight our selves now and the^, with
the beholding of their virtuous lives, which their writings do deliver unto
us, as certain lively Images of the soul. But such as erect their portraictes
let them tell us what profitte may redownd unto them by the same. Portraictes.
Is it because the manner of remembrance by this spectible view does help
their memory? But it appears manifestlye, that all such Imaginations are
vain, and dyabolicall devises. etc. Moreover Eusebius Bishop of Pamphilia
(writing to Constantia Augusta for answer to here request made unto him for
the Image of Christ,) Eusebius Bysh. of Pamphil.
Denied that it could be possible, that the resplendizaunt, and most orient
exellency of his Majesty, could be portrayed by any dead resemblaunce, or any
trisling picture. Using this reason. If that his heavenly disciples (quoth he)
were not able to behold him in the Mount, who f^lling flat upon the earth,
confessed that they were not able to behold so great a sight^, how much less
can the fashion of his flesh be resembled, or endured sithence he had put of
mortality: and washing corruption clean away, had now translated the shape of
a Servant, into the glorious Majesty of a Lord and God. etc. To pass over of
set purpose the reasons of Nazianzen, Basile and Athanasius debated upon this
matter, The reasons of Bysh. alleged in the counsel of Constantinople.
in the same counsel. For what need I cite any more Testimonies of men,
sithence the Lord himself does witness the same out of heaven?

The voice of our God cries out in his word, Deuteronomy. 20.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing. Contrary to this cries out the Pope in ye Tryde^tyne counsel, let us
make our selves graven Images: we will make us Imamages and Pictures: who
shall be obayed? the pope? or the Lord? What has the temple of God (says Paul)
to do with Idols? 2. Cor. 6.
How shall the Temple of God stand (says the Pope) without Images and
Pictures? A figure called contraposition betwixt the decrees of God and the
Popes.
The Popes Parasites prate apace in their decrees: The honor that is done to
the Image of Christ, is done to Christ himself. For the honor of the sign
does redownd to the thing signified. But the voice of Christ cries out far
otherwise, which does teach, that the honor done unto the first pattern can
never be employed better, then upon his lively members and lively Images. Math.
10.
Whatsoever you have done to the least of my brethren, you houe done it to me:
He that receives you, receives me. John the Apostle does give this lesson: 1.
John. 5.
My little children beware of Images? What does the Pope with his Trydentyne
hyrelynges decree out of his triple Crown? My sweet Babes retain Images with
you: Out of the Decrees of the Trydentine counsel 9. Sesio.
and see that there be no saint in heaven, which may not have a Temple on the
earth: nor let any place of the Church be seen void, without some Imagerye,
whosoever shall either teach or think the contrary, let him be accursed. And
by this means what make ye else of the Temple of God, but a den of Idols? The
Lord cries out by the mouth of his prophet Iere. Iere. 10.
Their Pictures are the doctrine of vanity: and Abacuc ye Prophet, Abacu^. 3.
calls Images the workmanship of lying. And you make carved Images and woden
Images books of the lay people. The wicked and preposterous judgments of the
Papists in worshipping of Images.
On which side shall the faith of the christians bestow it self? shall they
believe the Prophets of God? or the liyng of the Papists? If we that be
christians do live by faith, and if faith come by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God, and not by Images: why are your Temples so open and common
receptakles of dumme Stocks and Blocks? and so fast locked and shut up from
the word of God to speak freely to every nation in their mother tongue? Nay
rather why are the lively Images of the living God mangled and cut of? and
why are his lively Temples consumed with fire and sword, for dead Images of
dead souls?

But to admit thus much, that Images and Pictures may happily serve to some
use, else where, then in Churches, and besides the case of worshippyng: Yet by
what testimonye of the Scriptures, do ye press commonweals not only with
the use of Images, but with a necessity also of having the^ in churches, and
chappelles? as though Christian Religion were not established upon a sure Rock
and defesible enough, unless it must be underpropped with the Popes pelting
poppets: how is it then, that they which freely preach against this needeles
necessity, and fruitless fawning upon Images, (accordiding to the prescrypt
Rule of Gods word) yea so protest the same, as nevertheless offering not a
finger so much, nor any kind of force in the mean time to the overthrow of
those altares, and Images, but refer the matter wholly to the Magistrate: not
respecting ought else, but that all Christians, should worship God only and
alone: Shall these professors (say I) which teach the truth be accused? or
they rather which against the direct word of God, enforce the people to
manifest Idolatry? But of this briefly, and as it were lightly ouerrunue,
whereof Haddon has both gravely and aboundauntly discoursed before.

Osor. page 178.
Behold yet how this slaundrous mountain swells and increases. You have most
wickedly condemned sorrowful contrision of the heart and good works of the
godly: you have cut of all hope to live virtuously and Godly, by co^firming a
certain notable unpunished Licentiousness of living. etc. Where find you
this Osorius? Osorius slander against Luther touching contrition and good
works condemned, is confuted.
In the golden Legend (I suppose) or in the seven sleepers dream. If you have
found any such thing in any their writings, that does condemn Contrition,
Godly tears, and works of good men: Set down the Authors name then, (good
Sir) cite the words and place if you can: If you can not, what means then,
this your vncessaunt outrage of lying and slaundering? But happily Osorius is
not so much to be blamed for this as his Notary is, who raking together
certain scrappes out of other men's writings very ill fauouredly, and more
illfauouredly deprauing them: does make a most illfauoured and framshapen
delivery of them to Osor. For by the matter it self it is apparaunt, that
Osorius was never exercised in the books, whereat he barketh so much. This
sentence I confess is in one of Luthers Articles^ namely: The righteous man
does offend even in his best works. Articul. 31.
And hereupon Osorius concludes his argument. Ergo: A righteous man does not
work any good work, but all that he does, is wicked and mischievous. But
where did this Portingall learn his logic? whereas the right order of
concluding, after the Rules of Logic, should have been rather on this wise:
The righteous man does offend do he never so well. Ergo. The just man does
work well. For unless he did work good works, how could he offend in a good
work? As if a man shall frame an argument on this wise. Osorius does lie in
all his Books: Hereof therefore can not be denied, but that he writes
Books: Or else how could he lie in his books, if he wrote no books at all?

And yet neither did Luther in that Article affirm symply, that the righteous
man does sin in every good work? How this sentence that the Righteous man
does offend in every good work is to be taken. Gregory upon Ioh. 9. August. in
his 3. book of confess. cap. 7. August. to Boniface. 3. book. ca. 7.
But annexing thereunto an exception conditional, he does qualifye the
sharpness of the proposition, expounding himself with the testimonies of
Gregory and Augustine on this wise: If God proceed in his judgment (says he)
straightly, without all consideration of mercy. Meaning hereby, not that God
should take good works from righteous men, but should despoyle works of that
perfection, which of it self were able to counteruayle the clear judgment of
God: so that the perfection of our righteousness consist not now in doing well,
but in acknoledgement of our own Imperfection, and humble confessing the same.
For this do we hear Augustine speak, Virtue (says he) wherewith man is now
endued, is so far forth called perfect, as the true and humble
acknowledgement of man's own imperfection, joined with an unfeigned confession
of the same, does make it to be accepted for perfect. Now what poison lurketh
here I beseech you worshippfull Sir? Unless perhaps you think thus, that
because God does not command impossibilities, for this cause, they that be
regenerated may in this life accomplish the law of God fully and absolutely:
and that your self be of the number of them which in this life abcomplish all
righteousness thoroughly, If you think thus of your self, what better answer
shall I make you, The words of Constantine to Acesius.
then the same which Constantine the great did on a time nippingly to Acesius a
Nouatian (who denied that such as were fallen, could rise again by
repentance.) Set up your Ladders (quoth he) and clymbe you up to heaven
alone Acesius. Furthermore where you are wont to object in this place
impossibility of performing the law: surely this does not so much empaire
Luthers assertion, nor help your presumptuousnes: sithence Augustine does
answer you sufficiently in Luthers behalf. Aug. in his 1. book de
perfectione iustitiae.
All the co^mau^deme^ts of God (says he) are the^ reputed to have been
performed, when whatsoever is left undone, is pardoned. And in his book de
perfectione iustitiae debating this question whether the commandments of God
were possible to be kept: he does deny that they be possible to be kept: Aug.
in his book of the perfection of righteousness.
But he affirms that neither in this life they be possible to be kept, nor to
keep them, comes of nature but of the heavenly grace. But hereof has
sufficiently been spoken already before, so that it shall not be needful to
do the thing that is done already.

Of the ancient ordinances of the Church. The ordinances of the primitive
church taken away now by our Catholics.
It remains next now, that we enter into the discourse of the holy ceremonies,
decrees and ordinances of the Church, because he complayneth for the
suppressing of these also, wherein what just cause he has to complain, shall
hereby apeare. If we consider duly and aright the ancient ordinances, and
determinations of the primitive Church. Amongst which ancient ordinances of
the Church. I suppose this was establshed: That no man should be abridged from
freedom to marry, and from eating all kind of meats, fish, or flesh, as
every man found himself best disposed. It was an ancient ordinance also,
that as well the lay people as priests without exception should communicate
under both kinds, the bread and the wine. And that nothing should be read in
the Churches besides the scriptures. Moreover that the Scriptures should be
read openly to all persons generally in their mother tou^g yt every man might
understand it. The ancient ordinances of ye church, did never admit any more
sacraments then two: nor widows under threescore years old: nor vouchsafed
any (yt were but newly entered into the profession) to bear any rule in the
congregation: nor any else, but such as were known both godly and prayseworthy,
as well for the soundness of their doctrine, as for the continual course of
their lives: It was an especial prouiso of the ancient discipline, that no
one person should have any more Cures the^ one: nor should receive out of any
Church any greater contribution, then should seem sufficient for necessaryes
only, and not to maintain prodigality and lust: It was also an ancient
custom amongst the elders, that the newly professed should be applied to
reading of lessones, and singinge only: And the Priests in the mean time
should apply preaching of the word. Amongst other au^cie^t ordinances, that
Canon of the counsel of Nyce seems worthy to be placed here, which provided
that the oversight of all other churches should be committed to three or four
patriarchs equally, in such wise, as that no pre-eminence of superiority
should be amongst them, but all to be equal in dignity. Add unto this, the
general discipline of the church, which did not hang upon one man's sleeue
only, but was exercised indifferently in all places, against all notorions
offenses without respect of persons.

Now therefore where Osorius complayneth that the ordinances of the ancient
and primitive Church are taken away, The complaynt of abolishing the auntie^t
ordinances of the Church appliable to none so much as to the Papists.
and abolished, herein he does not amiss: So do many godly personages more
beside Osorius complain very bitterly of the same. But in the mean space I do
marvel much, what monstrous devise this Bishop coyneth against us, who
neither likes with the abolishing of the ancient customs of the primitive
Church, nor can in any respect digest those men, which do endeavor and desire
only to have a general reformation. For to say the truth, whereunto tends
all the endeavor of those men, whom Osorius here wringeth upon so sharply,
but that those ancient decrees and ordinances (wherewith the Church of Christ
was endued at the first) might recover again their former dignity, from which
they have been lamentably rejected? If they could bring this to pass, by any
means, nothing could please them better. But if their hearty desires attain
not wished Success, no men are more to be blamed for it Osorius then you your
selves: By what means the Romanistes have altered al things in the Church.
who under a deceauable and crafty vysor of antiquity, practice earnestly and
busily always, that no Monument of ancient antiquity may remain: but have
forged us a certain new face of an vpstart Church, with certain strange and
newfangled Decrees, and Decretalles, which the true and ancient antiquity (if
were alive again) would never acknowledge otherwise, then as misbegotten
Bastardes.

But to proceed: this Rhetorical amplificatio^ waxes more hot yet and in
more choler? Osorius page 178.
Moreover neither contented (says he) with the lamentable desolatio^ of these
things, ye have dispoyled man of all freedom of will, and have bound fast
with a certain fatal and unavoidable Necessity all the actoins and
imaginations of men, be they good and godly, or be the perilous and
pernicious, contrary to Nature, Reason, and the law of God. etc. Touching the
freedom of man's will and that fatal necessity (as Osorius terms it)
because answer sufficient is made already before: It shall be needelesse to
protract the Reader with a new repetition of matters spoken already. To be
brief, and to draw once somewhat nearer to the Epilogue of his notable Oration,
having dispatched that part of the accusation now, wherein he has discovered
whatsoever has been spoiled by the Lutheranes: he bends his eloquence to
declare, by the rest of his talk, what supply has come in for that which has
been spoiled. And here our proper fine Orator, taking a through and circumspect
view of all things I warrau^t you, can espy no one thing (of all yt is
reformed) any thing prayseworthy, nor any thing in any respect aunswerable to
the promises of these men: who promising to cure the wounds and blemishes of
the Church, have brought it into far worse case, more putrified, and fuller
of corruption.

Osor. page 180.
And why so? Because they do see that not only the professors, but the hearers
also of this new Gospel are not only not made better, but defiled with many
more heinous offenses more provoked to troublesome divisions, to venerous lust:
to theeuery, and murder, and to all other horrible practizes. This is a stale
devise and an old practice of a pratyng Rhetorician: that when thou see thy
self confounded with truth of matter, to flee forthwith to slaunderyng,
scoldyng and backbyting. But to answer you somewhat hereunto. What? do ye
note all the professors of the word Osorius? or some particular persons? I
think neither you will, nor justly can justify your saying against all: An
answer in the behalf of the Lutheranes lives against slau^deryng.
no more can ye against many of them: for as much as ye know not thoroughly, the
one half of our conuersations. But if you think thus of some particular
person, why do ye marvel so much at this? sithence the state and condition of
man's life attained never yet so perfect a felicity, but that there was always
just cause of complaint against the manners of many men, and the worst part
commonly were more in number the^ the better. Yea in Paradise it self:
sithence man and woman alone, being but two only could not live long together
in that human flesh, without sin, how much less is this to be wondered in
a multitude? And yet in respect of those some persons (whom you note as it were
with a coal) I know some also, and could note them by name, whose commendable
conversation of life I would rather choose, then all the holiness of all your
Portingalls whatsoever: unless you demean your selves more godly at home in
Portingall, then some of you lately behaved your selves here in England, whom
notwithstanding I will not at this present openly diffame, nor speak of them
all that I know: concealing their names of set purpose, to the end your noble
Nation shall not be infamed for their lewdenes by any report of mine. And
therefore let all that be Catholic be heavenly and Angelicke also for me. And
in this sort also had it been as seemly for you (good Catholic Sir) not to
have rusht so rudely with your unmannerly pen against them, whose manners be
altogether as far from your knowledge, as their names be.

As touching report, what has been carried unto you, or what not, I do not so
much esteem: which (as you know) carries lies for the more part, rather then
truth. But admit that ye report be true: mark yet I pray you, how injurious
and slau^derous you are both in respect of the persons against who^ you do
inueighe so much, It is one thing to judge of manners an other thing to judge of
doctrine.
and in respect of the cause which you do defend. For whereas they do treat
upon Relligion and doctrine only, you apply all the action to life and manners,
without all consideration of the difference betwixt these two. For whereas
Relligion is referred to God only: and manners respect man's state, and
condition properly: hereby it comes to pass, that in that one nothing ought
to be permitted, except it be most sincere and pure: and in these other nothing
at all can be found that is in any respect perfect. Now if the order and
course of man's life be not in all points correspondent to that absolute, and
exact rule of doctrine, which we profess: yet does this neither countenance
your error: nor prejudice the sincerity of the Relligion that is taught out
of the Gospel. Wherefore this was altogether besides the cushian Osorius, to
raunge so lauishly against men, and to speak so little of the matter and
substance of the question, which concerned not men's manners, but the points of
doctrine properly. But peradventure this place served here to the Rhetorical
common place of vice and virtue, taken out somewhere of some Orators book,
which perhaps you would have clean forgotten, unless you had furbushed it a
fresh at this present. Wherein notwithstanding I do neither disallow your
diligence much, nor despise your Rhetorical florishyng, and beautifieng of
righteousness. For I know and confess that this integrity of life (which you
comme^de so highly) apperteineth much to the dignifieng of the Church. But yet
this great boast makes but small roast, and serves as little to this present
cause.

Which in deed is this: That a plain demonstration ought to have been made by
the testimony of the Scriptures, not what is pure, or what is corrupt, in men's
manners: but in the controversies of Relligion what is true, and what is false.
Now if you be not so well furnished with Scriptures, as to be able to debate
thoroughly of the controversies of Relligio^, Dogs in the palace of Rome.
and therefore would convert your pen to this Rhetorical kind of cauillyng,
and scoldyng: the^ should you have for seen this much, that this your hideous
barkyng might at the least have resembled the barking of those dogs, that
were trained up long sithence in the Capitol of Rome, not to bark at honest
Citizens walking abroad in the day time, but to drive away thieves and gadders
by night, and to discover the^ with their barkyng. But you so frame your
accusation now, I know not how preposterously and ouerthwartly, as that ye
seem more worthy to be noted for a Sycophant, the^ an accuser: as one who
passing over those lazye Drones and waspes, which of all others chiefly ought
to have been beaten away far from the Hyues of the Church: ye rush only upon
the^ altogether, whose worthy travails (if you were an honest man) you would
think never to be able to requite with co^digne thankefulnes. And yet in this
your accusation against them, you do so enforce the whole bent of your
Inuectiue and speech, as that no part thereof at all carries any show of
truth, nor agreement in it self.

First you do say, Osori. page 180.181.
That these men took upon them this enterprise of a great courage, arrogancy,
and boldness, whereby they promised to reform the corrupt manners of the
Church, according to her former ancient beauty: and to bring this to pass,
they bound them selves by solemn oathe. Which I have already declared to be
most untrue: yea ye whole world witnessing same, though I would hold my peace.
Yea annexe further, That many ordinances well established in the Church first,
are taken away by them and abrogated. Which also has been disproued to be no
less frivolous and vain. Nay rather, if I should tell you, as it is in deed:
you should have said rather. That many things have been brought into the
Church by your Catholics, long sithence the time of the Apostles and ancient
Fathers: so weak of them selves, so frivolous, and so absurd: as could by no
means endure the glisteryng Beams of the Orient Gospel, The popes blind
Decrees ca^ not away with the light of the Gospel.
but must needs immediately at the very sound of the Trumpet of truth, fall
down of them selves to the ground, and vanish quite out of sight, yea without
touch of breath as they say. And hereupon came it, that the Sea of that Beast
was darkened: hereof came it, that the Den of momishe Monckes never founded
by God, were rooted clean: up hereof came it, that their goods and
possessions were dispersed abroad: their temples destroyed: their Images,
Altares, Idolles, Monumentes of profane superstition shyuered in pieces:
Finally whatsoever was repugnaunt to Christ's Gospel, whatsoever apperteined
not to his glory, whatsoever hypocrisy had heretofore builded upon the Sands,
and not upon the Rock Christ: came all to utter ruin. And there is no doubt,
but that your Mytred pride Osorius together with that intolerable arrogance,
and insolent hautynes of Romish Prelates, their Princely train: Lordly and
ambitious Titles, and all that Luciferlyke pomp of abominable life, wherein
they riotte and revel in despite of Christ and his Gospel, shall come to the
like overthrow, which does even now by all lykely conjectures threaten your
utter subversion.

The cavil of Osorius against the lives of Lutherans.
I come now to the other part of your cavil, which is in all respects as
untrue and frivolous. Wherein you conclude after this sort: That sithence the
Preaching of this Gospel, no Reformation of life has ensued, nor that ye
conversation of their Auditorie is any ioate at all bettered, but rather made
much more worse then before: But how do you know this to be true, being so
far distaunt from this end of the world? Report has told you so: Ueryly a
fit messenger for Osorius his gravity. Osori. rayseth all his slanders of
hearesay.
But do you so stoughtly warrau^t all your slanders upon hearesay good Sir?
and do ye think it enough for you to tread down the Gospel of Christ, with
your grave and solemn voucher of hearesay only? what? can you so quickly
harken unto Report, and give no credit or ear to Christ's Gospel? Is it so
in deed? has fame so bewitched your eyes, that you ca^ discern nothing but
that, which is altogether removed? nothing but wickedness? lechery? murders,
and theftes, tumultes, and conspiracies? Finally nothing reformed nor bettered
with us sithence the embracyng of this Gospel? The fruits of the Gospel
being restoared.
what say you to this? when the people be instructed to repose all their hope,
and affiaunce of Salvation in Christ only: to seek and crave of this only
patron and Mediator, a preservative for all maladies, reiectyng all peltyng
drugges of men's traditions: to hold them selves assured in this only
vnpenetrable Rock: to lame^te and bewail all their sins before him: finally
to make a sure covenant with the^ selves upon an vndeceauable Faith, to have
ye fruition of all things apperteinyng to salvation and everlasting co^solatio^
in him and by him: when godly consciences entangled before with innumerable
snares, do begin to be recomforted with that gladsome Trumpe of Evangelical
Grace: and to acknowledge and embrace the inestimable riches of Gods glory in
Christ Jesus: whe^as Kings having shaken from their shoulders that intolerable
yoke of servile Popish bondage, do know how to preserve their own Seignories
and right: and Subjects to yield due obedience to their Princes, and
Magistrates: finally when as Idolles, and Images being subverted, every person
is taught to open his own cause unto the living Lord, in spirit and truth,
and to lead his life according to the prescript rule of Gods ordinance, and
not after the Apish Decrees and Decretalles of the Pope? and to surcease here
from many others of the same sort: which being in number infinite almost are
you only and alone so bussardly blind, that can discern none of all these,
and can account all these points of so necessary reformation to be altogether
fruitelesse, and nothing worth?

But their manners remain yet unreformed, or rather worse then they were, since
this Gospel was received. Doctrine ought not to be judged after the qualities
of men's manners.
Harke^ a whiles you Portingal. Truly I may self have heard the Jews
obbraying us christians with the same faults, wherewith you do reproach us now
touching disordered life. And it may be peradventure, that amongst the Jews,
some Pharisees may lead their lives some what more precisely, according to the
outward integrity of the law, then many Christians do now a days: shall the
Faith therefore (which the Christians do profess) be esteemed any jot less
ualuable and sound? I beseech you Sir, in what country live you, that ca^ so
earnestly reprove us for not keepyng the discipline of our profession? What and
if your Auditory (say you) be not only not made better. etc. First render an
account of your own Auditory Osorius, then make inquisition of ours
afterward. But that we may with less difficulty answer the faults,
whereof you condemn us, I would feign learn of you first, who those be that
you note by the name of Auditorie? If you mean the Lutherans or Zuinglians:
surely I know no Lutheranes nor Zuinglia^s here. For as much as we here in
England do all profess to be ye disciples not of Luther, nor of Zuinglius, ne
yet of Calvin, but of Christ the Son of the living God only. But go to:
because it has pleased you to accuse us by the name of Sectaries thereby to
teaze me^ so much the more to hate us: Osorius malice against the Lutherans.
tell us I pray you first this one thing, whether those Lutheranes and
Zuinglians be the men, with whom these heinous wickednesses murders and
theftes be so rise unpunished? Truly I do confess this simply and truly, which
also I do lament heartily, that there is a great number of people every where,
not here in England alone, that be endued with no feelyng of Religion at all,
nor moved with any earnest motion of mind to any contemplation of heavenly
things. But such do I neither recompt Lutheranes nor yet worthy to be reckoned
amongst the number of true Christians.

Many are untruly termed Lutherans that be no Lutherans.
Of this sort of people are some (the multitude whereof is infinite) who like
Players upon a Stage (fashioyng them selves to the present times, and manners of
Princes) turn, return, and ouerturne them selves after every blaste of
Religion, according to the time and place where they live: ready always to
follow any kind of profession, now this, now that, wherein they may best
maintain their countenaunces, dignities, and worship in good likyng, and
without peril, but as for these I vouchsafe neither the name of Luthera^s, nor
Catholics, but Newtralls, a rascal, and most abject people of all others. And
this also your self do confess plainly in this book, namely: that you know
many in this our Realm constaunt, and unremovable Catholics, whom likewise
you will not have to be nombred as the Auditorie of this Gospel. To Pass over
withal innumerall infidels, Atheistes, Paganes, counterfaites, hypocrites,
false brethren, false Gospellers, which under pretense of Religion, do nothing
else but cast a myste before the eyes of the world, Mauy counterfets lurk in
the Church under presence of the Gospel.
and serve their own turns, to the great danger and hinderaunce of the
godly. Now in this so huge a multitude of people, and so manifold variety of
affections, what people be they against whom you do in so great clusters impute
so great wickedness, lust, outrage, tumultes, murders, conspiracies procured
against Princes, and other more monstrous abominations, unspeakable, and
intolerable?

Even such be (say you) the Auditorie of your Gospel. What do I hear? have we
then any other Gospel in England then is with you in Portingall? is not one
self same Gospel every where? are not Gods laws the same in all places? is
Christ divided amongst us? or does any Christian in the world admit any
other Gospel then the Gospel of Christ? But you being a meery conceipted man
meant happily to sport your self, with that nyckname against such as have
harkened to Luther, Zuinglius, Bucer, Calvin and others their like as unto
their Schoolemaisters: Be it so, yet do I see no cause, why you should call
their doctrine a new Gospel. But go to, let us see yet, how true your slander
is, that you charge these men withal. I do confess that there be now very
many, and heretofore have been many also, who with Luther and those others do
agrain in the exposition of holy Scripture, The approved integritye of
the-Protesta^ts.
whose doctrine you are not able to confou^de, though ye would, whose lives you
ca^ not justly charge with any infamous crime, no nor able to imitate them. Of
the living at this day were not so convenient to speak: I will say somewhat of
others that are gone.

And of those chiefly, whom that furious swellyng gulf of Mary lately
swallowed up, which being in number many in so few years: Make Inquisition
of all their lives, search out their manners, studies, exercizes, functions,
speeches and deeds whatsoever, sift them, peruse them, yea prye into them with
that captious head and pearcyng eyes of yours as narrowly as ye can. And first
in Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury: who after by yt hearing this Gospel, began to
savor of Christian profession, what wickedness was ever reported of him? The
life of Cranmer Archb. of Cant.
with what outrage of lust was he enflamed? what murders, what seditious
tumults, what secret co^spiracies were ever seen or suspected so much to
proceed from him? unless ye account him blame worthy for this: That whea king
Henry father of the same Mary upon great displeasure conceived, was for some
secret causes determined to strike of her head, this Reverend Archb. did
pacify the wrath of the father with mylde and continual intercession,
preserved the life of the daughter, who for life preserved, acquitted her patron
with death.

As concerning his Mariadge if you reprochfully impute yt to lust, The marriage
of Cra^mer defended.
which Paul does dignifie with so honorable a Title, I do answer: that he
was the husband of one wife, with who^ he continued many years more chastely,
The name of a Concubine more holy with the Papists then the name of a wife.
and holyly then Osorius in that his stinking, sole, and single life,
paraduenture one month, though he flee never so often to his Catholic
Confessions. And I see no cause why the name of a wife, shall not be accoumpted
in each respect as holy, with ye true professors of the Gospel, as yt name of
a Concubine with the Papists. To speak nothing else of this sort of people
more unseemly, yet perhaps truly.

With Cranmer lived Nicolas Ridley, Bishop of London, Nichol. Ridley Bishop of
London.
coupled in one partakyng of Religion, and one manner of Martyrdom, who ledd
such a life always unmarried, as in the which all his adversaries were not able
to reprehend, not only any notorious crime, but also not so much as a blemishe
reprocheworthy, so far as I ever heard. Not much inferior to them both in
all commendable worthynes, and dignity, crowned also with the same crown of
Martyrdom did shine that famous Prelate,

Ferrar Bishop of S. Dauides: what shall I speak of John Hooper Bishop of
Worcester and Gloucester? Ferrar Bish. of Saint David's. John Hooper Bish. of
Worcest. and Gloucester.
whose integrity of life, void of all cause of reprehension, vnweryable
travail in teaching, feedyng, and visityng, might be not only a notable
pattern to all Romish Prelates, though never so Catholic, but make them also
ashamed in their own behalfes. To pass over a number of the like, Taylours,
Saunders, Rogers, Philpottes, Barnes, Ieromes, Garrettes, Famous men martyrred
under Queen Mary.
whose virtues to rehearse and commend with condign praises, for their
unblameable lives, neither the time serves, nor is my simple skill able to
express accordyngly.

What one man did this little Ila^d at any time nourish up, or ever shall see
more holy, and more chaste, then was Thomas Bilney (whom no posterity ought
ever to forgette) after that he began to harken unto, Tho. Bilney
and apply his mind seryously to this doctrine, namely to the Gospel of
Christ? saving that in all excellency of virtuous life John Bradford seems
worthy to be joined with him, Ioh. Bradford.
who wholly and altogether did so dwell in the fear of the Lord, and in a
certain inward earnest meditation of heavenly life, that living here on earth,
he seemed to have been translated (as it were) into an heavenly soul, before
he was violently taken from hence, so lean, spent and worn out with often
abstinence, vnmeasureale travail, and so spare a dyette, that he seemed an
Anatomy, nothing but skin and boane. In earnest prayer so continualy
exercised, that before he was burnt, his knees in handling seemed almost as
hard as Camels hoofes. Of all these, and many others like unto these (which I
could set down unto you, gathered out of most faithful hystoryes: Report
could not certify you, but other things it could: It could report lies and
untruths: And no marvel. If you ask the cause, I will tell you. For we are
carried according to the wickedness of this our age into sundry affections,
parts and factions: We do esteem of contreuersies not with that reverence and
simplicity of heart, as beseems us, and as we are taught by the prescript word
of God, but through sinister and corrupt affections, conceive an evil opinion
of them: And wrest and wring the truth it self, (whether it will or no) to
color and cleake Sects and divisions. And therefore as we are for the more
part more greedely carried to harken unto plausible matters, (such as concern
our own commodity and preferment rather then the glory of the Son of God) so
never wants stoare of notable talebearers, skillful purueyors for such
itching ears, notorious Sicophantes even for the same purpose raised up by the
just judgment of God.

Hitherto have I spoken of such only as were famous for their learning,
doctrine, dignity, judgment and ecclesiastical function. Besides these I
could reckon up unto you, of the meaner sort of people, six hundred more or
less, consumed to Ashes, in that five years persecution: The lives of those
which were burnt in Queen Mary's reign.
upon whose bodies although ye Romanists did furiously rage according to your
sauadge, and brutish natures, yet shall you never be able to raze out the
remembrance of them, from the posterity, so long as this world does endure.
And as for their virtuous lives, and commendable monumentes of their
godliness, left behind them, all the pack of your popish prelacy, priests,
and parasites, will never be able to reach unto.

Let me be so bold to annexe somewhat of Luther himself, Reported even of
him, who is so much the more to be believed, as he seemed to be wholly severed
from partaking his doctrine. For after this manner Erasmus writing to Thomas
Arch. of York in a certain Epistle concerning Luther, Erasmus testimony
concerning Luther.
does consta^tly affirm, that his life was irreproueable by all men's
judgment: and adds furthermore which he confesses to be no small argument of
his commendation: That he was of such integrity of manners, and common
conversation of life, that his enemies could find nothing whereat they might
cavil. And albeit the credit of this testimony seem but of small estimation
with you, as appears by your writing: See Osorius in his 1. book. 69.
Yet whoseuer is endued with sound judgment, shall easily perceive that in
respect of their age and country wherein they were both borne, he was better
acquaynted with the whole life and cause of Luther then you were. I could also
recite unto you the testimony of Fisher Bishop of Rochester, touching the
same Luther, out of an Epistle of his, written to Erasmus: who although was
more outragiously bent against Luthers doctrine, then beseemed him, yet made he
much more honest and comme^dable report of Luther, then you do. The words of
Roffensis as I find them are these. Luther of whom you wrate unto me, is a man
endued with singular dexterity of wit: and has the scriptures at his fingers
ends: For I have readde over his writings very earnestly. And as willingly
would I have some conference with the man, if I might with out any prejudice to
my person: that I might debate many matters with him, which trouble me. etc.
Roffensis of the doctrine of Luther.
Again in an other Epistle to Erasmus. I do hear say that Luthers
Commentaries upon the Psalms and upon the Epistle to the Ephesians shall
shortly come forth in print. I am maruey lously delighted with the man's wit,
and his wonderful knowledge in the scriptures. Truly I could wish that he had
quallified his speeches against the high Bishop, and masters appertayning to
the Sea Apostolic. etc. But go to, if this be your reason Osorius that the
soundnes of the doctrine, shall be aportioned according to the lives of the
teachers, I beseech you, forgette a whiles that your collericke passion of your
blind affection, and vouchsafe to answer uprightly: What fault find you in
ye lives of Phil. Melancthon, Mart, Bucer, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Peter
Martyr and John Caluyne? For their lives were not led in hugger mugger, nor
their conuersations so closely cloystered, but that there be yet eye witnesses,
and living Records, by whom this question may easily be decided betwixt us,
whether I do Imagine or flater more in praising, then you err more
monstrously in slaundering them.

And where are now those horrible wickednesses? mo^struous sacrileges?
murders? lust? outrages and Treasons? Luthers doctrine not other then all
other true Christians.
Surely wheresoever they be, they are not in Luther, nor ever published by his
doctrine, sithe^ce his doctrine is none other manner of doctrine, then is of all
true Christians: therefore let Osorius him self look out who these be, and
what Auditory of what Gospel they be whom he accuses guilty of such horrible
crimes: whatsoever they be, surely they are neither Lutheranes nor Gospellers.
And forasmuch as there is none so holy a profession, but does shroud oftentimes
many such persons, as in deed are nothing less then they seem in outward
countenance, Osorius does argue skarse Clarkly like a doctor herein, that
valueth the dignity of the doctrine, by the quallity of the Auditory. Logitians
call it Fallax consequentis. The Fallax of the consequent.


For whereas Signs are not all of one nature, but some called accidents: some
likely hoodes, many perpetual and necessary, he learned Logitians therefore
teach that an argument can not lightly be deduced from Signs, An Argument
rightly deduced from Signs.
except it be from snch Signs only, which in their own nature appropried to
the things it self, have always a perpetual and necessary cause of
consequence, coupled with them. For Parents are not always to be adjudged
wicked, though their children be unthrifty and go out of kind. Nor is the
scholemayster to be blamed always, if his scholars profitte not in learning
accordingly. Nero was enstructed by a very godly Master in all godly and
virtuous precepts of learning and life: yet what man was ever more wicked? The
soundnes of doctrine does not always appear in the manners of the Scholars:
Doctrine not to be applied to manners, but manners to doctrine.
And sometimes also the matter fares quite contrary, as that under the veyle
of virtuous manners, may lurcke perilous poison of most contagious doctrine.
Doctrine therefore ought always to be measured by her own principles and
grounds chiefly from whence it takes her Root. Otherwise whereas all those
are accounted Christians in name and profession, which are infected with
semblable vices and corruptions: It should follow upon this rule of Logic,
that Christian doctrine were in this respect worthy to be blamed, because many
Christians, at this day, do abuse the name of Christians, to cloak and cover
their wicked and abominable lusts.

I have answered all the parts of Osorius Inuectiue reasonably well: Wherein
he brings himself expostulating with ye Lutheranes by a figure called
Apostrophe or a Rhethoricall slight rather? but in such wise as that you may
not so easily discern Osorius, as that old witch called Slander it self
speaking in the words of Osorius.

This quarrel therefore being now thoroughly canuassed which seemed to pinch
Haddos masters most: He remoueth his camp, and bends his whole force now
against his opposed enemy Haddon, whom he determines to assail on every side.
First, Osorius page 181. 182.
touching the most ancient profession of the Church, next concerning a
comparison made betwixt both Churches, to see whether of the^ do resemble the
Apostles Church nearest: In which part many things are discoursed of all
parts: of the ordinances of both Churches, of manners and life, of preaching,
of Masses, of the communion, of the variableness of opinions, of the Papane,
of Images, of praying to Saints: of sacrifice and of Purgatory. For these be
almost the chiefest furniture of this wiffeler.

Of prescription, of Antiquitye.
And first as touching Prescription of Antiquity, Osorius perpleding, demau^deth
of Haddon, in what wise he defends yt his innovation or new gospel: If
Haddon were present, this matter could not be destitute of a sufficient
Advocate. And because Haddon can not now come, I will by your patience
answer, not so artificially peradventure as him self could have done, yet as
effectually in his behalf as shall satisfy ye cause, though can not stopp
your ianglyng: which cause nevertheless remains vnua^quishable, not so much
by any my defense, as fortified thoroughly with her own strength and force of ye
truth. And yt I may know first, what I ought to defend, and what you mean to
oppugn, it behooves us to conclude upon this point. For you do so entangle all
your discourse with I know not what crooked and crabbed conueyaunce, and choppyng
of matters together, knittyng and reknittyng one thing upon an other, that ye
neither agree with your self, nor any man else can perfitly determine what your
meaning is. You do accuse Haddon (I suppose) and our Preachers of Nouelty.
Osorius does accuse the reformed Churches of Noueltye.
But we must the^ know wherein you define this Novelty to consiste. In the
life that we lead? or in the doctrine which we do profess? If you mean of our
lives: but therein wicked may we be, new we ca^ not be. For what is more
ancient then vice? If the question be of doctrine only, why the^ do ye
transpose the Disputation, which is only instituted upon doctrine, and rack
the same to ye lives, and manners of men? and then at last to command Haddon
to deliver unto you some example of that ancient Virtue? As though if he could
not do so, he should be forthwith condemned for an heretic? I know we live
not Apostolic lives, no more then we work the miracles which the Apostles
wrought: what then? what is this to the purpose.

Haddon affirms (as he may justify it well enough) that our Church here in
England does not vary from the institution Apostolicque in any thing: The
reformed Churches now a days do not vary from the Apostles institution in
doctrine.
meaning doctrine, faith, and Religion. If this seem not to be true in your
co^ceipt, it behooved you then to oppugn that which he does defend. For his
defense concerns the principles, and substaunciall points of Christian
doctrine, wherein he says that our Churches do vary nothing at all from the
institution of the Apostles. You or the other part (ouerpassing the matters
apperteinyng to doctrine,) do writhe and wreste the state of the whole question
to moral virtues. And in your own conceit seem, that you have very notably
besturred your self against Haddon, if you win this much of him that the
Lutheranes have not attained to that excellency of Apostolic integrity: And
hereupon you spend and wast all the smoaky powder of your miserable
Rhetoric: wherein you both bewray the weakness of your cause to much, and the
subtle steight of your deep devise. For if it would have pleased you to deal
franckly here, and not stick to discover the very grief of your mind, this
life of ours (howsoever it be) was not the matter that made us heretics:
Manner of life thought never so disorderous makes not an heretic.
nor that made you and your Catholics to be so maliciously incensed against
us. For how filthy soever we seem to you, and your fraternity, wollowyng and
weltryng in all abhonimation, if besides this licentiousness of manners had
been naught else, doughtles we should have found both your fatherhoode, and the
rest of your profession our good Masters enough, and not only our good
Masters, but most foreward fellows, and mates of the same vices and of all
kind of abomination besides, yea and not fellows only, but our auncientes
and Captains therein. For what filthynesse in all our lives, what pride,
ambition, cruelty, sauadgenes, robberies, disreipt, violence, arrogance, lust,
despising of Magistrates, was ever so monstrous in any of us, wherein you do
not vnmeasurably exceed us? And therefore if dissolute manners, and unbridled
course of licentious life, have made you so skittish, and forced you to boil
in so beastly rancour against us: surely this tro^pet ought so much the rather
have been founded against your popes of Rome, your Cardinals, and other your
Copesmates of ye same crew, by how much more grievous matter may be found in
them to be quarelled at and reproved. But this is not the prick that makes you
to kick, because we break Gods commandments by living wickedly, The cause
that enflameth Osor. against the Lutheranes is not the life, but the state of
their doctrine.
but because we yield not to the Decrees of your traditions, because we do not
humble our selves to your Cannons and Laws: but chiefly above all others,
because the light of the Gospel spreading her glorious beams abroad, and the
whole world at the length having shaken of her wonted drousines, eue^ Cobblers
and Tyukers begin to discern a Friar from a Fursebursh, a Moncke from a
Marmyan, and the Pope from a Puppet: because the ugly vysours and counterfaite
hypocrisy of Frameshapen Religion is laid open to the view, because the
errors of doctrine, blyndnes of Judgments, and most false pretenses of
antiquity be openly discovered to the world, hereof come all these storms,
hereof arise all those Tragical outcryes and exclamations of Osorius against
the poor Lutheranes.

Sith it is even so, and for as much as all this controuersye betwixt us,
consists not upon examples of good life, but upon the chief principles and
foundation of Doctrine, and Religion: rejecting all unnecessary
circumlocutions, come again to the matter Osorius, and stand fast upon the
special point of the question: The foundation of the question is not of
manners, but of the principles and grou^des of Religion. The condition agreed
upon concerns the trial of antiquity.
The controuersye at this present, concerns matter of Doctrine, and Faith:
which only matter must either convince us for Heretics, or arquite us for
Catholics. And here writing against Haddon, you require us to clear our
selves from all suspicion of Noueltye. There is nothing more easy to be done:
But sithence you provoke us to this challenge (my Lord,) become a man of your
word then: and let not your discourse run at randone, from the state of the
question: And let us conclude (if it please you) upon this point: That whether
of us can justify his part best, by testimony of Fathers, and Antiquity of
time, the same to go away with the garland. But who shall be vmpyer, you will
say? if I vouch the scripture, you will forthwith cry out that it is to
obscure: neither do I deny, but that in certain prophetical, and profound,
and deeper mysteries it is in deed somewhat obscure: The papists exception
against the obscurenes of the scriptures.
but in matters of faith, and salvation, the holy ghost would not have it so
obscure, but that every indifferent, and godly reader, might gather thereof
matter sufficient, for the necessary instruction of faith, and abilitye to
discern. And for mine own part, I will require none other witness or vmpyer
herein, then the Reader himself whatsoever he be, so that he will stand
upright, and will lay aside all private affections, and all partialytye of
foreiudgement, and give sentence according to the very touchstone of the
manifest Scriptures.

But our Osorius and his companion Pighius will exclayme again, and say yt
none ought be judge in this cause but the Pope of Rome: neither will I forsake
him, condicionally, so that he will faithfully, sincerely, and simply without
fraud or guile, exclude private affection, nor will be addicted to one part,
more the^ the other: and setting aside his authority awhiles, will promise to
become an upright, and sound vmpier of the cause together with scripture being
Judge. Of an vnpier in Ecclesiastical causes.
For otherwise I think it not to stand with conuenience of reason, that any
man shall be in his own cause, both a pleader, a witness, and a Judge: Neither
do I think that any such one, will ever become in indifferent Judge, nor will
any discrete man admit any such person to be Judge. And yet I stand not so
much upon a Judge herein. This one thing do I wish only, that with the
objections of our adversaries, our aunsweres may be heard with indifferency.
And I assure you, if I could prevail with wishing, I would desire nothing more
heartily, then yt the renowned king of Portingall Sebastian a prince of
excellent Majesty, A Request to the excellent king of Portingall.
(since I suppose verily that the arbitriment, detreminatio^, and judgment of
this cause does concern Christian Princes chiefly) would vouchsafe of his
singular cleme^cy according to the ancient Laws of Athens, to give ear
indifferently to both cause, and to lend his princely ears but even a little
whiles, not unto me, but to the cause it self, whereof I shall entreat. I
would not doubt (his highness being judge,) but that I would easily justify,
that all, whatsoever the Catholics do allege at this day for their
antiquitye, The Antiquity of the Romish Religion cou^terfaite.
are but bare bragges: And that with us remains nothing wherein they may
justly condemn us of Nouelty. And in this behalf I can not wonder enough,
what came into Osorius mind, to exact of us a warrant of our Nouelty, seeing
that of his own Antiquitye he can yeald us no manner of warrant at all.

The false accusation of Novelty against the Lutherans.
But let us harken a while to those notable reasons of our adversaries,
wherewith they do defend their Antiquitye: which being thoroughly confuted, we
will presently proceed to the arguments, which they do object against our
new masters of this new Gospel, as they term it. There is a principle in the
civil Law: The laws (says they) are favorable to the party in possession,
in a title of prescription.

The law of Prescriptio^.
If prescription of fifty years do clean cut of all challenge, what shall be
said then of them which affirm their continued possession in doctrine, a
thousand years and more.

By the same prescription of time (say they,) the priests of the old law did
challenge unto themselves, a lawful right to sit in Moses chair.

Ergo, Man's law does adiudge no man a wro^gfull dissensor, being able to
prescribe fifty years possession.

Answer: The priests of the old law do challenge a right to sit in Moses
chair, in respect of the continued prescription of time. I do confess this
to be true in deed: And yet this prescription notwithstanding, the Lord did
call the very same priests thieves, and murderers. Again touching their
allegation of the wrongful disseisor by law, and prescription of time, I do
answer. In the civil law this is true in deed: but not so in Gods law. And
yet there is also a rule in the civil law: A wro^gfull disseisor shall not
ohtayne, though he prescribe never so long continuance of possession. Again:
An ordinance begun wickedly at the first, is not said to be allowable for
prescriptio^ of time. But as concerning Gods law, there be many notable
testimonies of most worthy personages, which disprove the same for an untruth.
Namely amongst all others, the saying of Augustine chiefly: Distinct. 8.
August.
The veritye being discovered, custom must give place to truth: let no man
prefer custom before reason, and truth: because reason and truth do
always exclude custom. And Gregory: Gregory.
If you pretend custom (says he) you must note what the Lord says: I am the
way, the truth, and the life: He does not say, I am custom: doughtles every
custom, though never so ancient, though never so general, must give place to
the truth: Amongst whom also, hear what Cyprian does say: Custom.
Antiquitye. Prescriptio^. Cyprian. distinc. 8.
If Christ only must be harkened unto (says he) we may not regard what any
other did think convenient to be done before our time, but what Christ has
done first, who is above all other. For we ought not to follow the custom of
men, but the truth of God, for as much as the Lord spoke by the month of his
Prophet Esaias, and said: They worship me in vain, teaching the doctrines and
tradicions of men. Moreover: whereas themselves know this rule to be
infallible, that no custom shall prescribe against the prince, No custom may
prescribe against the king, much less any Custom may prescribe against god.
how much rather ought it be said: no time or custom shall prescribe against
God? Otherwise what shall we say of Antichrist, which because he has possessed
his See more then an hundredth years: shall he therefore not be accounted for
Antichrist for his title of prescription?

Hitherto therefore, the reasons wherewith the Catholics do maintain their
Antiquitye, are declared. It remains now, that we purge our selves of the
crime of Nouelty, fasly obbraydid against us by Osorius: A defense against the
accusation of Nouelty falsely charged upon the reformed Churches by Osorius.
especially, since Osorius does urge us so earnestly thereunto: wherein I would
gladly confer with that indifferent, and upright reader, (whom erst I spoke
of,) or with any other Catholic man, who has any spark of sound and upright
judgment: And I would enquire of him first his judgment upon this point of
doctrine: whereas we believe and profess, that our nature even from our first
creation, is so utterly lost, and forlorn, that in our selves remains no
help at all to rise again without Christ: again yt Christ the son of God,
taking our nature upon him, has made so perfect satisfaction for our sins,
that there remains nothing wherein: his deseruings have not sufficiently
enough satisfied for all general, Of the merits of Christ.
yea for the sins of the whole world: Moreover that these his merits are so
by wonderful dispensation spread abroad with ouerflowing plenty upon all
mankind, through the singular, and inestimable benefitte and mercy of God,
that a free passage is made wide open for all miserable wretches, and penitent
sinners, (being endued with faith) to have free access unto Christ: and so
laid open, as that freely through faith, without all merits of ours, without
all the works of the law they be pardoned and accepted: upon this point I say
I would feign hear the opinion of the godly, and Catholic Reader, whether
this Assertion hane any manner of Nouelty in it, which has not proceeded from
Christ himself, from Saint Paul, from the holy Ghost, and from the sacred
word of God. I think no man will say so.

Of true confidence.
What means this? That where the same scripture does teach us, to repose all
our affyaunce not in works, but in Christ only, grounding our selves in the
mean space assuredly, upon the infallible promise of God, whereof we have no
mistrust, but that he which promised freely, the same will perform most
faithfully, not for any our sake but for his Sons sake only, in whom we do
believe: so that now there be no reason else of any our righteousness in the
sight of God, then through faith only: Let the Godly and upright Reader judge
here again with me, what Nouelty, or Sacrilege is in this manner of Doctrine?

Tertulian touching prescription against Heretics.
If according to the authority of Tertullian; that thing ought to be preferred
that was first diliuered, I will ask again of any indifferent Reader whether
this custom were received in the Church first, namely: that we should
acknowledge one only Advocate and Mediator of God and men, the man Christ
Jesus? Or whether we should seek unto many Advocates and Mediators for the
ease of our miseries?

Of Invocation, adoration and worshipping this is not a new but an ancient
commandment: Thus shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou
serve: Exodus 20.
And again, thou shall make to thy self no graven Image, nor the likeness of
any thing etc. Of invocation, worshipping. etc.
And with what face then do you accuse them of innovation, who observe these
things according to the prescript rule of the ancient commandment?

God did institute in his Church two Sacraments, Of Sacraments.
as appears evidently, which he commanded us to observe very carefully and
deligently. If we do not frequent these in that sincerity of Religion, as we
ought to do: Let us be condemned. But if we do herein according to duetye,
and simplicitye of true Religion: I pray you what Noueltye is in this our
doing?

If we measure the ancient Fathers and Authors of true doctrine by number of
years: we say with Iustine: Paul is the Father of Fathers, Out of Iustine.
whose authority is of such credit, that if an Angel of heaven would bring
any thing contrary to that which Paul has taught, let him be holden accursed.
Of the freedom of Marriage. Heb. 13. 1. Timo. 4.
But the same Paul gave free liberty to all persons ingenerall to take wives,
and did dignify the Marriage bed by this title, honorable. And called the
forbidding of Marriage the doctrine of Devils: And there were amongst the
Apostles, some, which did not only marry wives, but did lead them about with
them also, according as was lawful for them to do: And how is this contrary
to ye ancient custom and examples of the Elders, The mother tongue in
Churches.
If ministers (who are appointed to the ministry in Churches) marry wives for
the necessary comfort of their liuelyhood? We read the scriptures to the
unlettered people in their mother tongue: we do communicate with them also under
both kinds, The Communion under both kinds.
both bread and wine. If the Apostles did not use the same: Let Osorious have
the prise.

I will further debate thus with this upright and frendlye Reader, and desire
him that he will vouchsafe to peruse all ye parts of our doctrine, and view
with his eyes every angle and corner of our Churches: Of Images.
Peradventure he sees no portrayctes of Images, blazed abroad to be worshipped
for pence: he beholds Bare walls, and judges them more like unto Barnes then
unto Churches: Yet was the most Ancient Temple of Solomon even such an other
Barn: yea such a Barn also was the Tabernacle of God more ancient then the
other in the Law carnal: and may not we want the gaze of Images in the
spiritual Law? Of right^ and Ceremonies.
He sees no tapers lighted at high noone, no palms, no Relics, no belles,
no oil, no spittle, no consecrated fire, nor water: he sees not the
Sacramental bread lyfted up aloft and worshipped: he sees no markette of
pardons, no Iubiles, no sacrificatory Masses, no shauelinges nor beardlesse
Priests: no differences of days, of months, years, gareme^ts, meats and
colors, no stately and pompeous supplications, and Processions, besides
innumerable other Byshapes of frameshapen Ceremonies, all which whether ought
to be tolerated in Christian Churches, I do not at this time discuss. Yet
this I deal with, and enquire of my Reader, whether our Churches (which do
lack all these trumperies) deserve rather to be condemned of nouelty, or do
more nearly resemble the lively and perfect pattern and countenance of the
most true and most ancient Church?

But Luther does teach that freewill has no power at all: Of the power of
freewill.
that whatsoever a man does, is sin: that whatsoever good or evil we do,
comes of absolute and unavoidable necessity, etc. And what can be spoken so
sincerely, but by sinister construing may be depraved? For how deeply does not
the deadlye sting of Momus wound, if it may freely pearce without resistaunce?
Luther does embase the power of freewill in deed, but in that man only that
is not yet regenerate: but in things appertayning unto God, and wherein he
weakeneth the effectual force of freewill: he does strengthen and establish it
with the access of Gods grace. Of the greatness of Sin, and distinction of
necessity, has been spoken so much already that it is needelesse now to
redouble the same again: All which (notwithstanding) the indifferent Reader
shall find nothing to be spoken by him, that was not spoken before his time,
and drawn from the very fountains, and most ancient springes of the
Prophettes and Apostles: as has been declared before, both out of the
Prophette Esaias, who recou^teth all our righteousness no better worth, then a
foul menstruous clothe, and out of Moses, Paul and the Prophets who have
taught this doctrine to be most assured. That it is God that does harden the
hearts: that does deliver over into reprobate minds: which has created the
wicked man the evil day: and that there is no evil in the City, that the Lord
has not wrought. etc. All which if a man should preach in these days in the
same words, there is no doubt but Osorius would accuse him of heretical
nouelty.

Of iustifiyng faith.
Of the iustifyng faith, Luther did discourse very abundantly and profoundly,
and with all no less faythfuly and truly: Whose judgment we do all embrace
gladly and joyfully: And render unto God most hearty thanks for this his
inestimable benefit, finding nothing in this doctrine, that is not throughlye
approved most true, not only by the testimony of the Apostles, but by the
general consent and agreement of the most ancient Prophettes. Paul does
teach: that man is justified in the sight of God by faith without works: Romans
3. Galat.
Luther does teach that we are justified by faith only: Galat.
what difference is there here I pray you? Osorius ascribes rewards to
works, Paul does openly take away all reward from works: Whose Judgment
is more true or more ancient? And what kind of new doctrine is there here
now? If Luther (agreeing with Paul) excludynge works, do establish faith
only in the doctrine justification, and yet not so altogether excluding
works, as that he would have no works practiced, but so and in such wise, as
they may not be said to justify: so that now godly and careful endeavor in
faithful works should not be sequestered, but wicked confidence, and vain
superstitious glorying upon merits utterly cut of rather. With which kind
of doctrine if Osorius be offended, as with a certain new fangled Gospel:
whether is it more reasonable, that the everlasting truth of GOD shall give
place to Osorius persuasio^s? or that Osorius should revoke his error,
according to the rule of the truth? In this therefore that Luther teaches,
that faith only does justify in the sight of God, is no new doctrine, but the
doctrine of Paul. But that the mind and meaning of Paul may the better be
conceived, it might have been added out of S. James (the best Interpretor of
Paul, as ye which does more fully express the meaning of Paul) what manner
of men they be, whom only faith does justify, not wicked obstinate Sinners:
but humble and prostrate Sinners only, truly and unfeignedly repentaunt
Sinners: For otherwise such as raunge outragiously, and wilfully in their
Sins, nor are touched with any remorse of sorrowful mind for their
wickedness committed, nor moved with any earnest desire to obtain forgiveness:
unto such I say, Paul does not bouchsafe to ascribe either Faith, or any
righteousness at all: no more does James defraud ye others (which with
repentance have an earnest desire of Salvation) of any part of Justification.
How faith only does justify, and whom.
No more do even those, which though be moved with never so great a remorse of
Conscience, obtain any mercy at Gods hands by any other means possibly,
then through only faith which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Whereby you may
perceive sufficiently, that in the Doctrine of Justification all works are
excluded, and Faith only wears the gareland. But that ye meaning of the
Apostle may appear more plainly (to be so bold to use school terms,) the
predicatum, must needs agree with his subiectum on this wise: as where it is
fayd, yt faith only does justify: this is true in deed: but whom? Not the
proud, not the obstinate, stubborn, and outrageous sinners: but those sinners
only, which (stricken down with an earnest acknowledgement of their sumes,
and entering into a serious meditation of amendment of life) do most humbly
flee unto Christ through faith, even with all their hearts. Such that do on
this wise, simply, and unfeignedly repent: (for Luther speaks not a word of
others) if a man do teach to be freely justified through faith only (agreeing
herein with Paul, with James, and with Christ himself) does this man seem in
your eyes to teach a new Gospel? or rather a most true and most most ancient
Gospel?

It were a tedious piece of work to run over all the places of doctrine. Let
this be the sum: (to speak breefly,) Martine Luther did publishe many
articles: Luther.
John Calvin has set forth his Institutions: Calvin.
Melancthon has made a collection of Common places: Melanctho^.
the same also has done Wolfg. Musculus: Henry Bullenger has written his
Decades: Musculus. Bullinger.
Peter Martyr has made sundry commentaryes upon the old Testament, P. Martyr.
and the new: and discoursed notably upon the Sacrament. The same did before
him Hulderick Zuinglius, John Oecolampadius. Hul. Zuinglius. Occolampadius.
Marine Bucer has given us many aunsweres, and Apologies: Amongst those may
be placed the Apology of John Iuell, John Iuell.
no less famous and worthy: Of Antichrist now openly and in good time
discovered, (besides many other things has Gaulter Rodulph compiled a
treatise. Gualter Rodolfe. Theodore Beza.
Of many other matters likewise many writers have treated largely: Finally, the
professions, and confessions of many nations, peoples, provinces, Kingdoms,
Cities, towns incorporate, proclaimed and published in writing, through all
their several Churches, by general agreement, conspiring, and concluding all
with one assent, in one vndoughted truth. In all whose writings, monuments,
and confessions, If you can show any thing new, never heard of before, or
that is not au^swerable, and correspondent to the auncienty, and doctrine of
the Apostles, I give you here free liberty to exclayme against those doctors
of the new Gospel, as loud, and wide as ye can. But if hitherto your self
have found no such matter, nor ever shall be able to show any such, to what end
raungeth this shameless and vnbryveled impudency, in matter so manifestly
false?

You call it a new Gospel shamelesly enough, yelding no reason that moves you
to call it new: Wherein you have set before our eyes a very plain, and evident
demonsiration of your foolish vanitye. For if we should confess the truth in
deed: to what purpose is all this brabble, contention, and discention amongst
us? but for this only matter, because we do endeuonr to reclayme you yt have
forsaken the true and native simplicitye of the true and ancient Gospel,
roauing at randone after I can not tell what newfangled, strange, and
imaginatiue devises of men's traditions: and are desirous to have you come home
to the ancient antiquitye of the true, simple, and pure Euangelick veritye
again. If any man shall doubt hereof, and think this untrue that I speak:
The Lutherans acquitted from all reprehention of Noueltye.
the apparent proof is at hand. Uouchsafe us once this one petition, that ye
would be but willing to have the Christian doctrine to recover, and return to
her ancient state, and first institution, even the same state wherein it
flourished in those most ancient days of Christ, and his Apostles, weeding out
by the roots all that pilfe, and baggage, that has ouergrowen the Church
since their departrue hence, and wherewith they nor any of them were ever
acquainted: we will desire none other conditions, or couenauntes of unity, and
atonement to be concluded upon betwixt us. Whereby the godly and indifferent
reader may by this only argument conjecture, where those masters do lurk,
whom Osorius does accuse of Noueltye. Howbeit this nickname of new
Gospellers, (wherewith the Catholics do obbrayd us) is no new reproach: For
in like manner the Prophets in times past, thapostles, yea Christ himself were
called New fellows, because they taught new doctrine. An old quarrel of the
Catholics touching Noueltye.
Tertullian, and Eusebius also do record yt this nickname was usually
freque^ted, eue^ in the very swathling clowtes of the Church. But they did
easily deliver themselves from that reproach of Nouelty. Wherein albeit we have
not attained so prosperous a success, as they did, yet have we yielded our
endeavor in the same cause, as far forth as we trust the godly and
indifferent reader will be satisfied, and pleased withal.

I have spoken now of our Antiquity. It remains that you answer likewise
Osorius as much as you may for your Antiquitye. For it is against all reason,
and injuriously handled to exact a special accou^pt of an others Antiquitye,
that can render no reason for your own. And therefore, whereas this religion
of yours (which under visor of a true Church, you do falsely call by the name of
a Catholic Church,) is ou^rwhelmed with infinite precepts, laws, and
doctrines of men, oppressed with innumerable decrees, decretals, extrauagantes,
Quintines, Sixtines, Ceremonies, Traditions, Rules, Prescriptes, Edictes,
Cannons and Synodalles, Rites, vows and curses. Let us be certified therefore,
how much antiquity is resiau^t in the whole rabble of these your inventions
and devises.

Of the supremacy and titles of the Pope.
And to begin at the very toppegallaunt of all your Religion that high Prelate
the Pope him self: let us first take a view of all his Titles, by the which he
is called, to wit: Uniuersall Bishop, Prince of Priests, high and supreme
head of the Church on earth: The titles of the Roman pope
Christ's Uicare general, the only Successor of Peter, the most holy Father:
most Reverend Bishop: keepyng ioynte Consistory together with God: the only
Monarche of the visible Church, Bishop of Bishops.

These Titles and Additions of names, I do not enquire whether were ever
named, or heard of in the time of Christ, or of his Apostles: neither do I ask
whether they were received into the Church, in the time of Gregory, six
hundredth years after ye Asce^sion of Christ: For no man will ever say so. This
is it that I do ask, whether if ye Apostles of Christ, or if Christ him self
lived at this day, he could endure these blasphemies, whether he would not
thunder out, ye same words or greater the^ the same, wherewith he reproched
the Jews, and Pharisees long sithence: Math. 23.
Woe be unto you Pharisees, which love the chief and highest Seats in the
Synagogues, and love to be saluted in the markettes, and to be called of men
Rabby. etc. What shall I speak of the dignity of ye Pope? The outrageous;
dignity of the pope.
whereby your Parasites do make this Romish Bishop not only greater then all
Bishops, and higher then all human power, but better also then the general
Councels, and all the whole Churches besides: wherein you give him liberty to
dispense with whatsoever, and howsoever he will: altogether as him lists, yea
though it be contrary to Gods Commandments: to make Laws and Articles: to
throw down unto hell: to open and shut fast heaven and Purgatory, to whom and
from whom he will: to release at his pleasure promises and oaths of
allegeaunce, wherewith Subjects are bound either to God, or to their Princes:
and whereby you have coined him a ioynte Consistory together with God: by the
which you authorize him to tread upon most mighty Emperors: to transpose
Kingdoms and States: to make markettes of Pardons: and to make new kinds of
worshyppynges.

It is manifest and plain that all these were devised by your Parasites, not
derived from the Apostles: all which howsoever you cover and cloak with never
so fair a vysour of feigned antiquity, yet the sacred Hystory of the
Evangelists, and the writings of the Apostles do determine the contrary:
Christ him self submitting him self unto Caesar, did not deny to pay tribute:
he rebuked his Apostles striving together about preeminence by the example of a
child, he taught them to embase them selves in all humility: permitted unto
them no liberty of beatyng Rule: Paul appealed to Caesar as to an higher
power: Peter making him self equal with the Elders, called him self Fellow
Elder not Prince of Priests. He was never called head of ye Church, nor ever so
taken: For proof whereof hear ye testimony of Chrysostom an ancient
witness: Chrisost. ad Romanos. homil. 23.
Let every soul submit it self to the higher power, yea though he be an
Apostle, though he be an Evangelist, or Prophet or whatsoever he be: For this
humility does not subvert power. etc. I make no mention here, with what
thunderyng words Gregory does inueighe against the^, Gregory.
which did practice to deprave this Ecclesiastical equabilitie, with arrogau^t
Titles, The supremacy was first granted by Phocas to Boniface.
and to blaze her with more beautyfull feathers, the^ she was hatched withal:
whom he vouchsafes no better name, then very forerunners of Antichrist.
Hystories are full hereof, that those Titles of Pontifical pride were first
granted to pope Boniface the 3. by Phocas a murderer. But the fullness of all
power began to be plumed by) little and little in the times of his Successors,
at the last in the time of Hildebrand it became thoroughly ripe. The fulness of
power began in the time of Hildebrand Pope.
And yet the Greek Churches stood always against it, nor would in any case
allow thereof until the year of our Lord 1400. at what time Pope Eugenius 4.
by fraud, and great sums of money did purchase this singular prerogative of
superioritye, from the States of the Church, and the pieres of the Greek
Empire. To be brief: The profession which our Churches do generally
acknowledge touching Christ, to be the only head of his Church: is most
evidently confirmed by the most ancient, and approved testimonies of the
Apostles. On the contrary part, this your head of your Romish Church, though
magnifyed with never so glorious titles, how truly it may maintain such
singularitye, I know not: Sure I am: you can not justify it by any Antiquitye
at all.

Cardinals.
The same that I have spoken of the Papane, may be veryfyed of the first
creation, and election, of Cardinals: of whom was never so much as name heard
of, The election of the Pope translated from the Emperor and the people of
Rome unto the Cardinals.
in ye age of thapostles, or in Gregory's time, no, nor a thousand years after
Christ. For in those former ages, from Gregory I. unto Pope John 29. the
election of the Pope was always Resiaunt with the Emperor, and the people of
Rome. After which time the people being excluded from giving their voices, the
election was (through the practice of Parasites) posted over to certain
Cardinals: The Pope must be taught (say they,) and not heard.

Of the Mass, and her appurtenaunces.
Even with like fraud, were the people persuaded, that the Mass was a very
ancient thing, not begun of late, nor proceeding from any others, then from
the Apostles themselves, more then xv. hundredth years ago. But Paul, many
years after thascention of Christ, writing to the Corinthia^s, does say: that
he did deliver unto them, the same which he had received of the Lord: Wherein
he spoke not a word of those stagelyke gambols, apish gestures, of
transubstantiation: of one only kind to be delivered to the people: of any
sacrifice for the quick, and the dead: of invocation of Saints: or praying
for the dead: All which together with that high feast of Corpus Christi, from
whence they took their first footing, The use of Corpse in the Church
and who were the Authors thereof, Histories make mention plainly enough. The
wearing of Coapes at the time of Communion was first brought in by the
bountiful liberality of Charles the great. The practice, and custom of
private Masses began under his son Lodovick Pius: Private Masses.
At what time was a decree made in a council holden at Agathe, that the lay
people should be admitted to receive the Sacrament three times of the year
only. This custom was afterward abridged from thrice, to once in a year,
by a constitution made in the time of Clement 3. The Communion of the lay
people abbridged from thrice to once in a year by Clement 3
who also described certain Rites to be observed in celebrating ye Mass:
whereas a little before, Pope Alexander the 3. had instituted the use of
unleavened bread about the time of Frederick Barbarosa, and taken away the
other part of the Communion from the lay people. Unleavened bread.
The pride and arrogance of the Popes waxed then so outrageous, that at the
last, they shamed not to commit horrible sacrilege in the whole use of the
Lords supper, One part of the Communion taken away from the lay people. Corpus
Christi day
and turned it to the worshypping of an Idol: the true use thereof, being
utterly abolished. But for the carrying abroad of this consecrated bread, was a
special feast, and holyday granted by Pope Vrbane the 4. by the mediation of
Thomas Aquinas, a little before Gregory the 7. As concerning the Cannon of the
Mass, appears plainly, by the whotte contention raised about Gregory's
Cannon, and Ambrose his Cannon, that it was clowted up, and patcht together
with many other trinckets more of the like sort, by diverse, and sundry Popes:
and not instituted in the primitive Church, nor yet ordained by thapostles:
During the time of which contention, the common Churches were in a great
perplexitye, not resolved, whether of those two Cannons they might receive.
Besides which Cannons, were diverse other Cannons made for the use of the Mass,
each contrary to other, botcht up partly by Gratian, which afterward were
enlarged with new vpstart, and more horrible blasphemies by Pope Gregory the 9.
about the year of our Lord 1227. and after him, by Pope Boniface the 8. about
the year of our Lord 1330. And this is evidently to be found in Historyes
every where.

Touching Images, Of Image.
Idols, pictures, pilgrimages, worshipping of Saints, and praying for the
dead, if antiquitye be demanded, what it can say: I would desire you to
answer me at a word (Osorius,) whether you think those Ages, and Churches to
be more ancient, that never hadd the use of them? or else those, which have had
them?

Concerning the Celebrating of the Communion: If you can Justify by any
probable record, or testimony, that the flourishing age of the Apostles, Of
transubstantion of Elevation of carrying abroad of the Sacrament.
or of the ancient Fathers, that ever any mention, or motion was made of the
lifting the bread aloft, of transubstantiating it, of worshipping it, of
hanging it up, of carrying it about, of sacrificing it for the sins of the
people, of devouring it alone, or of any of all these toys, (which you have
chopped into the Church at this day,) you shall win the victory. But if you
can not: Surcease then at the length for very shame to urge Haddon so earnestly
to defend his Noueltye, seeing your self are not able to defend your own, by
any manifest or probable authority.

Again for marriage of Priests forbidden by public authority, Of marriage
of priests and choice of meats.
Choice of meats, Uigilles, State holidays, and Imber days, over much
babbling in your intercessions, and prayers, joined with a certain opinion of
Religion, and obteining forgeuenes for the same: Be it generally spoken as
before.

I will not speak much of your Canons, Decrees, and Decretalls, Of the Popes
decrees and decretals.
by force whereof, you have erected to your selves a plain Imperial, kingly,
and poltique Superioritye in the Church: contrary to all Antiquitye, and
clean contrary to the nature of the Gospel. It is vndoughted true, that ye
Son of God, was sent from above, not to establishe any worldly, or seculer
principalitye, in this world: but a spiritual, and everlasting kingdom, which
is united, and knitt together, by the preaching and ministry of the word: not
by any human power, force of Arms, Imperial dignity, bodily policy. And as
for your infinite rabble of Laws, innumerable decrees, and Cannos, partly
Sinodals, partly Prouincialls: some prerogatives of the Pope, others peculiar
of several Bishopps, wherewith Christian consciences are so miserably
entangled: to what end tend they all at the last? or what do they emplye
other? then under the title of the Church, to fortify you a kingdom, and
Tyranicall Ierarchye upon the earth? Which no power, nor potentate of this
world may be able to counteruayle. Otherwise what do these words of your
Decretalls emport, Extrauaga. de Maiorit. obed. cap. vnam.
wherein you challenge unto Peter's chair, the authority of the temporal
sword? If any man gaynesay you herein, you do forthwith exclayme, that he does
not well understand, (to speak your own words:) that saying of the Lord.
Putt up thy sword into thy sheathe. Again, where you force the one sword under
subjection of the other, so that the Temporal sword, must of necessitye be
subject to the spiritual sword. And at the last, measuring the proportion of
your Authority, by ynchmeale as it were, how much and by how many degrees it
surpasses the Temporal authority: De mayor it. and obedientia. cap. Solitae.
you allege for proof these words. Whereas the earth is seven times greater
then the Moon, and the Son eight times greater then the earth, it remains
therefore, according to this proportion, that the Popes superexcellency, must
surmount in dignitye, all kingly royaltye, fiftye times, sixtye degrees. At the
length, having on this manner enthronized your Ierarchye, ye have forced the
matter to this pass: That if any man will be so hardy, as once to mutter,
against the Majesty of this triple dignitye, you have Decrees, and Cannons,
(far worse then Cannonshotte,) to hale the poor Heretic to the stake, and
consume him to Ashes.

I come now to the orders and armies of Monckes and Friars, Of Mou^cks and
Friars.
and that whole generation of Cowled Crauines: whose first foundation if you
search for, we shall find that they are start up long since the age of the
Apostles, and that purer age of the primitive Church. If you desire to know to
what end they were erected, the matter will declare it self manifestly, that
these ca^cred Caterpillars were sent for a special plague only, to devour
the Gospel of Christ, and to fill up the full measure of the mystery of
iniquity: which is enough though I speak no more of them. Howbeit I deny
not, but that in the times of Augustine, Jerome, and Basile, wanted not a great
number of men, and women, who (either forced through cruelty of persecution, or
loathyng the losenes and licentious life of the common people) did abandon them
selves into deserts and solitary places, choosing rather to live far from
company with a few, then amyddes the turmoyles and troubles of worldly
affairs, to be carried from the quiet and tranquillity of their minds. But
Monckery was then a sequestration and departing from the world, not a
profession in the world: And even those Monckes were the^ in number but few,
and none other but of the lay people: whom not Religion, not coats, not
cowles, not colors, not rules, not vows did sequester from the company of the
laytie: nor were they soiourning then in ye Cities, or Towns. But coucht close
upon tops of mountains, or in unhaunted woods and fennes: nor lay snortyng
in sloth, or pamperyng the paunche upon other men's purses: but either lived
moderatly with their own revenues, or gatte their living with the sweat of
their brows: Amongst whom was no foundation laid as yet of those three
Vows, Three vows of Mou^kerye.
with the other trinckettes apperteinyng to the same vows, namely: wolle,
flax, color, cowle, leather belt, or gyrdle of knotted coard, shoes cut or
whole, fish, eggs, pulse, heary cloth, scilence, night Orisons: The Seraphin
had not yet ouerspread the world with his six Monckish wyngs: Six wings of
Seraphin
whereof the first was all orderly obedience, the second Eua^gelicall poverty,
the third immaculate virginity, the fourth most humble humility, the fifth
peacemakyng Simplicity, the sixth Seraphicall Charity: of whom though I dare
not affirm, that they were not altogether void of those godly gifts, yet was
not so Celestial, and Seraphicall a profession of them flowen from out the
fiery Firmament into the earth as yet. And no marvel: for as much as these
Seraphicall fraternities of Cowled Cloysterers, nor the roysting vpstartes of
Religious rowte, Aemilius in his 5. book
had not yet cloyed the earth: namely: first the Carthusians, whose founder was
Bruno, erected under Pope Urban the 2. in the year.1084. Then the order of
Cistersians, Carthusianes.
which start up within a whiles after in the year.1098. Amongst the which
was Bernarde not the least ornament of that order: Castersianes.
out of who^ sprang a fresh sprought of momish Monckes.

After them followed the order of Templars or Almaines which took their name
of the Hospital of S. John in the year.1128. Templars
The Order of Premonstratenses were founded by Caliste 2. Premonstratenses.
in the year.1124. The order of Gilbertines in ye year.1152. Gilbertines
by Eugenius the 3. The Order of Brother Preachers, who took their name and
beginning from Dominicke a murderer and most cruel persecutour of the
Valdenses, Dominicanes.
under Innocent 3. in the year.1216. Immediately after ensued the factions of
Franciscanes in the year.1228. Franciscans
under Gregory the 9. Eremites. Augustines Carmelites.
To whom within a whiles after were added ye orders of Eremytes, Austen Friars,
and Reformed Carmelites whom the mount Carmell did vomit out unto us. There
followed also an other order of Austen Friars under Honorius the 4. in ye
year.1286. Neither did these monstrous vanities of new fangle Religions cease
at men: but the Serpigo crawled further into women's consciences also, who being
allured by the example of men, began after a little sittyng abrood, to hatched up
such cheekynes, and to flock together in coueyes and herdes. Whereof some were
called Sisters Clarites, Nuns of S. Clares order.
broched by Dominicke first. Some Brigittines surnamed of one Brigitte a
Scithia^ borne, their couey peeped abroad at the first in the beginning of
Vrbane the 5. his Popedom.

In the Council of Laterane was a Decree published by Innocent the 3. with a
special prouiso for the abandonyng of diversities of Religions, Out of the
Council of Lateran. Innocent. 3.
that from thenceforth no Covent of Cloystered company or cowled crew should be
erected: in the year.1215. And yet in despite of the authority of this
Decree, how many clusters of factious Friars, have been forged amongst your
holy Fathers since that time. Cap. 13. Minorites Augustine anes.
Besides the orders of Minorites, Austens, Brigidines, Crossebearers and
Scourgers, there is peepte abroad within these few years (good luck a Gods
name to the Pope and his Puppettes) the order of Jesuits in the year.1540.
Crossebeabeares. Whippers Jesuits
promising I know not what by the title of their names: Sure I am they have
hitherto accomplished nothing correspondent to so sacred a name: But it seemed
good to the Lord Jesus peradventure to fulfill so the Prophetical truth of his
Gospel: Many shall come in my name. etc. What follows, let them selves look
to it.

I have spoken of Mounckery: I have spoken also of some other orders, and
ordinances of the Romish Church: for to rippe up all were an infinite piece of
work. It remains now: That Osorius say somewhat for him self likewise, and
make some show of wares if he have any in all that his Romish Church, In the
Romish Church are many things new altogether, nothing ancient savoring of
thapostolique Antiquitye.
wherein he lives now (except a few Articles of the Creed only, wherein we
can justify as ancient a prescription of possession as they can) that be not
either new, strange, and lately vpstarte, or else altogether Poetical
stagelicke and mockeries. Wherefore if we measure Antiquity by ye age of Christ
and his Apostles: and the nearest years next ensuyng the same age: wherein
also if Osorius will abide by it, yt nothing ought to be allowed in the Church,
that does not savor of that primitive and Apostolic antiquity: then shall
Osorius daughtlesse at this one blow choppe of the Popes head, triple Crown,
Church and all: for as much as he shall never be able to vouch any thing either
in the received Doctrine, Religion, Rites, or Ceremonies of his Church, that
ever saw the age of the Apostles, or is in any respect correspondent to that
first pattern and president of the primitive Simplicity. There is such a
general Metamorphosis and alteration, yea all things are turned into so
frameshapen a newfanglenesse: that it may seem they have not only forgoen the
ancient ordinances of the primitive Church, but also to have utterly excluded
them selves from all acquaintau^ce with that same Church, with the Gospel, yea
with Christ him self, of whom the Apostles gave testimony and preached.

The carnal presence of Christ no where but in heaven.
The Apostles did not acknowledge that same one Christ any where, but in heaven:
and him ascendes into heaven they did so apprehend by Faith, that they would
never seek him else where then in heaven, and so in heaven sittyng in the
flesh, as that they would no more know him after the flesh: as men not dreamyng
so much upon his carnal presence, nor over greedely affectioned to enjoy him
after that fleshly manner, but were otherwise wholly settled, and immovably
fixed in mind in that spiritual presence of his Majesty. But to you
suffices not to apprehend Christ by Faith sittyng in heaven, and to worship in
spirit, as the Apostles and blessed Martyrs did, The carnal presence of
Christ one of the Popish doctrine.
unless after a fleshly and bodyly manner, with your fingers, you handle, the
real, corporal, substanciall, identicall presence of Christ, behold the the
same with your eyes, and choppe him up at a morsel. Which devise of yours
does argue, that you seem to be carried with a wondrous senseless opinion of
error, as neither to acknowledge one and the self same Christ, whom the
Apostles did: nor to worship him in heaven only: but to imagine to your selves
two Christ's, of that one Christ: namely, one Savior in heaven, and an other
in earth, and him also to Sacrifice daily in your Mass.

How the Papists dp do differ from the Apostles in the ministering of the
communion.
In the Apostles time the Communion was ministered not once in a year only, nor
at the Feast of Easter only, nor with Bread consecrated into ye body of
Christ, but in a thankful remembrance of the Lords death (the bread and
wine being equally delivered to the people) at all times whenever any
assembly of well disposed did meet together for that purpose.

They never said nor song any private Masses: Private Mass.
nor instituted any Sacrifices for the quick and the dead, being thoroughly
satisfied with one sacrifice only: which being once finished, they were
assured that the whole action of our Redemption was accomplished. For so are we
taught by the testimony of the Apostle. Hebr. 9. 8 10.
By his own blood he entered in once, the everlasting redemption being
accomplished. And again. For this did he once, when he offered up himself.
And imediately after. We are sanctified by the only offering of the body of
Christ Jesus once offered for all. Moreover in an other place writing of one
Christ only: 1. Tim. ^.
One God (says he) one Mediator of God, and men, the man Christ Jesus. etc. But
how shall there be but one only Christ, or one only Sacrifice of his body
once offered, of whose body you do exact daily a new and fresh sacrifice to be
made for the sins of ye people? Or how ca^ he be said to be but one,
according to ye proportion of a body, of whom you do imagine a presence
according to the whole nature of his flesh, both absent in body in the heavens,
and in the same body nevertheless, at one self instaunt, on the earth? Do ye
not see how absurdly these your patcheries concur and agree with the natural
meaning of the Scriptures? and how far they be from all reason? And what is
this else, then to preach utterly an other Christ then whom the Apostles have
taught? They acknowledge him to be heavenly, you make him earthly. Their
doctrine does raise us from the earth up on high, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God the Father: Your doctrine what does it? whereunto tends it?
whether does it call the minds of Christians? but from above downward, out of
heaven into the earth, withdrawing the senses from the Spirit, to the flesh:
So that we must seek for Christ there, not where he is, but where you imagine
him to be present. The Apostle Paul when he preaches unto us the lively
feature of this Christ (who taking upon him the shape of a Servant, suffered
death in the same shape, once for our sins under Pontius Pilate, and
afterward accomplishing the mystery of our redemption rose again for our
justification) does teach us plainly, that he ascended into heaven, not leaving
his body (wherein he suffered) behind him here on earth, but taking up the
same body into heaven, was with the same received into glory: whom also he
affirms, he knew no more now, according to his fleshlye presence, that is to
say, according to the capacity of his carnal senses. And that besides this
Christ only, he knew none other Christ, nor this Christ otherwise, then
according to the new creature only, namely: visible in spirit, with the eyes
of faith, and not with fleshlye eyes. Let us make now a comparison betwixt this
Christ of our Gospel, with that your Christ of the Pope, in the same manner as
you do fashion him, and make a gaze of him to the eyes, and ears of the people
after the order of your Gospel: which seems to me to be after this manner:
not as having taken upon him, the shape of a servant, but the form of bread,
is in the same form of bread, and under the accidents of bread made of wheat,
set out to the gaze of the people to be tooted upon, and is of Christians
worshipped, and offered to God the Father, and this not once, but daily: not
under Pontius Pilate, but under the Pope of Rome, not a Sacrifice only for the
quick, but for the souls in Purgatory also, to the washing away of their
sins: Which Sacrifice being ended, he is buried in deed, but buried or rather
drowned in the paunch of a priest, from whence he neither rises again, nor
ascends afterward, but descends rather: nor is ever looked for to come
again from thence. And this is that same Christ, not the Evangelical Christ,
but the Papisticall and poetical Christ: whom thought the Apostles or
Evangelists never knew, yet must we be enforced (will we nyll we) to honor and
worship nevertheless as the very Savior of the world forsooth. Whom may not
suffice to lift up hearts and minds on high to him only, which dwells in
heaven, unless we also lift up our fleshly eyes, to this visible Christ, and
kneel and crootche unto him with great reverence: yea although the eyes
themselves do behold nothing but bread and wine, yet the eyes must lie, and all
the senses must be deceived, The true doctrine of tra^substantion iuuented by
the pa^istes.
neither may in any wise be reputed other then very herityques: but in
despyght of eyes and senses all, we must of infallible persuasion of faith
firmly believe, that it is now no more bread and wine that is seen: But ye
(bread and wine being thrust clean ont of doors) Christ only, yea, whole
Christ does possess every part of that place, who though be not present in his
own natural shape, nor in the same proportion of body which he took of the
Uirgine Mary, yet in the self same nature, truth, substance, Identity
notwithstanding, under other forms forsooth and yet not figuratively, but
truly, most absolutely, perfectly and fully, must in the same whole body and
the same natural blood be contained, felt, seen, and without all contradition
worshipped.

These be the mysteries of your divinity, as I suppose, by the which you have
begotten unto the world a new Christ: Transubsta^tiation was never known to
the Apostles.
I know not whom, altogether an other Christ, never borne of the Uirgine Mary
doubtless, whom the Gospel never knew, nor the Apostles ever taught, nor the
Euangelystes ever saw: I add also: whom never any of you has seen hitherto
yet, nor shall ever see hereafter. And yet these so wittelesse, so dotish, and
monstrous devises of drowsy dreams (then which nothing can be spoken or
imagyned more false, and more monstrous) you shame not at all to vaunt to be
most ancient and most true, as the Gabyonites of old time did their shoes.
And for the same your Popish Christ made of bread, Many thou sands of Martyrs
lost their lives for this Transubsta^tiatio^.
you stick not to adventure limm and life more earnestly, then for the true
Glory of that Christ, whom we do most certaynely know to be in heaven, where
also we do worship him: And even this does your horrible butchery of an
infinite number of our Martyrs declare to be true by most plain and evident
demonstration.

With the blood of whom because your holy mother ye church seems so beastly
dronken long sithence, this one thing would I feign learn of you, The Church
of the Pope a Murderer.
what special cause was it that enforced you, to utter such outrage in the
shedding of so much blood of your natural brethren: was it because they
defrauded Christ the Son of God (which was borne for our sakes, crucified,
rose again, ascended up into heaven, sitting now a Lord in heaven) of one
dramm so much of his due honor? nothing less: Was it because they abused or
defiled the Gospel? I think not so: Was it because they brake the ancient
ordinances and approved doctrine of the holy Apostles and Prophettes in any
one thing? or because they went beyond the bonds prescribed by the ancient
fathers? none of all these: But the cause was, for that they refused to allow
of that newfangled and vpstart Idol of the Popish Mass, The papist ca^ render
no just cause of sp^llyng so much Christian blood.
and that lately spro^g up Breadworshippe, contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostles, yea contrary to Christ himself: and because they would not in this
behalf be as furiously frantic as the Papists themselves.

In the mean time, we speak not this, as though we were of opinion, that
Sacraments should be defrauded of their dew honor. It is one thing to
reverence the Sacraments and an other thing to turn Christ into a Sacrament.
For it is one thing to reverence the Sacraments accordyngly, and an other
thing to convert the Sacrament of Christ, into Christ him self: and to
worship earthly Signs, for the heavenly Christ: in the one whereof is a
kind of Religion, in the other manifest Idolatry. To the which wants
nothing now, but that they chaunt lustely together with Jeroboam: These be thy
Gods O Israel. But we shall be urged perhaps with the words of Christ in
the Gospel. The words of Christ.
This is my body etc. This is my body.
As though in the words of Christ (which be Spirit and life) it be so rare
and unaccustomed phrase of speaking, to use Tropes and figures now and then,
seeing there is no kind of doctrine that more usually delights in figures,
Christ's words bespirit and life.
Tropes, parables, Similitudes, metaphors, allegoryes and mysteryes, the^ the
mystycall speech of the sacred scripture: especially when mention is made of
Christ himself, or when Christ himself would vouchsafe to express his great
and inestimable benefittes toward us, and the everlasting efficacy of his
death and passion: I know not how it had rather, under certain shadows, and
mystycall resemblaunces, as under Allegorical clouds (to speak as Jerome
does) signyfye the same more modestly, rather then to proclayme it openly in
words.

By means whereof we ought many times to consider, That in the Prophetical
Scriptures, Christ our Lord and Savior is called by sundry and several names,
according to the diverse and several operation, and effectual power and
workyng of his Divine Majesty and pleasure toward us. For in that he does
enlighten the Darckenes of our minds, he is called the light of the world:
Christ is called by sundry names in the Scriptures.
In respect of his wonderful might and power, surmounting all power
whatsoever, he is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: In respect that he
guides us, he is called the way: In respect that he leads in, he is called
the door: In respect that we are none otherwise engraffed then in him, he is
called the Vine, and we the Branches. And so according to the nature of his
Innocence, and our deliverance, he is called the Lamb of God: in respect that
he loves his Church, with more the^ an husbandly love, does cherish it, endow
it, cloth it and beutyfy it, he is called an husband, he is called also the
Rock: sometime a grain of Corn dead in the earth, many times a Serpent set
up upon a Cross: sometimes a wellspring gushing out into life everlasting.
And so in diverse and several respects, he is called by diverse and several
names. In like manner because he feeds and defends us, he is called A good
Shepherd, and because he feeds us with none other thing the^ with ye death of
his own body, and shedding of his blood: He is also called our meat, our
bread, and our drink. Christ is called bread in the Gospel.
Moreover because this bread and this drink is of the Lords own mouth
commanded to be received, to renew ye remembrance of him: for this cause
those elements do put on the nature of a Sacrament, By what similitude the
Sacrament of bread and wine, is called the body and blood of Christ.
and so under this very cover and mystery of a Sacrament are called his own
body and blood.

Which least I shall seem to justify of mine own proper knowledge. Let us
hear the testimony and agreeable consent of Augustine. Who reasonyng of
Sacraments, and of the likeness of things whereof they be Sacraments, does
utterly deny ye Sacraments can be in any respect Sacraments at all, unless
they have a likeness of some things: and for that cause in respect of the
likeness of the things them selves, he affirms that they are many times
called by the name of the things them selves: August. to Boniface 13. Episto.
So an Argument may be framed out of August. on this wise.

The Sacrament of the last Supper has a likeness of the body of the Lord.

No likeness is the thing it self, whereof it is the likeness.

Ergo, The Sacrament of the Eucharist is not the body of Christ.

But if Osorius be of opinion that Christ's words ought to be taken simply
according to the bare letter of the flesh, August. upon the psalm. 89.
let him harken again to the same Augustine. This is a Mystery (says he) that
I tell you, which if it be understood spiritually, will quicken and give life.
And the same Augustine in an other place, opening plainly the figure of the
same words, August. against Adimant 13.
does witness directly on this wise: The lord doughted not to say. This is my
body, when he gave the sign of his body. I could vouche many other grave and
ancient Testimonies, witnessing the same, namely: Tertullian, Origene, Jerome,
Chrysostom, Theodorete, Gelasius and others. But of this matter I do not mean
to make any curious discourse as now: There shall be hereafter more fit place
for the same, more at large by Gods grace. In the mean space for my learning,
I would feign learn one Question of Osorius, who albeit has not been over
much studied in Augustine, yet has at the least been busied amongst the
Rhetoricia^s. Let us therefore consider the matter by the circumstaunces of
Rhetoric. The circumstaunces about the Supper of the Lord are to be
considered.
And to grant this much first, that Christ is omnipotent which according to
the power of his Divine omnipotency can, and is able to do all things in heaven
and in earth: what matter should move him now both to take away his own body
from hence (which) was but one only body) from us? and yet withal should
leave the self same body behind him with us? which though could not be done
according to the nature of humanity: yet to grant that it might be done
miraculously: what profit then or what necessity was there to work a miracle
herein? You will say, because the spouse the Church could not lack the
presence of her own husband Christ. And wherefore I pray you? For this is the
thing wherein I desire to be taught of you chiefly Osorius, sithence it is not
credible that miracles (which are wrought against nature) should be wrought
rashly without some singular or especial consideration: I am now therefore
desirous to know, what cause you will allege. To feed us with his body, you
will say. What? to feed our bellyes? or our souls? Surely our souls he has
fed already sufficiently enough long sithence in that very day, wherein he
washed away the Sins of the whole world, and pacified all things both in
heaven and in earth once for all. What, to feed our bellyes then? But he does
aboundauntly feed us, with other food daily: Moreover neither ca^ Augustine
nor yet ye Scripture it self digest this, August. upon the words of the Lord
in Lake Ser. 33.
that man shall be fed with man's flesh, and drink man's blood. Do not prepare
your teeth (says he) but your heart. And again in an other place as many times
else also, inuityng us to a spiritual eating of Christ: August. in Ioh.
tractar. 25.26.
Why do thou make ready thy teeth and thy belly (says he) believe, and thou
have eaten. Again, to believe in him (says he) is to eat that lively bread.
Moreover annexe hereunto, That whenas Christ has accomplished all the parts
and duties of his holy office, which needed ye use of his flesh, to perform
the work of our redemption: In the which flesh he satisfied all the parts of
the law, pacified the wrath of his Father: overcame Sin and death: and the
Devil him self being the author of death has trodden under foot for ever
and ever. In which flesh he rose again, and ascended into heaven, like a most
triumphaunt Conqueror: From whence he does even now also miraculously nourish,
preserve and comfort his Church here on earth, through the unspeakable power
of his excellent omnipotency, so that now to the full accomplishment of our
Salvation seems no one thing at all to remain unperformed, but that only
last day of Judgment. These matters therefore being vndoughted true: what thing
may that be now Osorius: wherein his fleshly presence may seem in any respect
necessary from hence forth? The abse^ce of the body of Christ more profitable
for vsthe^ his presence.
and not rather his absence in the flesh more commodious for us? namely, since
him self has spoken in the Gospel. It behooves you that I go, for if I go
not, the comforter can not come: If the corporal presence of Christ seem in
your conceiptes so necessary, and so effectual unto Salvation: Then bethink
this with your self, An Argument in respect of the profit thereof.
how long the Apostles should have needed the use of his bodyly presence: how
weak they were: how gross their understanding was, notwithstanding their
daily: familiarity and acquaintance with God and man: notwithstanding so may
miracles seen with their eyes, notwithstanding so many apparaunt
demonstrations, notwithstanding their daily teaching proceedyng from that
heavenly voice: yet lo when he should asce^de into heaven, does he not cast
their incredulity in their teeth? And what was ye cause hereof else, but
because the effectual power and mighty force of the comforter, could not
enlighten their hearts, unless the fleshly presence of Christ had been first
taken away from them. And do you not yet cease so drowsily to dream upon
Christ's flesh? and even for that cause have you made such an horrible
slaughter of so many thousand souls, continuyng still in that sauadge and
unappeasable vnmercyfulnes? And yet after this so great and cruel a bootchery,
may ye not endure to have that your notable Prelate called by the name of
Antichrist? In deed is this your ancient Religion, my Lord? to speak nothing
in the mean space of that, whereunto the Rhetoricia^s are wont to flee, when
they assail their adversaries most grievously by an Impossibility of proof:
as this, that it is not possible for you to prove that your fleshly Assertion
of the Sacrament by any reason, or by any devise or imagination. Antichrist.
For how can you possibly bring to pass, that two contradictories may be
verified of one self same body, An argument from Impossibilitye.
at one self instaunt? so that the same self body of Christ (seeing you will
have it one self body) may be at one self same time, in one, and in diverse
places, at one instaunt of time, both glorified, and not glorified?
Contradictiories cann not be together, not so much as by miracle.
visible, and not visible? corruptible, and incorruptible, which is not only
wonderfully absurd to be spoken, but as impossible to be done: and which also
will admit no miracle at all, namely that the thing that is true by nature,
should be false by miracle, and be conceived both true and false at one
instaunt of time. But because we determined not to prosecute Disputation,
hereof in this place, but to treat only of the antiquity of doctrine, I
return again to your Church, which you garnish with a very gorgeous, but in
very deed counterfaite and false title of Antiquity: wherein you deal also
as subtelly and craftily: Not much unlike to harlottes, who (when they will be
atcompted for honest) do as much as they may frame them selves to the
resemblaunce of virtuous matrones, from whose conversation and manners they do
varry notwithstanding altogether. A great diversity betwixt the ancient
Church of Rome, and this vpstart Church.
Even so fares it with your Church: I speak of that shape and countenance of
the Church that now is, not that which was long ago. For as I may not deny
that the Church of Rome in that pure and primer age deserved wonderful yea the
principal commendation of all others, not only in respect of the noumber of
Martyrs that suffered there, but also in respect of her unstained sincerity and
Faith: even so (comparyng the Church that now is, with the Church that then
was) The example is so far of from any lively resemblaunce of the first
pattern, that it seems quite transformed, and (I can not tell how) misshapen
into a certain chaungelyng Else, without any mauer of likely applyable nesse
to the feature or countenance of that first and ancient simplicity and
sincerity.

For such was the life of Christians in that purer age, The lines and
couersatio^ of the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church.
that they would not swerue one title so much from their profession: Moreover
such was their profession, that it would not raunge an hearebredth from the
prescript rule of the Institutions Apostolic. And such was the rage of
persecution then, as would now supper them to be Idely sluggish, or to geaue
themselves to unlusty Lazines. As for delights, and pleasures, to rake riches
together, to build palaces, to seek the exalting of themselves by honorable
titles, and dignityes, they had never one minute of spare time to bestow their
wits upon. Their daily exercise then was a continual wresting against the
world, and the Devil. They spent all their time in labors, and perils: their
whole life was a paynfull turmoyle: all their power was naught else but prayer.
Their fortress was grounded upon Christ: Yea for Christ only was their whole
warfare. Neither were those valiant soldiers destitute in ye mean time of a
singular Chefetayne: Christ himself was the chief general of this Army: who
did either mitigate the horror, and cruelty of their agonyes, by his omnipotent
power: or with some comfortable restoratyue, qualify their greeues: so
ordering, and attempering the proceedyngs, and alterations of his Church, that
he would neither suffer the veins, and sinowes of the same to gather any
infection, by ouerflowing plenty of ytching delights of this flattering world:
nor to be discouraged or vanquished with any immoderat assaults, or excessive
storms of adverse fortune: and at the last would conduct them to a joyful
Triumph, and end of all their Troubles, and afflictions.

And this was the very order of the first foundation, The first age of the
Church
and building of that ancient Church: So that neither tickeling enticementes
of the world, could defile the life of the godly, nor any contagious error
infect their doctrine. For the very same ordinances, and rules of doctrine,
which thapostles received of Christ and the holy ghost, the same also which
came from the Apostles unto the Church, were retained with unremovable
co^stancye. So also was nothing at all, mingled, or chopped in for use, or
worship, unless being delivered from Christ, or his Apostles, had the roots
thereof unseparably planted in the known authority of the sacred word.
Inuielable as yet was that sacred rule of this commandment. See that you add
nothing, nor diminishe any thing. Deuteronomy. 12.
And that other also of Saint Paul: Whosoever shall teach you any other
Gospel, let him be holden accursed: Gala. 1.
And this also: They do worship me in vain, teaching the doctrine, and
traditions of men. etc. Math. 7.
Those superfluous swarms of superstitious traditions of men were not yet
grown in ure: men were not yet ouercloyed with the cumbersume clusters of
crabbed constitutions. For it seemed good to the holy ghost, not to burdeine
the Gentiles with the ordinances prescribed in the old law. That unmeasurable
heap of ragged Rytes, were not yet raked together, nor hard of in the Church:
Nor was there any need of naked ceremonies, where sufficed to every person to
serve and worship God in spirit and truth. Nether was any thing worshipped
then, but his Deitye alone.

In process of time the manners and ordinance of Christians were changed.
Afterward in deed, the age of the Apostles being run over, and the number
of Christians increasing: certain ordinances were instituted by the Fathers,
and Elders, which did apperteine to the well ordering, and government of
outward discipline. Yet even in these was such a moderation, and consonauncy
observed, as should nether extinguishe the glory of the Gospel, nor enta^gle
consciences with combersome charge: but serve only for preservation of
necessary orders: For due observation of the which, was granted to the
Church, a certain authority and power, to dispose and determine (according to
the nature of places, and necessitye of times) such things as might seem most
agreeable, The middle age of the Church.
and couenable for their assemblies. But this authority, (hedged in as it were,
within her certain limits, and bounds,) as was but human, so forced it not
such a necessitye of observance, as did those other commanded immediately from
God. For like consideration may not be taken of human precepts, commanded by
men only, as must be had of thordinaunces of God. Hereof comes it, that the
breach or not performaunce of that one, being done without arrogant co^te^pt,
or reprochful disdayn, is not punishable as mortal and deadly sin. In like
manner, the godly ministers of the Church were not without their due honor, How
sure forth humayne authority does bind.
and authority, yet such it was, as exceeded not the appointed lymittes, and
measure. For as then function ecclesiastical was a Ministry, and service, not
a Maistry, or Lordshippe: Ecclesiastical function consists in two things
chiefly.
which consists in two things chiefly: In preaching the word, and
ministering the Sacraments: and in directing outward discipline, and ordering
manners, and misdemeanors. In which kind of ministry, although commandment
be given to yeald due obedience unto the pastors, How far ecclesiastical
power does extend it self.
yea though we hear these words spoken of Ministers: He that hears you,
hears me: Yet tend they not to this end, that they may after their own
wits, and pleasures, make new innouations, frame new fashions of doctrine,
and coin new Sacraments, thrust in new worshippings, and new Gods, or thereby
to erect a kingdom in the Church. But their whole power and authority is
restrained to the prescript rule of the Gospel: not to dispense, and dispose
things after their own lust: but to be the dispensors, and disposers of the
mysteries of God. Whereupon in matters appertayning to Gods Law, In matters
appertayning unto God, dew obedience ought to be given to the Pastors and
Ministers.
conscience is bound to yealde due obedience to the pastoures according to this
saying He that refuses you, refuses me.

In other things that concern the Tradicions of men, or that have no
assurance of their creation by any principle of doctrine: herein ought special
regard to be had. First to what end they are commanded: then also by what
authority they are brought into the Church. For the ordinances which are
thrust in, How far forth obedience ought to be given or not given to Pastors
of the church in matters of men's constitution.
under such manner, and condition as may enfeeble true confidence in the
Mediator, as may dispoyle consciences of their freedom, and overthrow the
majesty of gods grace, or are linked together with a vain opinion of
righteousness, of worshipping, of remission of sins, of merits, of Salvation,
or of unavoidable necessitye: Such, I say, ought without all respect to be
hauished, and abandoned, as pestilent batches from the communion, and
congregation of the Church. Consideration also must be had of the difference
betwixt these things, which the Church does charge men's consciences withal by
man's authority only, and the things which are established, and proclaimed by
the express word, and commandment of God. For although the Church may of
duty require a certain subiuection to the ecclesiastical ministers, as that
we ought to obey the ordinances, that are instituted for preservation of
civil societye, and couenable decency: Yet must the ministers be well advised,
least under pretense, What ministers ought to consider in making new
ordinances.
and color of ecclesiastical authority, they either command the things that
are not expedient, or oppress the simple people with unmeasurable Burdeines,
or think with them selves, that the Church is tied of neccessity, to any Laws
established by men.

Even so, and the same that has been spoken of men's Constitutions, may in
effect be applied to Iudicall Courts, and Judgments. For although authority
be committed to the Church to judge, Of judicial power of Churches.
and determine of doctrines, and outward misdemeanors: and although the
resolution of doubtful controversies, the discovery and opening of matters
obscure, the declaring, and debatyng of matters confuse, the reformation, and
amendment of matters amysse, be left over to the Censure, and judgment of the
Church many times: Yet is not this ordinary authority so arbitrary, and
absolute: but is also fast tied to the direct rule of the word. So that in
matters of controversy, this Authority came conclude, and command nothing,
but that which ye word of the Gospel must make warrantable. Neither has this
authority any such prerogative to make any alteration of Gods Scriptures, or
to forge false, and untrue interpretations, which may avail to establishe an
authority of men, or of orders: or to make any new articles of faith: or to
bring in strange Inuocations, which are directly repugnant to the manifest
authority of the Scriptures. And therefore we creditt the Church as a Mistres
and a teacher, foreshewing the truth: yet after an other manner altogether, then
as we be bound to obey the word of the Gospel, preached in the Church, by ye
mouth of Gods faithful ministers: which authority, when they put in execution
according to the authority of Gods word, we do believe them: yet so
nevertheless believe them, as that our creditt is not grounded now upon the
testimony of the Church, nor upon men, but upon the word of God: namely
because their judgment is agreeable, and consonant with the rule of the sacred
scriptures, and with a free confession of the Godly, judging directly,
according to the voice and word of God.

The Church therefore has authority, in decyding controversies of doctrine?
Yet so, that it self must be ouerruled by the authority of the word:
Otherwise the Church has neither authority, nor judgment, contrary to the
consonancy of the Scriptures. In like manner in discipline, and reformation of
manners, the Church may determine, and judge: The difference betwixt
Ecclesiastical and temporal Judgments.
But here also consideration must be had of the difference: For the censures
ecclesiastical are of one kind: but Judgments temporal, of an other kind.
For in forinsicall, and temporal causes, when Judgments are given, although
they receive their authority from the word of God, yet are they in force, in
respect of the authority of the Prince, and the Magistrate. And therefore they
minister correction, with punishment corporal, according to the qualitye of
the trespass. But the judgments of the Church are far unlike: For in those
manner of offenses which appertain to the ecclesiastical Consistorye, the
Church has her proper judgments, and peculiar punishments. Wherewith it does
not afflict, or crucify men's bodies notwithstanding, nor pursue unto death:
but cutteth of from the congregation only, and common society of men, such as
do wilfully, and stubburnely set themselves against the Ministerye: and such
as do harden themselves, and obstinately persevere in wickedness, against order,
and conscience, and continue in errors, and other notorious crimes, contrary to
the prescript rule of sound doctrine: Against such the Church thundereth out
endless excommunicatio^s, denoficing the horrible curse of Gods everlasting
wrath, and unappeasable displeasure, except they repent. And these punishments
of ye primitive Church (in old time called (...)) as were never ministered, but
upon grievous, and urgent causes: so was there no hope of release from the same,
unless plain demonstration were made (by open, and public confession) of
true and unfeigned repentance. Which kind of censure, the ancient Fathers
divided into three degrees, (...), Excommunication. Ecclesiastical discipline
in the primitive Church.
Whereby all manner of offenders, as well spiritual, as temporal, were, as it
were cut of from all societye, and partaking of the Church, and Sacraments,
(...); Deprivation: Whereby such as were but newly professed, were removed from
their function. (...). Sequestration. Whereby all offenders whatsoever, were
excluded from the Sacraments, some from partaking of all the Sacraments, and
some from the Communion only: whom the Grecians do note by this word (...):
Remouyng from the Communion table only.

And this was the very order and government of the prymityue and Apostolic
Church, wherein flourished not only that sincerity of doctrine (whereof I
spoke before) but also Ecclesiastical discipline touching distrybution of
dignityes, placing of elders, ordering of times, reading of lessons,
frequenting of exercises, Inquisition of life, Reformation of manners, and
other profitable ordinances established after the best manner, was daily
exercised. All which the prymytyue and undefiled antiquity of the ancient
Fathers observed purely and sincerely (after the age of the Apostles) and in
all respects very reverently and orderly: as the decrees and Canons of godly
assemblies and Synods, together with the Hystoryes and Monumentes of ancient
Fathers do plainly and manifestly record.

The first institution of the primitive church compared with the times of the
latter Church.
Having now described and faithfully expressed the very face and countenance
of the ancient primitive Church, I refer me to any equal and indiferrent
judgment, to discern whether the Lutheran Church or the Lateran Church of
Rome to resemble that primitive Church nearest. And as for that primitive
Church of Rome, has been aboundauntly and sufficiently spoken of already. Now
could I wish that the Romish prelates would vouchsafe to deliver likewise some
painted vysour of their Ieratohye, if it might please them: or if they refuse
so to do, we will not disdain to do so much in their behalf, whereby godly
minds may euydently perceive, the true causes, that moved those Lutherans
justly to sequester themselves from that Romysh Revel: In which their
sequestration notwithstanding from Rome, they have not removed themselves one
ynche so much the more from the Church of Christ. I speak of the Romish Church
(once again I say) in that state that it is now. The first Institution whereof
touching doctrine and Traditions, if be sifted and searched by comparing of her
first foundation to the true Church of Christ: it will euydently appear that
this Romysh Church (being but a late newfa^gled vpstart) does express no
spark of resemblaunce of that ancient antiquity, but patcht and botcht up
altogether with new opinions, erroneous abuses, Idolatries, traditions devised
by authority of men, joined with an opinion of necessary worshipping and
obseruaunces.

It is most certain that the foundations of Christ's church were grounded
first upon sure, The foundation of the christian Church.
plain, infallible and immovable demonstrations proclaimed from above, in the
writings prophetical and Apostolical, which be builded upon the true
knowledge of the essential will of God: upon true invocation and prayer, upon
unfeigned obedience to godward, upon assured acknowledgeme^t and affiau^ce in ye
Mediator, wh is very God and very man, and which does display abroad ye
kingdom of Christ to be a spiritual, and an everlasting kingdom, not
temporal, nor instituted or governed by man's pollicye or power: but begone by
the preaching of the Gospel, and enlarged by faith in them, which do believe
and obey the word of doctrine and life, with a pure and sincere affection.

On the contrary part the foundations of the Romish Ierarchy are builded upon
the decrees of Popes: The foundation of the Romyshe Church.
entangled with most intricate and (I know not what) most crabbed and crooked
questions of Scholeianglers: Polluted with most manifest errors utterly
dissentyng and clean contrary to the prescript rule of Gods word, which being
apparaunt enough in very many matters besides, yet is notably discernable in
iiij. principal points chiefly. The Popes doctrine co^uinced by four
principal points.
First, Because this doctrine does abolish quite the doctrine of the law, of
repentance, of righteousness by faith, and commands a mammering
doubtfulnesse: out of which puddle yssueth an outrageous ouerflowing Sea of
papisticall errors. Secondaryly, because it does transpose merits and
worshippings (which are proper and peculiar unto the son of God) into
adoration, oblation, and application of the consecrated bread for the quick
and the dead, by merit meritorious, in their masking Mass, and without their
mass, whereas in very deed the Gospel does plainly teach, that the
benefittes of the son of God are not applied to any person, but in respect of
every their proper and peculiar faith. Thirdly, after the manner of Infidels:
Because it translateth to dead men Invocation, which ought to be yielded to God
only. Fourthly, because it commands traditions of men: Mounckish vows,
Canonical satisfactions, pilgrimages, and innumerable such dredge with an
opinion of merit, worshyppyng and necessary obseruaunce: and does prefer the
same, before the commandments of the law which God has commanded to be
especially observed. To this Beadroll appertain more then dottered Bussardly
fables of Purgatory, Pardons, secret and compulsary confesu^on, pompous
Processions and superstitious supplications, wherein is carried abroad to be
gazed upon, the consecrated bread: profaning of the Lords Supper, making sale
thereof as it were in open Fair or Markette, Magical consecrations of
natural things: to wit, of water, wine, oil, salt and such like.

The popes Church more like an earthly kingdom then the kingdom of Christ.
What shall I say of that more then whorysh shamelenesse? when as the Popes
without all proof or probabilyty of ancient antiquity, of a certain insolent
arrogance, not by any Dyuyne authoryty, but through their own traiterous
treachery, have raised to them selves, not a true Catholic and Apostolycke
Church, to Christ Jesus: but a Seraphycall Ierarchy, exceedyng all earthly
prymacy, superiority, and potentaty. Wherein reygneth in place of Christ, a
proud Popysh Peacock: For the Apostles, cormoraunt Cardinals: For Martyrs,
monstrous Mounckes: for professors, pestiferous persecutors: For fathers,
Bellygod Bishops, and Gorbelly Abbottes: For Evangelists, cruel Canonistes,
Copistes, Decretaries, Summularyes seditious Sententioners: For Minysters,
sheepysh shauelinges: And for Pastors, Maskyng Massemongers: Who having
rauenously Raked the right of the Church, have turned and changed it into a
newfangled fashion of an earthly kingdom: where it may not suffice to serve
Christ Jesus our pastor and head only, to settle our selves upon him whollye,
to depend upon his mercy only, Unless we become vassals and bondslaues to
this popysh Bishop, and honor him as a certain other Christ upon earth: who
(under a delycate vysor of glorious name, cou^terfaytyng the horns of the
immaculate Lamb) does under the person of Christ's Uycar on earth attempt
nothing else in very deed, but that he may be the chief Monarch of the whole
world: and that all others Princes and Potentates of the earth may become buxam
and bonnair unto his beck and commandment. For may it be lawful Osorius, for
a man to speak the truth franckely, and in plain words to call a Toad a
Toad? Let that vysor of presumptuous pretense be plucked from your pates, and
but a little whiles turn down that title and cloak of the Church, wherewith
you cover your selves, and let us behold ye thing as it is in deed: to wit,
the whole course of your conversation, your treasury, mighty Majesty, gallant
train, pryncely palaces, stately dignyty, pompous pride, terryble Laws, your
lofty Castles, presumptuous power: what difference shall we see betwixt the
highest government of an Empire, and the supremacy of the Pope? betwixt the
courts of Kings, and the Reuelyng Rout of Rome? betwixt Princes parliame^ts,
and the Popes general councels?

Now if you list to take a view of the gallaunts themselves: A small
description of the Romish Ierarchye.
what is ye Pope himself other the^ ye Monarch and chief Ruler of this world?
saving that other worldly Princes be crowned with one single Dyademe only: but
this Ruffeler can skarse be satisfied with a Tryple Crown. Cardynalles what do
they represent else, then kings? and kings Sons? what do the Patryarches,
Archbyshoppes, Byshopps, and Abbottes in that pontifical kyndome, A comparison
betwixt the kingdom of the Pope, and the kingdom of this world.
show themselves other, then earthly princes, Dukes, Earls? equal, or rather
exceedyng them in sumptuousness, waited upon with stately train, wheresoever
they go and Ride: and many of them also Rynged and Chayned? to whom a man may
lawfully lyncke the Lubberly Rowt of monstrous Mounckes, and false Friars in
stead of a guard: Finally, what one thing is done in any common wealth or
pryncely courts, that these jolly Rufflers have not conveyed into the Church
of Christ, by ambytious emulation? Kings and Emperors (enduced hereunto for
necessary preservation of their state) do join unto them counselors and
Piers: Those have their Ambassadors and Messengers: they have also their pryuy
ligiers, and skowtes: what? does the Pope want his consistory? has not this
most holy father his Synodaryes? does he lack his legates nati and legates de
latere, (who wheresoever they be sent) use no less pomp the^ any other Piere,
or pote^tate of highest nobility, yea though he be never so sumptuous? No more
is he destitute of his skowtes and spies, whom he has priuelye lurkyng every
where, armed with treason at a pynche, in princes courts, in their councels, yea
in ye closettes and pryuy chambers of Kings and Queens?

Do ye not think that this is a comely concordaunce Osorius? and a reasonable
resemblaunce of Christ's life and commandments? agreeable with the Apostles
and Evangelists? with the ancient Fathers? with the ordinances of the primitive
Church? and with the former president of the Elders? The Lord cries out in the
Gospel. John. 20. A comparison betwixt the popes kingdom and Christ's kingdom.
As my living Father sent me, eue^ so do I send you. What? and do you think
that he was so sent into the world, that he should establish a new Regyment on
earth and like an other Romulus build an other stately and Imperial Rome? Or
do ye think that the ministers of Christ were sent after any other sort, then
the Son himself was sent from the Father? Luke. 20.
Christ proceeds yet foreward: Receive ye the holy Ghost (says he)
whosoever Sins you shall forgive, the same are forgeuen them, whosoever
Sins you shall retain, the same also shall be retained. Other power then this
he never did entitle his Church withal, nor yet gave this power to any, but
unto them only, whom he purposed to endue with his holy spirit.

If we will value the Church of Christ, by Christ his own Laws, and not after
the decrees of Popes: what can be more evident then the words which he spoke
unto his Disciples? Mar. 10.
Ye know that such as will seem to rule over Nations, are Lords over them:
their Princes have dominion over them. But it shall not be so with you, for he
that will be greatest, shall humble himself and minister to all the rest. For
the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister to other
himself, and to give his life to be a redemption for many.

Luce. 12.
Again: Who made me judge betwixt you? we are taught like wise in Paul, 2.
Cor. 10.
that the weapons of our warrefare are not carnal, but mighty in the power of
God, wherewith we captiuate all understanding and wisdom in subjection unto
Christ. And again: Let every man so esteem of us as the ministers of Christ
and Stewardes of the misteryes of God: 1. Cor. 4.
And the same Paul in an other place: 2. Cor. 1.
Not because we be Lords over your faith, but we be helpers of your joy: For
by faith you are made perfect. In the same sense also Peter. 1. Pet. 5.
Not being Lords over the Clergy, says he. And again in the third chapter of
the same Epistle (meaning to express the efficacy of the Gospel) he does call
it a ministry not of the flesh, but of the spirit. And therefore to the end
he may make us more spiritual, Romans 12.
he does wisely forbid not the ministers only, but generally all other to be
alike, fashioned to this present word: what would he now say, The shape of the
Romish Ierarchy.
If he did behold the shape and ugly deformity of the Romish Church, as it is
now? if he advised well the Royaltyes of S. Peter, the fulness of power, the
authority of both swords, the Keys of all Churches stolen away, and hanged
all upon the Romish bunch, the top gallau^t of the pontifical majesty, the
Cardinals, the Legates preuayling above Princes, the empalled and Mytred
Bishops, the orders of Shauelings, the swarms of Mounckes and Friars, the
Laws, Bulls and decrees which they use as forcible as Ca^non shot, their
might and power fearful, yea terrible also to Princes? The Lord himself
cries out mightily in the Gospel, that his kingdom is not of this world: nor
can away with the things that are mighty of the earth. But our pontifical
prelate will storm and wax wroth, if ye world enjoy any thing, that is not
subject unto his power.

And this Ierarchy mean whiles more then wordly, The counte^faite authority
of popes.
they feign (and God will) to be the Church: at whose beck, as at the sight of
Gorgones ugly face, they make astonyed all the Monarchs and Tetrarches of the
earth. And the same have they magnified with the name of Catholic forsooth:
The church wickedly defined by the papists.
By virtue of which name they will have to be notyfied, not a congregation
dispersed upon the face of the whole earth, agreeing together in one conformity
of doctrine, and worshypping of Christ (which does make a true Catholic
Church) But they mean hereby that only Ierarchy which they will have tied
fast to ye Romyshe See. And hereunto for the greater advancement of the
authority, they have devised a trymme title of Antiquity. Behold (say they) was
there ever any Church if ye Church of Rome were not a Church? glorying (as it
were) upon the title of Antiquitye, whereas never any one thing does differ
more from all antiquity: wherein these Romish skippiacks seem in my conceit
not much like little boys playing the Comedyes of Plautus upon some stage:
where one plays the part of Chremes an other of Menedemus or Cremilus: who
being not yet come to be hoary and grayheaded by course of years, because they
will set a grave countenance upon the matter and seem old men before the
gazers upon them about on the Skaffoldes: they put upon them counterfayt
trynckets: to wit, a white hoary beard upon their chynne: gray and white
locks upon their heads: counterfayting their gate with stooping and
crooching: they rest their hands upon some staff shaking and tremblyng: and
fashion their voices big like old men, doing all this with a certain witty
and crafty conueyaunce of counterfayting: so that if you behold their outward
handling and gesture, you would say they were old men, but if you discharge
them of their Roabes and pluck of their vysours, you shall find them nothing
less then such as they have feigned themselves to be. Not much unlike is this
dottrell Ierarchy of Rome, which it is a wonder to see how many years it
vaunteth of continuance, How the Romish stagers do counterfayt old
Antiquitye.
in words, in voice, in countenance, gesture, and outward resemblaunce:
Fiftene hundredth years and more (say they) did our predecessors begin to
sit in this chair, even from the first foundation of the prymitiue Church:
which being erected in Christ himself, established by the Apostles, confirmed
with a continual course of never failing Succession, received by general
consent from the Ancient Fathers, and from them has remained and been derived
unto us by aperpetuall and permanent delivery of Succession. But your Church
which you call an Evangelical Church, where was it ever seen or heard at any
time of any man? These verily be the vysours and stagelike gugawes, wherewith
this Romish counterfaytes have played their tragical parts, and wherewith
they have beguiled many simple people hitherto. But let us pluck of their
visors, and discover this bellygod Pope a whytes, that we may thoroughly behold
what manner of puppette this smoath Apish Church is within.

About fiftene hundredth years sithence and more, they say that this Church
(wherein they raygne now like Lords) was and has had unchanged continuance.
Albeit this be but to small purpose, what co^tinuaunce things that are false
and altogether untrue do prescribe upon: Yet if the age of ye Church be so
great, as they pretend it to be: let them show the^ out of all the
antiquities of things, places, times, or persons, what one of all the Apostles
or Evangelists: what one ancient Father, or ancient Church did ever hear
the name of universal Pope, A manifest declaration of the Romish church as it
is now to be nothing at all,
before these thousand years last past? or if they now heard it, would permit
it in the Church? what Law did ever enforce and bind all churches generally to
the ordinary Succession of one Church? or ever appointed so great a
toppegallaunt of Majesty? which as before the chief and highest judge may
claim prerogative of Jurisdiction over all causes in the world to be decided
within his own consistory? which might arrogantly challenge the fullness of
power? which as it were out of one high court of parlyament, might rule over
all Churches, and bear dominion over all the world as over one peculier
dioces? which might challe^ge the authority of both swords? might be Lord over
the Spyritualty and Temporalty? which being the wellspring and Closette of the
whole Law, finally being King of Kings, Queen and Princess of all
pote^tates, and rulers, might surmount in superiority all earthly dignity,
seventy times sixty degrees? when as there are not yet much more then a
thousand years sithence Gregory a Pope of Rome, did fra^ckely and openly
confess that there was never any of his predecessors, that would ever take
upon him this name of Singularity, or enter upon any such haughtiness of
arrogant title, to be named with such an heathenish name: wherein (says he)
was a wonderful injury committed against Christ the head of the whole Church,
unto whom should a sharp and dreadful account be rendered by him whosoever he
were, that would enterprise to bring under his own subjection all the rest of
his members, under the name and title of Universality. And over and besides
annexeth hereunto with great vehemence of speech, Gregor. 4. book 30. Epistle.
whosoever does call himself universal Bishop, or does attempt to be so
called, the same does by that his intolerable pride, denounce him self
plainly to be the very forerunner of Antichrist.

Let the Romanistes show, where was not only the order, The order of
Cardinals.
but the name also of Cardinals little above one thousand years sithence: or
where this prettye form of election was heard of which is now frequented in
the Romish Church, before that Pope Nicholas 2. The election of the pope of
Rome.
gathering together a Covent of Piers apparelled in purple, from amongst the
Deacons of that City. and the neighbor Bishops there, did transfer all the
right and interest of choosing the Pope to a few Cardinals, contrary to the
prescript custom of the ancient Fathers. Touching the Election of Cornelius a
Bishop of Rome, Cyprian 4. book Epistle 2.
the words of Cyprian are very evident: which I have thought good to inserte
in this place, Cornelius was made Bishop (says he) by the Judgment of GOD and
his Christ, by the consent of all the Clergy almost: by the voices and
acclamations of the people that were present, and by the Congregation of the
Ancient Priests, and godly personages.

For as yet Emperors were not professed Christians. At the length Constantine
being Emperor, the Church was governed after his time, The ancient authority
of Emperors in sommoning Councelles and in choosing popes. A Decree of Charles
the great and Otto. Distinct. 6 3.
until the time of Henry the 4. in such sort, that neither Bishops should
be created, but by thauthoritye Imperial, nor counsels Sommoned, nor
Ecclesiastical Revenues distributed by any Bishop, before the Emperors grace
did allow thereof. That this is true, appears by the Records of most
ancient momuments, but above others chiefly, by that decree of Charles the
great, and Otto, Emperors proclaimed in a Synod of Byshopps. The form of the
decree is extant in the 63. Distinct. The force of which decree remained firm,
and inviolable, during the whole line, and race of the said Charles, until the
time of Otto. the 1. And after him also until the Battles, and overthrows of
Henry the 4. and Henry the 5. For as concerning the form of the oathe annexed
to the same distinction, (whereby they do falsely imagine, that themperor Otto,
did swear him self to the Pope) it is manifest by the aute^tick, and true
Records of Histories, that it was shame fully forged, and counterfeit, as also
the grant, and Donatiue of Ludouicus Pius, which is immediately set before the
same oath in the distinction, which Records do plainly convince the same to
be detestable lies. And where now be these xv. hundredth years, whereupon they
prate with so full mouth so much? The old Canons do abhor private Masses.
The old Cannons that are called the Canons of the Apostles, do with
wonderful seueritye, manace, and threaten them, who (frequenting the Church,
and hearing the preachings) do sequester themselves from receiving the
Communion. On this wise did Pope Calixt, (who would do nothing without the
Censures ecclesiastical) exhort and persuade all men to communicate publicly
together, wheresoever the supper of the Lord was ministered. The words of
Jerome be in each respect, no less evident. The Supper of the Lord (says he,)
ought to be general to all: because Christ himself did equally distribute the
Sacrament to all his disciples that were present. And how does this gear agree
with the celebrating of your private Masses?

The same Canons provided, Canon. 8.
that the Bishop should be deposed, which would join a civil office, with a
spiritual fu^ction. The same also did Pope Clement detest as horrible
haynousnes. And what does the Pope then mean by that new power of both
swords? The power of both swords contrary to the old Canons. The third
Counsel of Carthage Cap. 47. In the new Constitutions. 123. and 146. Cap. 3.
Antiquity against Images in Churches.
is it because he will be armed to fight a new combat with the Dragon, that
fought against the Aungel Michaell? Many years sithence did the Council of
Carthage forbid, that nothing should be read in the Church, but the Canonical
Scriptures: Which Scriptures Iustinia^ the Emperor commanded to be uttered
with a loud, and audible voice, that the people might gather some fruit
thereby.

If Antiquity of time, or authority of Councels, could have obtained any
creditt amongst the Romanistes: the old council Elibertine did decree, that
nothing should be painted in the Church, that might be an occasion to move the
people to worshippyng. So did also Epiphanius that ancient Father account it
for an intolerable sacrilege, if any man would be so hardy as to set up in
Churches of Christians, any kind of Image, yea though it were the Image of
Christ himself.

The Ancient Fathers were no less godly zealous, then zelously studious to
persuade and enduce the people to the Readyng of holy Scriptures, and to the
buying of Books of the same, that amongst themselves every one in his
several familye, wives with their husbands, children with their parents, the
plowgh man at the plowe, Origene upon Leuit. Cap. 16. Chrisost. upon Math. 1.
Homel. 2. Upon John Homel. 31. August. de opera Monach.
the weauers in their Loomes, women and maidens spinning and carding, might
debate of the holy Scriptures, and sing some sonets and songs of the same: as
Origin, Chrysostom, and Jerome do testify.

It was not tolerable in the time of Augustine, that A Mou^ck should idely
consume his time in sloth, and sluggishnes, or should (under visor, and
pretense of holiness) live upon an other man's trencher, but by the sweat of his
own brows: such a one also Appollonius also does lyken to a thief. There was
an ancient custom of this Land, instituted from the ancient fathers, that no
person should appeal to the Pope for any cause, without the kings leave:
Malburiensis de pontificibus. Lib. 1.
at what time our kings yielded to the popes no submission at all. Whereupon,
when Anselme did deliver the Popes letters to the king: What have we to do
(said the king) with the Popes letters, we will not break the laws of our
kingdom: Whosoever shall presume to infring the Custom of our Realm, the
some is a traitor to our Crown, and dignitye: he that does take away our
Crown from us, is an enemy, and Traitor to our own person,

An ancient law of England against pluralities.
There was an ordinance sometime within the Realm, no less profitable then
ancient: That if any man did possess two Benefices at one time, bearing
charge of soul especially, the same should be deprived from both. And this
ordinance continued so long in force, until the Pope with his medley of
dispensation, innouating all things, All things altered by the pope.
and turning all things vpsydowne, after his own lust, and pleasure, did
leave nothing in Churches, that had any smatch of Antiquitye.

Out of the Tridentine Council.
And no marvel, though he were so malapertly saucy with ye Laws of our Realm,
when as in the last Council holden at Trydent, skarcely 24. years sithence,
by public authority, and consent of the whole Council, an Edict was
established, that no person should enjoy two benefices at once: this Cannon
notwithstanding, there is so little regard of authority of that Council
amongst these Prelates: that a man may easily see now a days, many
Monasteries, two Byshopprickes, yea sometimes three or four swallowed up into
one paunch, all at one time.

General Councels according to the old constitutio^s above the pope.
The same may be verified of the Councils of Co^stance, and Basile: Where though
many matters were determined upon wickedly enough, this decree notwithstanding
was published being good and profitable for the Church: That general Counsels
assembled together by lawful Sommons, were and ought to be esteemed better,
and higher in authority then the Pope: And yet this decree sone razed out by
the power of the Pope, how quickly was it dispatched? so farforth does nothing
delight these fine heads of Rome, that whether it be old, or new, nothing can
please them, but that which is for their own toothe. Wherein I would wish,
that Osorius would mark diligently this one thing, sithence this See does
convey her lawful descent not from any decrees of me^, but from christ
himself, as he affirms: what do these Fathers of ye Counsel of Constance,
and Basile, mean by this decree: Wherein they commanded, that the Romish
See, should be governed by the general Counsels.

Now what may be spoken or imagined, of the Prouisiones Reseruations, The
Church of Rome as it is now is convinced of Nouelty.
yearly pencio^s, Pardons, Privileges, Exemptions, Dispensations, Graces,
Preuentions, Expectatiues, Palles, Uisitations, and other like snares and
trappes of that Romish See? what? shall we number these trinketts also
amongst the other sacred Relics, received in that Apostolic age, above xv
hundredth year sithence?

I come now more near unto those parts of Religion, wherein all the glory and
vaunte of your Antiquitye triumphs chiefly. And first, that doctrine of
Tra^substantiatio^ your only Goddess and chief vpholder of that your popish
kingdom: From whence did it issue? and who was the author of it before Pope
Innocent 3. The Council of Laterane. A new doctrine first instituted in the
same under Pope Innocent. 3. Cap. 1.
in the Council of Lateran, not many years ago? At what time the consecrated
host was commanded to cast away all her nature of Bread: or at least before
Nicholas 2. and his Successor Hildebrand in a Council holden at Rome? at what
Council, Berengarius was forced to Recant. And why were not Pope Gelasius,
Theodoret, Augustine, Tertullian, Origin, Eusebius, and with them also, the
whole Greek Church cited to Recant. For the same error of Berengarius? Why
was not the Church of Moskouites compelled to abjure, which from thence even to
this day, do minister the Communion with bread broken, and distributed in
deed, but not consecrated into the body of the Lord? To pass over other
Churches, why was not all this Church of Saxons in our kingdom condemned for
heretical, which maintained the same cause, that Berengarius did? as of late
has been declared by certain ancient Records, lately found out amongst us
in the Saxons tongue. Although this opinion of consecrated bread, began to
sparckes^ abroad, not many years ago, after the Council of Nice the second,
Sommoned as it seems by John Damascen, who was the first founder of this
doing devise, and afterward again under Lanfranck: yet was this heresy
never stablished, nor were they taken for heretics, who did celebrate the
Sacrament of the body, and blood of our Lord, under natural bread and natural
wine, before that Council of Laterane before mentioned: under Pope Innocent,
in the year of our Lord 1215. or under Nicholas, in the year 1062. Neither
shall Osorius be ever able to find it out, when he has thoroughly perused all
the Libraries of his Antiquitye that he can.

Not long after, came the worshipping of the bread, lyfted up, and hoisted up
aloft, to the gaze of all the people, by yt means of Honorius 3. next
Successor of Innocent aforesaid: Which matter was of all other most needful.
For whereas the nature of bread, had once banished it self clean away: and
nothing now remained under ye outward forms of bread and wine else, but ye
true, and natural substance of flesh, which should exhibit it self to the
minds, and senses of the worshippers corporally: It could not possible be, but
a worshipping must needs ensue hereupon.

These erroneous foundations being thus laid, as one error does commonly
engender an other: Of the sacrifice of the Mass.
there vpstart an other Whelpe of the same litter, as notorious a mystery of
iniquity as the other. To wit, of this Sacrament first Transubsta^tiated,
then worshipped, at the last sprang up a Sacrifice of this Sacrament offered.
And no marvel at all in need. For after that the simple people were once
thoroughly persuaded to believe, that Christ him self was wholly present, with
all his whole true body, and the true Passion of his body: they could not now
stay here with only lookyng upon, and worshippyng their Savior so lifted
up, and blazed abroad to their view: but would also crave help of him, not
for them selves only, but for their parents, and friends also, that were
dead: And hereupon grew this Sacrifice of the Mass (so named of the people)
plausible for the people in deed, and as profitable for the Priests purses.
Which subtle devise of blind error, though was the most pestilent botche that
ever could have infected the Church, and most deuilishly repugnaunt to Gods
sacred Testament: yet these crafty counterfaites could coin counsel colo^able
enough notwithstanding, to make this peltyug puppet gaynefull for their purses.
For where no shift could be imagined to frame the Apostles and Evangelists to
be Proctours in this cause: they ran by and by to Doctors: and wheresoever
they could pyke out any mention made of a Sacrifice, either of the Altar, or of
the Priest, the same by crooked conueyaunce they would wrest and wring to be
good Testimony for their doctrine. Wherein how honestly they behaved them
selves, shall be seen hereafter by Gods grace.

Next coosin german to this, Of private confession.
began to challenge a right in the Church, Ear Confession. Which being an egg
(as it were) of the same brood, was hatched up and fully plumed, at the very
same Laterane Council, as appears sufficiently by the very words of the
same Council: the true report whereof ensues: Let every faithful person of
what estate degree or sex soever he be, The Laterane council under Innocent.
3. Cap. 21.
after he comes once to years of discretion, confess all his Sins alone
faithfully to his own Curate once in the hear at the least. Behold here the
very first Institution of private and Ear Confession, which is in ure at this
day: or else if it had been instituted before, or decreed upon from above, to
what end needed so careful a Prouiso to be made by men, whereby the people
should be forced to a general necessity of reckonyng all their Sins to the
Priest? Now therefore if this were an ordinance and tradition of the Romish
Church: where is that brag of Antiquity, whereby the Papists would prove
that this private Confession came from the Apostles? where is their glorius
boastyng of the continuance and delivery thereof from thence even to this
present age? Surely Chrysostom and others do tell us an other tale: for this
writes Chrysostom. Chrisost. in his fourth Sermon of Lazarus.
I constrain thee not to come to the mids of a Stage, and to call many
witnesses. Tell thy sins to me alone. etc. And again the same Chrysostom.
If thou be ashamed (says he) to tell to any man thy Sins, Chrisost. up on
the psalm. 50. hom. 2.
that thou have done, tell them daily in thy soul. I do not say Confess them
to thy fellow Servant, who may reproach thee: tell them to God, that takes
care for them. etc. Moreover the same Chrysostom in an other place. I do not
say unto thee come forth into a Stage nor disclose thy Sins to others,
Chriso. upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. homi. 31.
but I will have thee to obey the Prophet saying: Disclose thy Sins unto the
Lord: In the sight of GOD therefore confess thy Sins, before the true Judge,
utter thy sins with prayer, not with tongue but with the testimony of thine
own conscience and so trust to obtain mercy at the length. etc. Certes if
Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, had ever suspected that this Ear
Confession, Tripart. histo. lib. 9 Cap. 35.
had been authorized by any express word of the Scriptures, he would never
have abrogated the same for the defilyng of a certain matrone by a certain
Deacon in the Church, under color of Confession: what shall we say to that,
where Erasmus but of late years writing of Confession durst not ascribe the
institution thereof to Christ, Erasmus iu his Apolo.
as unto the author thereof, but yeldyng him self willing to learn, if any
man could make proof by sufficient Arguments, that Confession had his
beginning at the Scripture: how happened that amongst such a multitude of
Monckes and Deuines, not one would step forth to withstand this challenge of
Ear Confession as then? To pass over in the mean space that, which the same
Erasmus in an other place expressing his meaning plainly: It appears (says
he) that in the time of Jerome, private Confession of Sins was not as yet
received in the Church, which afterward was profitably instituted by the
Church, so that the Priests and lay people use the same accordingly. But
herein some scarce skillful Deuines are not alitle deceived, because where the
ancient Fathers wrate touching public and general Confession, all that do
they strain to this secret whispering, a quite contrary kind of Confession.
etc. To pass over also many other things for breuities sake, whereof if there
should be general collection made, there is no dought but this vysour of
Antiquity would be easily plucked of.

The Sacraments of the Romish Church.
The same be said also of the Sacraments of Orders, Annoylynges and Matrimony:
The use of which things albeit grew by little and little, even with ye first age
of the Church, and are also reteigned until this day amongst us: yet do we
utterly deny, yt they were Registered amongst the noumber of Sacraments: before
a very few years sithence. And Osorius shall never be able to prove the
contrary.

There has been a solemn custom of long time in the Church of Rome, that
such as entered into any order Ecclesiastical (foreswearing to be coupled in
wedlock) should swear them selves to observe perpetual vow of unmarried life:
If any man be of opinion, that this Tyranny was brought in by the Apostles, and
not rather directly against the ordinance of the Apostolic Church, is much
deceived in imagination: whereas that law was never begone, nor ever heard of,
before the time of Hildebrand. And although I can not deny, that there were
many unmarried Ministers many days ago in the Church of Christ at that time,
when as there was not such a huge multitude of Priests, and more plentyfull
gifts of chastity possessed Christian Churches: yet did never any man read,
or hear, yt this necessity of vowyng chastity, became a public and common
coaction before Hildebra^d was borne. How earnestly the Germans did set them
selves against this wicked prohibition decreed by Pope Gregory the 7. (at what
time the Archbishop of Mentz Sollicitour of this Popish decree was almost
slain,) let the Histories bear witness. As touching what was done in England
I will note somewhat my self. For on this wise writes Henry Huntyngton in his
Chronicle. Out of Huntington the 7. book.
Anselme (says he) did prohibit Mariadge of Priests in England, which was
never prohibited before. Which seemed to some a matter of wonderful
contine^cie, but to other very pernicious, and perilous, least whiles they
should covet for a cleannes, that surmounted their power, they might rushe
healong into horrible filthynes, to the great reproach and dishonor of
Christian name. This much he, Out of the Chronicles of Monumetensis.
with whom also accords the testimony of Monumetensis, touching the same
matter. Herbert Bishop of Norwiche (says he) by the commandment of Anselme,
and a Decree of a Provincial Synod, did endeavor by all means possible to
sequester the Priests from their Wives in his Diocese. And when he could not
bring it to pass, he was constrained to send to Anselme for Counsel. This is
to be found in a written History page 240. The same also happened to Gerrarde
Archb. of York about the same time.

Now what will Osorius say to this? If I shall be able to show him out of our
own ancient Records, more then 40. Records and Rolls, which do make
mention, Council of Gangren. Cap. 4.
not only of our Priests companying together with their Wives, but also that
do by public authority and law of the land provide, that their Wives ought
to be endowed in lands and possessions? There was an old Decree in the
Council of Gangren. That no man should make any difference betwixt an unmarried
Priest, and a married Priest, as to Judge the one more holy then the other, in
respect of his unmarried life. I will annexe the words of the Counsel: If any
man do take exception betwixt a Married Priest, at that in respect of his
Mariadge, he ought not to minister the Communion, and so sequester him self
from Communicating with him, let him be accursed. Out of the 2. council of
Arelaten. 2. cap.
There ensued after this the Council of Areletens. the 2. wherein was a
contrary Decree made, that no person should be admitted to Priesthood, that was
Married to a Wife, unless he vowed to depart from his Wife. etc. Whereunto
also agreed a Decree of Pope Lucius long after the other. Whereby Priests, and
Deacons, and such as served the Altares, should live continently. Pope Lucius
decree. distin^. 81. Ministri.
And this hitherto tolerable enough. But what kind of co^tinency he did
mean, let us mark by the sequel. But if it happen (says he) that a Minister
do go to bed to his Wife after he have once received orders, let him not
enter within the Chau^cell, nor be made bearer of the Sacrament, nor yet come a
near the Altar. etc.

As touching Images, Invocation, Sacrifies for Sins, and Freewil, has been
spoken sufficiently before. And what shall I add more of the rest of the
rascal rabble? to wit: of Purgatory, of Satisfactory Constitutions, of vows,
of other like peltyng pelf of the newfangled Romish Traditions, and of the
antiquity of all the rest, but even as they be in deed? namely, that in them
all appears no countenance of true Antiquity, The greatest part of the
Romish doctrine newly found out and brought in within th^s 500. years.
but are devises altogether of men's inue^tions, bastardes, and misbegotten
chaungelyngs of Scholeianglers, and cowled crauens, not grounded upon any
authority of the Scripture, altogether unknown unto the ancient primitive
Church: the most part whereof has been hatched and thrust abroad into the world,
within these 500. years: within which compass of time, that noumber of years
began to be fulfilled, which was long before Prophesied of, for the lettyng
louse of Satan into the world, whose liberty out of that bottomless gulf of
hell, Apoc. 21.
was foretold by the Prophetical Scriptures should be after a thousand years,
to the end he might now prevail to deceive the people dwelling upon the four
corners of the earth Gog and Magog. etc. By mean of which pestiferous
deceauing, it is scarce credible to be spoken, what mo^struous ruin and
dissipation of Empires and Kingdoms with in these 500. years, what an
alteration has ensued in yt church chiefly, how much of Christian force has
been decayed through Civil wars, and private grudgynges, and how greatly the
power of foreine Nations has increased, to our destruction and undoing, And
how in the mean time, whiles the Turk does invade the Christian Church
without, seeking with foreine force to undermine it, The Popish Prelates be no
less busily bent to build up their fortress of furious Tyranny even within
the bowels of the same Church, and to fill up their Coffers with Treasures:
they moyle and turmoyle all things, Procure wars and bloodshed for the
establishment of their primacy, stir up Civil wars and commotions, turn
all things vpsidowne: Whereupon comes to pass, that doctrine is naught set
by: by how much their treasory abounds in and over flowing-plenty, by so much
(to speak with Jerome) their virtues are pyned away with famine and skarsity:
Idolatry, ambition, and superstition have grown to an unmeasurable excess:
all things are defiled with abuse: Religion rules the roast with violence, and
cruelty: Finally all things are come to naught. Truth is turned to plain
lying, and treachery: The place of sincere faith, possesses false hypocrisy:
Praying for the dead, kneeling and crowching to Images, supplyeth the place of
the true, and pure worshipping of God. The word of the Lord, is trodden down
with man's authority. The most godly and ancient ordinances are transformed
into new fangled traditions: the simple meaning of the Scriptures, is enta^gled
with scholetrickes, and Sophystrye: Lust, and unbridled licentious outrages
prevail above godly conversation, and seueritye of discipline: Presu^ptuous
pride, and greedy desire of Lordlynes and superioritye, do wrestle against
lowlynes, and humilitye: huge heaps of new Noueltyes increase daily: errors
and falshode flock abroad vnmeasurably: Finally the whole state of the
ancient Church, is become a very stage of an earthly Monarchye, and a filthy
forgeshoppe of foolish fond ceremonies. But now, as soon as the Lord of his
loving mercy and good pleasure toward us, vouchsafed to amend this daily
drowsy darkness, with some glymering of dawning day, and to refresh the razed
Rent of his ruynous Church, and to restore a recovery of his ancient records
of written veritye: the Braynesuck beasts of Romyshe rowte ganne fret and
fume: and our sweet shauelinges seek at the length, Truth suffers violence.
that we render them a reason of our Noueltye? And because veritye
Evangelical, oppressed with Tyranny (through ye Revel of Satha^s raunging
abroad these few years) either durst not show it self into the open world,
or could not be heard to plead for it self, through their outrageous vilaines,
and being now quickened from above, begins to display her oryent beams: she
is called to cora^, before these cloisterers, (as though Christ, and the
doctrine Apostolical were some stranger in the world) and commanded to
Justify her challenge of Antiquitye to them, which are neither able to render
any reason of their counterfayt Antiquity, nor Justify the truth of their own
cause, by any records, or reports of probable auncienty, or by any testimony
or president of the prymatyue Church whatsoever.

Wherein me seems they behave themselves no more modestly and shamefastly,
then thieves, and murderers, which breakyng in by night into an other man's
house, A figure called Hypotiposis. Whereby the state of the Romans Church and
the Reformed Church is expressed.
having by violnce and wrong, either slain, or thrust the true owner out of
doors, challenge unto themselves a title of possession: And so pleadyng in
possession by wrongful disseisin for term of certain years, do plead
occupation, and prescription of time, against the lawful heir that has right
by law to recover, and demand Judgment, thrusting the true heir out from
his true inheritance: who in right, and equitye demands restitution. For
what other thing do they herein? who finding their cause to be no way
bettered, by vouching of Scriptures which make nothing for the^ at all, flee
over forthwith to yt. Fathers, and Custom continued of old, by long
prescription of time, crying out against us with full mouths, that they have
enjoyed their possession in the Church, more then xv. hundredth years: and
command us to tell them where our Church was little above xl. years sithence.
In the question of the Church many things are contained.
And because they ask it, I will tell them: conditionally, that they will
distinctly tell me first, what they do mean by this word Church. If they
mean the people, perhaps we were not all borne then: if they understand the
Roofes, Walls, and Timber of the Churches, People, buildyng doctrine, form of
government. Where the Church of Lutheranes was forty years ago.
they stand even now in the same place, where they were wont to stand, and are
environed with ye same churchyardes, where they stood of old. But if they
speak of the doctrine, verily it was in the word of God, and in the
Scriptures, discernable enough, where also it rests now, rested ever
heretofore, and shall rest hereafter for ever. If they demand of the form of
government. It was in the primitive Church, and many years after, in Asia,
Greece, Afric, and Europe, dispersed abroad in all Churches: at what time
every particular Church, was governed by their peculiar Patriarchs, and not
pente up, and straighted into one hole, under the commandment of one man
only: when also neither was any Bishop called universal Bishop, no nor my
Lord Bishop of Rome, called as then universal Bishop.

I have now told where our Church was before these fourtye years. It remains
that I be so bold to demand again of them, but especially of our Osorius,
that he vouchsafe to declare unto us, where this fine Ciceronisme, this brave
poolyshed speech, where this exquisited eloquence of writing, and speaking,
where this gorgeous furniture of fyled tou^ges, and this pyked and strange
statelynes of style, A Similitude betwixt the restitutio^ of Religion and the
finest of the tounges
was forty years ago? where this wonderful increase of Arts, and
Mathematical sciences was? will he either say, that it is newely found out
now? or restored again rather? and delivered long sithence from old ancient
teachers? If he will confess that they be not new, nor special devises of our
proper wits: but renewed, and revived rather out of ancient authors: let him
then so account him self satisfied in his question touching the state of the
Church: not that it is a new vpstart, but revived from old: not garnished
with new Coapes, but returning again in her old Fryse gown. For we do not now
build a new Church, Reason re^dered why Religion is more pure at this time in
the Churches, then it was in many years before.
but we bring forth, and beautifye the old Church.

But now if any man will seem to marvel what the very cause and reason
should be, that these arts, and disciplines do rather in these days now
florishe again at length, after so long scylence, and so long continuance in
exile and banishment, and would needs know ye very true and natural cause
hereof. What better answer shall I make him, then that it is done by the
special providence of GOD? who of his inestimable goodness vouchsafed, in
these latter days, to discover abroad into ye world the famous Art of
Emprinting: The Art of Emprintyng.
By means whereof, as well the seeds, and principles of all liberal sciences,
as the knowledge of Diuinitye are extant and in daily exercise, not newly begone
now, but sproughted up of the old Roots, and recovering their old beauty.
So that you have less cause to wonder Osorius, that our Deuines being
enlightened thus with so open a light of the manifest scriptures, and furnyshed
with so great store of books, and helps of learning, do see much more in
matters of Diuinitye, than many our Elders have done: Which helps and
furnitures of books, if had been so plentiful in those ancient years of
Gregory 7. Nicholas 2. and Innocent 3. for the exercise of wits, as we see
them now daily, and hourly handled, and frequented: believe me Osorius, The
Pope of Rome had never so long lurcked in his lazye den, nor so long had
bewitched the senses of selly ones, with his legerdemain, and crafty
conueyaunce: Nor had Osorius ever sturred his stumpes so stoughtly in this
quarrel against Haddon: Nor had Haddon been forced to this straight, to make
defense of his Noueltye at this present.

The reason and objection of the Catholics in the defense of their Church.
But here some one of Osorius Impes will say peradventure: For as much as the
state and condition of the Church is such, that wheresoever it be, it must
needs be visible and apparaunt to be seen, not thrust under a bushel, but
set on high upon an hill, that it may shine clearly unto all: and for as much
also, as the Church of Rome was ever (eue^ from the very swathlyng cloutes of
Christian Religion) of that excellency, as to be able to Justify her dignity,
and renown, by the whole and full agreeable consent of all estates, times, and
places, even unto this day: and that none other Church besides this one alone,
can mainteyne so long a continuance of years, and so great a title of
authority: who may dought hereof, but that this See of Rome is the only See,
where only is refiaunt a true face, and profession of the true Church? And
that on the contrary part, the Lutheranes Church being but of a few years
continuance, and never heard of before, must therefore be accoumpted not worthy
of place, or name of a Church. For this is almost the whole strength and
substance of their defense. And I am not ignorant, how plausibly this
probable show glittereth in the eyes of unskillful and unlettered people: For
so do Philosophers define Probability: to be such as seems probable, either
to all men, or many, or at the least to wise personages.

But in heavenly things ought a far other manner of consideration be had.
Probable with Deuines.
For if we ground our selves upon many, we are taught by Christ himself: That
many are called, but few are chosen. And again in an other place, That his
flock is a very little flock. And afterward he demands, If when the Son
of man shall come, whether he shall find any Faith upon the earth. Neither are
those things always best, with delight many. Again, if we shall depend upon the
Judgment of the wise, we hear likewise ye same Lord him self giving thanks
unto his Father, that he had hidden those things from the prudent, and wise of
this world, and revealed them to little ones. And again we read in Paul, The
wisdom of this world is very foolishnes with God. And therefore where as they
would have ye Church to be placed on high, apparau^t to the view of all the
world, truly they Judge not amysse herein, namely if they mean of ye preaching
of ye word. Rome built upon seven hills.
And yet this is no good Argument notwithstanding, that every City vau^ced on
highest hill, shall be forthwith esteemed the true church of God: Apocal. 13.
or else what shall be said to that famous and great City mentioned in the
Apocalips? Which was foreprophecied should be built, not upon the Top of on
hill only, but upon seven hills? Or what shall we Judge of that exceedyng
wondering and worshyppyng of so many Nations, so reuere^tly humbled to that
Beast? whose marcke it is said that small and great, young and old, rich and
poor freemen and bondmen, yea and those in noumber not a few, but universally
all shall be marked withal in their right hands, and in their foreheades?
Uerely if common sense, and consent of people do make a Church, where was ever
a greater consent, or more well likyng, and greater admiration of fautours and
friends?

But they say that ye consent and co^munitie of their Church is universal and
Catholic, The reason of the papists touching the consent and proof of their
universality.
which may not err by any means. Now let us see how they prove it. The
Apostle (say they) in his Epistles did greatly co^me^de the faith of the
Roman Church. This is true. Peter also did both consecrate the same to be a
See and instruct it in the Faith. I am in dought of this: But what hereof?
After the Apostles time, many of the Apostles Disciples (say they) learned
Doctors and holy Martyrs, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Tertullia^, Augustine,
and all that ancient age of grave Fathers did always most gloriously esteem
of this Church. Is there any more yet? In the time of Basile, Nazienzene and
Chrysostom the Church of Rome was not only had in highest estimation, but
also was diverse times sought unto for counsel and aid: neither will I deny
this to be true, couple herewith if you will, that when other Churches were
tossed and turmoyled every where with Schisms, and rent in sunder with
seditious factions: no one Church besides stood so long in so quiet a calm,
not assaulted with any such conte^tious sects, or variable opinions, which did
not a little advance the estimation of the Church, and gate it no small
authority: Go to, and what shall be concluded at the last out of all this? For
sooth, The Church of Rome whiles it reteigned the sound doctrine and
simplicity of the Faith, was commended of the holy Fathers, by the name of a
Catholic, and an Apostolic Church.

Ergo, The Church of Rome is the head and Metropolitan Church of all other
Churches, which has never hitherto swarued from the true tracke of the truth,
nor shall ever err: under the which all other Churches must be subject of very
necessity: the commandment whereof is an heinous obstinacy to disobey: From
the which to depart is manifest Schism: against the which to resist, and stand
is plain heresy: all the commandments whereof to swear obedience unto, is
the surest way of sauety: moreover also a very necessary Article of eternal
Salvation.



You do see (I suppose) the whole force and subtlety of your Catholic cutted
Enthymeme. Whereof if you will see a right proportion, it is this.

The captious conclusion of the Catholics.
The Church of Rome was allowed of the holy Apostles, or the most ancient
Fathers, and all the most approved Doctors of the Church, for Catholic, and
Apostolic.

But our Church is the Church of Rome.

Ergo, Our Church is approved for Catholic and Apostolic, by the consent of
all the godly.

First we answer to the Mayor proposition: The answer to the Argument.
The ancient primitive Church of Rome was approved by the famous consent of
the learned, for Catholic and Apostolic. Peradventure it was so: yet was
not this Church of Rome accounted so alone: nor yet to this end so accounted,
because it should be the universal Church of all other Churches. For this will
forthwith be gain said by the Councels of Nice, Mileuitane, and by Pope
Gregory and all the learned Deuines of that age until the coming of Boniface
3. Moreover neither was it for that cause so famously commended with so great
consent, because it was the Church of Rome, but because it was a Christian
Church. Neither for any prerogative of the place (though) Peter sat there a
thousand times) For even this also will an ancient Pope Gregory deny, as
appears evidently by the Decrees. Distinct. 40. Non loca.
Neither the places: nor the dignities do make us more acceptable to our
Creator, but either our good deeds do couple us unto him, or our evil
deeds do exclude us from him. Moreover not because it can prescribe an
ordinary Succession of Bishops. Distinct. 4. Non est.
For Jerome also will not admit this. They be not children of holy ones
forthwith (says he) that occupy the possession of the holy ones, but they
that practice the works of the holy ones. But because with the Succession of
Bishops they did join agreeable profession in true Religion: because they did
apply them selves to imitate the Faith, Religion and order of worshyppyng
instituted by the Apostles: because they did not varry from well ordered
Churches, in any part of sound doctrine: For this cause I say, namely for
their sincere, unstained Faith, and constaunt vprightenes of Religion, not
defiled with filthy stenche of erroneous doctrine, the Church of Rome obtained
of the ancient godly Fathers, to have a place amongst the Catholic and
Apostolic Churches.

But what is this, O ye Apostolic Princes to this your Romish Church, in the
state that it is now in? the disorderous order whereof, as it is at this day,
reuelyng with Cardinals, riotyng in Court, glorified with this title of
Uniuersall head, garnished with tripple Crown, guarded with the double sword,
magnified with Patriarchs, and innumerable other titles of dignity, armed
with Abbottes, mounted with Mounkes, saluted sovereign with shauelyngs, and
infinite skulles of fectes, fortified with those Canons, Decrees, Decretalles,
and Rescriptes, pampered up with Pardons, exalted with Idolatry, sumptuous in
superstition, entangled with so many snares and Articles, embrued in so bloody
a bootchery of Saints (that might easily fill up a thousand Toonnesfull of
Babilonicall horror and cruelty) advanced with so many more then
Pharisaicall Traditions, and peltyng Ceremonies, which would easily ouerlade a
monstrous Carricke, glitteryng in gold, precious stones, and pearl: enriched
with large and great possessions and patrimonies, beautified with purple and
scarlet: finally so blazing in bravery, with the Royalties of S. Peter: If S.
Peter, if Paul the Apostle, if the holy Fathers, and ancient Doctors of that
pure and primitive Church had seen these glorious gawdyes which we see: verily
I do believe, they would so little acknowledge this Church for Catholic, that
they would even from the bottom of their hearts utterly abhor it, and would
scarsely acknowledge it by the name of a Christian Church. And thus much to
your Mayor.

A fallax in the Equiuocum which is of diverse significations.
Now I do answer to your Minor: wherein you have committed a great eskape in
the word which the Logitians do term aequiuocum or ignoratio Elenchi. For this
word Romayne Church is in the Mayor taken after one sort, in the Minor after an
other sort: In the Mayor it notes such a Church, as did retain the true
worshippyng of God, and sincerity of Religion, as into the which were no
poisoned infections of sinister Doctrine, no filth of false opinyons crept: But
in the Minor this word Church is of a far contrary condition and quality, as
the which does carry no resemblaunce at all of that ancient and primitive
Church besides a bare name only, The Romans Church does combat against the true
Church of Christ under a color of christian name.
and a certain whorysh dissembling counterfayt of outward Succession. In all
things else, which do make a true, unspotted and undefiled Church, it bears
so no countenance at all, as that it seems rather under the name and Title
of the Church, to be at defiaunce with the Church rather, and under the name of
a Christian souldior, to fight against Christ her captain and traitorously to
betraye him to Antichryst. For if Christ be the verity it self, surely
counterfayt verity (as Origin says) is very Antichrist. Origin upon Matthew
cap. 17.
And therefore if they will justify their consent and Antiquity, by good
argument: Let them yield us such a Church of Rome, as the ancient Fathers did
honorably esteem of, and then shall it not want our agreeable and mutual
assent and allowaunce: And let them make us a plain demonstration of those
ornaments which are worthily ascribed to a true Christian Church, and we will
confess it to be a true Church. Where the Church is (says Irene) there is
the holy Ghost, and where the Spirit of God is, there is also the Church and
all grace: Irene. 3. book. cap. 4.
But the Spyryte is the verity, therefore verity is the life of the Church: The
truth is the life of the church.
without the which the Church is blind and even dead, being alive, and
deserves not so much as the name of a Church, no more then the portrai^t or
counterfayt of a man, does deserve to be called a man properly: whereupon the
Church is with the Apostle very fittely called a sure pi^ler, and a foundation,
not of man's authority, but of Gods verity.

And by the testimony of Lactantius that Church is called the only Catholic
Church, Lactant. 5. institu. cap. 30.
wherein God is worshipped aright: which Church if the offspring of the ancient
Romanistes did now profess as truly, and in the same form as the Catholic
Fathers did extol and praise it with such great commendation, there would be
no controversy at all. On the other side, if they have determined with themselves
neither to admit the truth within their City themselves, nor to tolerate the
same to be preached being brought in by others: let them accuse themselves and
not the Lutherans, who had rather patiently endure continual enmity and hatred
of them, then to become open adversaries of the truth. Moreover let them also
cease hereafter to pray in aid of antiquity, and number of voices, for defense
of their church: forasmuch as they can allege no true report of ye one, and
ye other can help them nothing at all. For if it may be lawful for us
(renouncing the verity) to maintain one cause by vouching antiquity, and
number of nations, namely in those things, Arguments made from consent and
multitude of authors are weak.
which appertain properly to Christ and his Church: then let us not spare to
argue after the same form of Logic.

The Religion of Mahumette has been of as long a continuance of time and
years, as the Church of the Pope:

Ergo, Mahumettes Religion is of as great authority as the Popes.

And again.

The greatest part of Priests have long sithence been over gredily covetous:

Ergo, They that do inueigh against their greedy Avarice most, be accounted
Cosen Germaynes to the valdenses heresy.

Again The greater part of the people did cry out Crucifige and stoaned
Stephen to death: And the most part of me^ do at this day follow their own
sensuality and lust:

Ergo, Let us all join together in sensuality and lust.



If on this wise we shall think to measure the truth and sincerity of
Religion, by the standard of Antiquity, and number of years, what shall we
win by this argument? when we do hear that many are called but few are
chosen, Math. 10. Eccle. 1. Jeremy. 8.
when as fools also be in number infinite, when as from the highest to the
lowest all are become covetous, when as even from the Prophette to the Priests
all work deceit: What shall we win (I say) by this argument, but that the part
of Satan (which is more in number) shall be of greater force, and seem to
triumph against the Lord?

But to let pass the Romysh Church: I return to our own Church. In the
which Osorius having alleged nothing hitherto, nor being by any means able
to allege any matter truly, that may seem either new, or strange in our
doctrine, or that does in any respect swerve from the institution and
discipline of the Apostles: he runs away from the question, that concerns
the sincerity of Religion and doctrine, and comes to this point, to catch
some occasion of outward life and manners of men, whereby he may reproach us
(subtlely enough I warrant you) imitating herein the old crafty Rhetorical
Foxes, who feeling themselves altogether unable to prosecute the cause which is
specially in hand with effect, do wring the state of ye Question an other way,
or enforce the whole bent of their accusation against their adversary with some
contrary cauillation, turning Catte in the Pan: that so being not otherwise
able to compass their cause it self, they may yet at least entangle their
Adversary with some peril and danger. Not much unlike hereunto happens now
to Osorius in this kind of controversy: who being not able to maintain the
cause of his guilty Church with any justifiable arguments: bends himself
wholly to defame our Churches with falsehoodes and untruths. And on this wise
at length addresseth his assault against us, as finding nothing offensive to
any man in our faith, in our Religion, in our manner of worshypping, nor our
Church ordinances: he presently rusheth upon our lives, and rippeth abroad the
dishonest behavior of men: Osorious accusation which was properly bent against
Doctrine is transposed to manners.
and in this discourse he spends all his powder and shot of slanders,
lies, outcries, figures, and all his exclamations of accusation. And therefore
it behooves me also to alter the state of my defense, so that from henceforth I
shall not need to answer for our doctrine, our faith, our Sacraments and the
institution of our Churches, which differ not from the institution Apostolic:
but for the lives only, and the outward conuersations and manners of our
Ministers.

And first, It is well truly, and I do praise you Osorius, so do all the rest
of us likewise acknowledge our selves indebted unto you in a whole Cartlode of
thanks in this behalf. For sithence you apply all the force of your
accusation to reprove our evil demeanor, and corruption of manners only,
having else no matter of reproach justly to charge us withal, surely even by
this only testimony of your own mouth, you do fully acquit us, in such wise
as all men may well and plainly perceive, that all things else are well
stayed, and sound with us concerning other points of our doctrine and
christian profession. All which if you think may be tolerable enough amongst
us, why may ye not as well release us of your action of heresy and schism, in
so much as all heretical waywardness consists, not in conversation of life
properly, but in doctrine and Religion. But if it be our doctrine that you and
your Catholics do mislike chiefly, why do you not prosequute this action
against us? why do ye not stay here? why run you away like a coward from your
challenge? wherefore do ye turn over all the substance and rigor of your
accusation against our lives and manners, leaving our doctrine in the field?
why are ye so lusty and frolic in that one, and so white liuered and
caponlike in this other? You do accuse us of Nouelty: If you charge the
doctrine of our Religion with this Noueltye, declare them in plain words in
what part of Doctrine, and in which one article of the common Creed, we do vary
from the Apostolic or prophetical scriptures. Nay rather what do our
Churches profess at this day, yt we have not drawn and taken from the
Apostles, the Evangelists, yea and from Christ himself, the very author and
fou^der of faith? which also we maintain and keep very Religiously? you have
tofore treated (I confess) of freewill, of righteousness of works, and of
certain other principles somewhat: but so have you handled your self therein,
that it had been better for you to have been silent and mumme, for the further
you roll in this puddle, the more dirt cleaves to your back, and both
bewrays where you have been, and makes you to loase ye whole grace of your
market. And now perceauing your self destitute of aid in this kind of
conflict, you fly the field cowardly, and renew your skirmish in narrow
streights, inuading the corruptions and escapes of manners and lives with lyeng
and slauntyng. Wherein I would not so much reprehend you, as though you had
dealt much amiss, if in this behalf you proceeded against us with a good and
simple meaning, and as we do all with you altogether: who are no less agreeued
with that outrageous corruption of manners, the^ your selves are. Now eue^ here
also you show your self so cold, and unprovided, as that by your unskillful
ha^dling of the matter, you disclose rather the scabbe of your own Fistula,
then minister salve to any others soar. For you do not therefore so earnestly
reprove our lewdenes and misdemeanour, how horrible so ever it be, because your
mind is so much agreeued thereat, or because you have any earnest desire to
bring us to amendeme^t: but this rather is the whole scope of your scoldyng, To
what end tends the force of Osorius Accusation.
that as it were occasioned by these, you might pyke out some fit matter to
whett your cursed and slanderous tongue more freely against Luther and other
godly Ministers, and bring them into hatred and contempt: conceauyng in your
imagination to bring this to pass, that if the world would by your means but
conceive evil of the Lutheranes, as yt their Churches did swarm, and were
overwhelmed with abomination of life: then the credit of our doctrine should
be easily cracked, and those godly personages, which took upon them to restore
the sincerity of the Gospel should be accounted for errant heretics, and
most execrable false Prophets: for hereunto is your whole Rhetoric strayned
Osorius.

But let us see how well this Rhetoric does agree with the Rules of Logic.
And because (as your self say) it is not sufficient for a man to affirm what
him lists with bare words only, let us behold not your vain ianglyng, but
the very substance of your meaning. And to begin now with the principal part
of the controversy, to wit, whereas in the defense of our Church Haddon had
said (as true it was in deed) that our doctrine was neither new, nor did
differ any jot from the Institution, and discipline of the Apostles: all
this saying of Haddon, Osorius does utterly deny, and does Reply against it,
that our Church has no affinity at all with the Institution, and discipline
of the Apostles, Osorius does deny that Luthers doctrine has any affinitye
with the Apostolic Scriptures. Page 181.
nor any continuau^ce in Antiquity. And who so? Now mark his reasons gentle
Reader, and marvel a whiles at the wonderful dexterity of this Portingall
Prelate: For Haddon (says he) does bring no president or example of that
ancient virtue. Fourth a Gods name. Moreover in all that Church appear no
examples of that heavenly virtue. What virtues speak you of here good Sir?
Miracles? What? do ye look for such miracles in these days? No. But lust
(say you) raungeth in your Churches: wickedness is ryfe: high ways and
passadges are replenished with thieves: Osor. page 182.
treasons, and conspiracies are common practizes of the people: treachery and
villainy brings all things into peril: for the simple purity of the
Gospel, these fellows have in all commonweals scattered abroad horrible
wickedness: for concord and charity, execrable dissentions: pride in stead of
modesty: for Religion, Sacrilege: for freedom, servile bondage, for Civil
orders, outrage, finally for tra^quilitie and peace, cruel and detestable
tumultes and commotions. And who be they, I pray you? Luther (I think)
Mela^cthon, Bucer, Calvin, Zuinglius, Haddon and such others their like. Go
to, is there any more yet? And all these mischieues (say you) after the
doctrine of these men took place, were in such wise not rooted out, as that
they increase rather daily more and more amongst us, and are grown to greater
heaps: all which mischieues notwithstanding, if were but light or mean at the
least, the matter were not so great: for that might have been pardonable in
respect of the weakness of man's Nature: But what shall we say now of that
most horrible and execrable haynousnes, wherewith they have practiced the
dissipation, overthrow, utter spoil, and consumyng of all things both
public and private with fire and sword, yea the most holy things of the
Church. Be of good cheer now. I suppose this whotte flaming Rhetorical smoke
is come almost to an end. Can Osorius amplification add yet more hereunto?
surely these be great matters, yea very great in deed, but yet you shall hear
far more heinous. For whereas amongst other kind of living creatures which
nature has formed, Osorius lying Rhetoric.
to the destruction of mankind, some do bewitche with their eyes, and lookyng
on: some do infect with touching: others do kill with their teeth, and some
with their tails: These Luthera^s do so contriue their matters, that they do
not only poison the bodies, the souls, and the lives of men, with the
contagion of their wickedness: but upon what ground soever they set footyng,
I do not say, they defile the same with those former small faults, but
wheresoever they tread with their feet, they leave the same land contamined,
and poisoned with many more, ye more execrable abominations. And why does he
not add this also withal? that what ship soever they enter into, of purpose
to sail over Sea, they do also drown the same shipp into ye bottom of ye Sea
with over burden of their wickedness? why then clappe your hands, rejoice you
Osorians, and congratulate this yonr notable Rhethoricia^: who (if you have not
yet learned the art of lying and flaunderyng) have here a notable
Schoolemaister whom ye may follow: And so when you have magnified this your
exquisite Master triumphauntly enough, write some Epitaphe for this wretched
caytife Haddon, worthy his impudency, who notwithstanding all these horrible
abominations, shamed not to stand in the defense of this new doctrine, against
this great Doctor Osorius.

Moreover, that the singular excellency of this your Master may shine so much
the more notably. Behold now not the Rhetoric, but the modesty and humanity
of the man. For whereas this might have sufficed him (if at least he might have
woonne this much) which we can in no wise deny, to wit, that our manners are
not correspondent to that most exact, and exquisite rule of most holy, and
Apostlicque Religion: Which thing these new Apostles vnde^rtooke to bring to
pass: yet the sweet man contented of his incredible courtesy to acquit us
of this quarrel, does now deal with us after this manner: not to compare us (as
he might of his Pontifical authority do it well enough) with the Apostles,
nor with ancient Fathers of the primitive Church: but does refer us to our
own forefathers and does require this only at our hands, that we Englismen,
should frame our selves to the gravity, virtue, Religion, and holiness of our
au^cestours, and by their example become like unto them in like integrity of
life. But for as much as we can not aspire to the glory and renown of their
virtues (which were also by many degrees inferior to the Apostles) how much
and how far discrepant therefore is the Institution of our Church in this
point, that it may carry any resemblaunce at all of that Apostolic
institution and discipline, which discipline ought to express it self not in
vain ostentation, and tauntyng: but in superexcellent examples of
righteousness, chastity, sincerity, Religion, and charity, and a life
altogether undefiled, unreprovable conversation, and a most serious desire and
endeavor of heavenly virtue. You have heard godly Reader the knittyng up of
the conclusion of this Peroratio^, fetched out of the very entrails of all
Rhethoricke. Now take an Argument of ye same somewhat more compendiously knitte
up, not with floorishyng figures of Rhetoric, but framed even in ye very
school and Art of Logic and comprehended in few words, that it may easily
appear, how to Judge of the same more certainly and to answer the matter
more fittely. The Argument of Osorius.


The life of the Lutheranes (as he calls them) is heinous and far unlike
the life of the Apostles, and their own ancestors.

Ergo, The doctrine that the Lutheranes do profess in their Churches, is
altogether discrepant from the Doctrine and Institution of the Apostles.

The Answer to the Argument.
For as much as this is the whole force, and Summary conclusion of your Argument
Osorius. It remains again that we answer unto the same. And what answer
may we frame more fit, and agreeable to the matter, then to deny the Argument?
For I beseech you, where did you learn this Logic to knitte such fleeyng
fruitless moates together? or where have you learned this Divinity, to
measure men's doctrine, and profession, by manners and conversation of life? When
Haddon debated with you of Faith only, and Religion: it behooved you to have
answered the same accordyngly: which if seemed in your conceit to varry from
the Institution Apostolic in any points: the same should have been laid open
by you, the Articles should have been noted by some special mark, and
convinced with Scriptures: those errors should have been refuted with lawful
Testimonies and authorities: those heresies should have been discovered, and
confuted. But you (omittyng that part of the controversy which belonged to
doctrine) skyppe away to other matters, not such as are of no importance, but
such nevertheless, as concern the present matter nothing at all, according to
the old Proverb, which is the way to Canterbury? a pocke full of plummes. And
this much to the Conclusion of your euillfauoured clouted Argument.

Osorius quarrel of life and manners.
I come now to answer that part of your argument wherewith you urge us most,
namely Manners (albeit the same has been once done already) but so I would
answer you, as that I would desire you to answer me first simply to a few
questions. First whereas you Rail so franckly against the manners of our
people, do you know this that ye write to be true by any sure argument or
knowledge of your own? but how can you attain unto it being so meare a
stranger, and so far severed from us by distaunce of place? Or else have you
conceived it to be so, by some conjecture of your own head? but we take you
for no Proyet. Or have you believed it upon some vagarant tales, or reports of
others? but talebearers may deceive you, and have deceived many. Or did you
dream of any such happily, ouercharged with some wine of Creete? But the men
of Creete have been always accounted liars. Again every fond dream, is not
by and by a prophecy: Tit. 1.
As Basile reports. Moreover do you inueigh against all the Lutheranes
generally? or against some particulerly? if you mean all: you speak untruly:
If you speak of many, tell us when did you number the^? if of some particular
persons, it stands against all reason that the offense of a few dissolute
persons should be a common reproach to the whole order of Mynisterie. Now
again let us see what kind of offenses they be, wherewith you charge us?
what? do you mean therefore all kinds and sorts of abominations Osorius
without any exception? or those small and venial faults rather? No. But even
the most heinous, the most wicked, not to be named, Lust, murders,
Conspiracies, Treasons, Tumultes, Pride, Sauadgenesse, Vproares, Destructions,
and Dispensations, and what not? I marvel of one thing much, that whiles you
are exquisite skillful in numbering and multiplying our faults, as that no
horror and filthiness of life can be found in all yonr Rhetoric, which you
have not by all ways and means of Amplification stretched out to the hard
hedge against the Lutheranes: That ye forgot to obbrayd the Lutheranes with one
poor abomination amongst all the rest, Ill may the Snight the Woodcock
twight for his long bill.
which my self will not name here, but will refer you over to the gentle
remembrance of Cardinal Casus and to his brethren, and to that Catholic
crewe, and most holy children of that most holy mother Church S. Maryes.

But I return to our own Catalogue, what? say you that all those
abominations therefore raunge abroad with us unpunished? yea in deed Sir. What?
with us English men only? or do ye not comprehend in ye same Cataloge French
men also, Germaynes, Danes, Switzers, Bohemya^s, Polans, Rettes, Scotts and
all other nations Fautors of ye Luthera^es doctrine also. Yea truly:
whersoeuer throughout the whole world, the doctrine of these men has been
published, wheresoever these new Gospellers do set their feet on the ground,
they do defyle the heavens, the air, and the earth, with the horror of their
iniquity. Good words, good Sir. What? be those notorius crimes so common and
general amongst us alone, that the same cannot be found any where among you
Catholics? yes: but not so much: In deed do you think that there is not even
as much? and will you give me leave then to answer hereunto as I think?
Surely I will not speak much, neither is it needful, namely in a matter so
apparaunt. The life of the Lutheranes compared with the Catholics.
This one thing will I speak boldly, and the same also no less truly, then
as Demetrius on a time was said to answer Lysimachus: A Stru^pet does behave
her self more modestly amongst us Osorius, then Penelope does amongst you.
By this one bethink your self now Osorius what my opinion is of all the rest.

And yet do I not in the mean space deny, but that we are by many degrees
far unlike to the life which the Apostles did lead, and which indeed
beseemeeh the true professors of the Apostolic doctrine. Nevertheless as we
dot glory much of our virtues, so neither do we so stroke and flatter our
selves in our vices, but we judge the same worthy of sharp correction and
chastisement. But when you have reckoned up all the spots of our ill
favored life, and agrauated the filthiness thereof as much as you may, yet
are you to answer me directly to this, namely, whether ye think these faults
to be proper to men? or to doctrine? if unto me^, let your exclamation
therefore touch them, which have deserved to be exclaymed against. They be
Lutheranes (say you) that be so abominable: There be Lutheranes also that do
live godly. And I think that all your Catholics do not lead their lives
like Apostles. Now if the former faults be proper to the doctrine: But it has
been long sithence declared, that this doctrine is none other, then which
Christ and his Apostles delivered. Wherefore if these faults and licentiousnes
of life be imputed to the doctrine, and professors of the same doctrine, The
vices of manners are not to be imputed to his doctrine.
then look about you Osorius how far your slanderous speech does stretche,
and whom you touch therewith: for even all those (whom you do accuse for
Lutheranes) do believe in Christ, and not in Luther: nor do acknowledge any
other Author of their faith, then all other Christian men do, so that this
profession can not justly be charged with any crime which cleaves not fast to
the Gospel of Christ, and is common also to the Apostles themselves.

But the doctrine of Luther (say you) has discovered unto them this liberty,
and ministered occasion of this dissolute life. If it shall be enough for
Osorius to affirm in bare words only that, whereof he has not hitherto made
any proof, nor is ever able to justify: We are utterly overthrown, for he
imputes all that huge heap of heinous abomination to Luthers doctrine. And
why so Sir Bishop? how do you prove this to be true? Luther did open the
fountaynes of the Gospel of grace: he did display abroad to the view of the
world, The fruits of Luthres doctrine.
the free promises of God, which had been pent up in a deep doungeon of long
scilence, and almost pyned away with long emprisonement: he raised up and
recomforted with the comfortable confidence in the Medyatour, consciences that
were utterly foredone and forelorne, yea and this not altogether unfruitfully:
he discovered the force and efficacy of faith learnedly: he confuted the vain
and talkatiue opinion of vain confidence in man's righteousness: the part of the
Law which consists of works, he bound within her proper lymittes and
bounds: he enclosed it within her peculiar persons and Times, and severed it
clean from the Gospel: he called back the slippery minds of men, from
carnal superstition, and fryuolous Jewish zeal to the spiritual worshipping
of God and true Religion.

It follows. Osor page 182.
Forasmuch as Luther, Melancthon, Bucer Martyr, Calvin and others of the same
crew have stuffed their books full of these things, and taught the same also
openly in their Sermones every where: what have these new Gospellers brought to
pass by their new doctrine be thereto as yet else, then cut in sunder the very
Sinowes of severe discipline? scattered abroad over the whole world lycentious
lust, murders, and vproares? filled all commonweals with abominations,
Tumultes, pride, Bondage, vproares, unpunished liberty to sin, outrage and
all abominable infections of mischiefs, and untimely deaths? in steed of
Concord, Cleanesse, modesty, freedom, Religion, and peace? I beseech you Osor.
for the love you bear to your chastity, modesty, freedom and Religion, what
answer can you make hereunto? Can it not be lawful for us to preach the
Gospel of God, but that we shall forthwith overthrow all virtue? may we not
comfort and cherish wounded and pyned consciences, but we must withal open an
high way for the wicked to raunge in all outrage unpunished? Is it not possible
to distinguish the law from the Gospell^ to make a difference betwixt the
works of the Law, and the righteousness of faith, to display the force of ye
heavenly grace; but we must be accounted enemies of Gods law? The confutation
of hisl aunder.
and rooters out of honesty? Is this the manner of your reasoning? and the
superaboundance of your eloquence? or the barraynenesse of your judgment, or
super infirmity of your slippery brains? And yet what wonder is it, though
Luther be so infamed sithence Paul himself being in the same predicament,
could not by any means escape the venomous snatches of like vypers, nor could
skarse shake them away from his hand. For so we read that it was objected
against Paul, yea even of his own brethren, namely: That he taught a
defection from Moses.

Artic. 21.
Howbeit it was so much the less to be marueled: That the same should be
objected against Paul, in that time especially, when as the Jews were: yet
chief rulers of the Temple it self, and Moses ordynaunces were as yet, in
their chief force and authority. What? and have we profited this far now at
the length after so great, and long labors employed, after so many
aduertizements of thapostles, after so many instructions of the holy ghost,
after so many examples of the Church, after so many miracles, so many books,
so many testimonies of learned men, so many helps of sownd doctrine, that we
must after all these needs ^unne back unto old Iewishnes again? and may we
not now skarcely open onr mouths, to preach Jesus Christ the Son of God, The
scoff of Luthers doctrine.
but we must seem Injurious to Moses? For what else did Luther mean?
Whereunto else tended all his doctrine, travail, endeavor, and thought? but
that the gracious mercy of God, discovered in the Gospel, might through his
minystery he commended to weak^ and aflicted consciences? and glorified of
them? In which manner of doctrine if any thing seem displeasaunt to your mind,
let your own mind and Imagination offend you rather then Paul, or Luther.
For there lurketh a plague, or pestilence, not in the Doctrine, but in the
mind, which in my judgment seems to be such, as that if you had lived in
the time of Christ, with the Scribes and Pharisees, being of the same mind
wherewith you gnaw this doctrine so viperously now, you might have been fellow
mate with them which cried out Crucifige, Crucifige, against Christ. Not so,
(say you,) but the wickedness, and abominations of this age do much displease
me: with that am I worthily offended. And what good or godly man is not
thoroughly displeased herewith? Peruse who will the writings of Luther,
Melanckton, Bucer, Zuinglius, Martyr, Calvin, and he shall easily peceaue that
this deadly decay of Godly life, was no less grievous to every of them, then to
your self: that I need never speak of this besides, to wit, that Luther
being very oftentimes disquieted with the manners, and unthankfulness of his own
country men, did long before with a very prophetical vehemencye foretell,
that the same lamentable slaughter should befall them, Luther offended with the
life of his country men.
for their ungrateful contempt of Evangelical life, wherewith not long after
they were grievously pinched. And how then may any reasonable man credit you
Osorius, that lie so impudently upon these men, whom you make to be Authors,
and standerbearers of all those mischyeues, and Tumultes?

But here is yet another argument clowted up, and patcht together with the
like stuff: whereby he would prove upon trust of his Rhethoricke. That these
false Prophets Lutherans, were not sent from God. Let us first note the words
which he cites out of the Scriptures. Osor. page 187.
Mark well (says he,) What the Lord spoke of a false Prophet: The Prophet
that is puffed up with pride, and will speak in my name the thing that I do not
command him to speak, or in the name of any other strange Godds, let him be
slain. And if in your secret conceypt you think with your self, how shall I
understand, that it is not the word of God, that he has spoken. Take this for
a sign: Whatsoever that Prophet shall Prophecy in my name, and it come not to
pass: that has not the Lord spoken, but the Prophet himself has imagined
it, through the pride of his own heart, and therefore thou shall not fear him.
etc. Where is this? Seek for it Reader in the old Testament, or in the new,
for either it pleased not Osorius to note the place, or perhaps it served not
for his purpose so to do. But the place is to be found in the 18. Chap. of
Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 18.
Go to: and what is it, that this wonderful Philosopher of this world, has
pyked out of these words?

Forsooth, having uttered this much first by way of preamble. It follows now
(says he,) that we see what Luther, Melancton, Bucer, Calvin, and the other
jolly companions have promised and undertaken to do, what hope they have given
of their glorious promises, to wit, that it should come to pass, that they
would call home again the discipline of the Gospel to her ancient
sinceritye, restore Religion, hold up the Church that was ready to fall down:
That is to say, that they would fully restore the decayed faith of the Church,
restore lenitye, Chastitye, Concord, Unity, Modestye, Obedience, Charity
together with godlynes, and great bountye of godly love. All these things
whereof they promised largely, and in many words to bring to pass: it lacks
so much of thacomplishment of their promise, that they have left all things in
far more worse case, more perverse, more filthy, and more deformed by the
means of their goodly travail: as men that have placed Sacrilege, in stead of
Religion: Crueltye in stead of Lenytye: Tumults in stead of Peace: Civil war
in stead of Concord: Licentiousnes of life in stead of chastity: Contempt of
Magistrates, in stead of Obedience: Pride in stead of Modestye: Finally in
stead of Charity, and Pietye, Enmitye and hatred amongst good men: Monstrous
wickedness, and utter overthrow, and confusion of all commonweals. The matters
being so (to conclude at the last) who can think that any man may doubt, that
these men were sent from God, or moved by his holy spirit?

Breefly: passing over all frivolous circumlocutions of words, to gather the
whole matter again together into a short breuiate. Behold here a full
sillogisme, after this manner and form.

The argument of Osorius.
The Prophets which do prophecy in the name of God, if it come not to pass as
they have prophesied, are not sent from God.

It is so far of that Luther, Melancton, Bucer, or Calvin have performed the
things that they promised, that all have proved in far more worse case.

Ergo. Luther, Melancton, Bucer, and Calvin, were not sent from God, but are
lying Prophets, and therefore according to Gods law, worthy of everlasting
death.

I am in doubt, whether I may answer, or laugh: The One of both paraduenture
the Reader will look fort the other the fondnes of the argument does persuade me
to do. For what can be spoken more senselesly? what can be more crookedly
wrested out of the whole Scriptures? what could have been attempted more
cruelly, and falsely against godly personages? what could have been concluded
more absurdly? First there is a place vouched out of the Scripture, wherein the
people is taught, how they may discern a false Prophet from a true: namely by
the true success, and event of things: as far forth as ye things foretold
do happen or not happen. And yet in this behalf also special consideration
of choice ought to be hadd, and some secret inspiration of the holy ghost: For
although Caiphas be said to have foretold, as the truth was. Yet will you not
give him a place amongst the holy Prophets: So also neither did Balaam lie
altogether when in a Prophetical speech, he foretold the people of God, good
and gladsome tidings: yet I think you will not number him amongst the Godly
Prophets of God. 1. Kings.
The Spirit that was raised by Saul in the name of Samuel, to foreshew what
should become of the success of the battle, did not tell otherwise, then as
it came to pass afterward: Act. 1^.
Likewise also in the Acts of thapostles: The Prophetisse at Phillippos did
prophecye many things of Paul, and Timothe which were true and maruailous: yet
will no man assign her a place amongst the true Prophetisses. What shall we
say of the Devil himself? which did foretell to Siluerster the Pope, A true
difference betwixt the false and the true Prophett.
that he should never dye before he came unto Jerusalem? what? was not the
sequel aunswerable to his former tale? How then Osorius? are those then to be
accounted the true Prophets of God, which do foretell ye things that shall
come to pass? I think not so: Neither does the Scripture affirm the same to
be true. The true Prophets of God do pronounce truly from out the true
treasures of the heart. And not contrariwise, all they that do tell true
things altogether, ought always to be taken for true Prophets of God: But
whatsoever he be that teaches false Doctrine, and is found a liar: it is most
certain that he is not sent of God. Telling truth therefore namely in Successes
human, does not always asrgue him that does foretell the same to be a true
Prophet of God. But lying does always bewray a false Prophet. And this is it,
whereof the Scripture would have us to be forewarned in this place. For the
words of the Scripture do not so directly determine, that every person
whosoever foretells the truth of every thing is therefore sent from God. But
it sets down this special mark: That if any Prophet have foretold any
thing in the name of the Lord, which does not afterwades come to pass, By this
mark (says the Scripture) shall you know, that a man has spoken it, and not
the Lord: Then which sign (say you) no thing can be more sure, nothing more
evident, nothing more commodious for our sauetye. And this also do we confess
as well as you do. And so much hitherto for the Mayor.

But to answer the Minor now, what is any of all this to Luther? Melancthon,
and their companyons? Because they have promised (say you) so largely and so
lowdly, whereas they gave so great a hope of themselves by their glorious
promises, that it should come to pass, that they would call back again the
decayed life of the Christians, and the dissolute manners of the Church, to the
ancient purity of the Gospel: they did so perform nothing of that they
promised, that they left all things in far worse case then they received them.
I will answer to both. And first your allegation of their promises, we have
showed already how it is altogether untrue: to the iustyfying of which flaunder
against the^ you have not brought forth one syllable so much hitherto, out of
all the writings of Luther, or Melancton, wherewith you are able to charge
the^: Whereas on the other side it will be no matter of difficultye for me to
convince you for an open liar, by innumerable places out of Luther himself:
Emo^gest many I will cite one, by the which the Reader may easily understand,
how far of Luther was from that glorious kind of braggery of Reformation,
wherewith you do slander him most Impudently. For after this manner does he
make a report of himself, writing upon the Psalms of degrees. Luther upon
the 130. Psalm.
I do gladly use ( says Luther,) mine own experience: for what is it, or how
much is it, that he has given to me alone? I did desire no thing else, then
that this abuse of pardons might be taken away: But behold what an unmeasurable
Sea of Gods marvelous bounty and liberality ensued thereupon? So that it is
general true, that no man dare wish so much as God is ready to give. The
cause is the mistrust fullness of our heart, the lack of hope, and weakness of
faith. Thus much Luther. Go to now, and where is now that glorious hope
promised, and brag of promise, whereas himself co^plaineth of want of hope,
of mistrustfulnes of heart, and weakness of faith? or upon what confidence
could he dare promise so largely, and boldly to others that which him self
confesses plainly, he durst not be so bold as to wish for? But put the case,
they promised all that you have spoken: what then? you add forthwith: But they
did not perform their promises^ what they performed, or what they did not
perform in the reformation of manners, I do not so much stand upon: Nor do I
speak all here that I could: But leave it to the judgment of him that shall
judge the quick and the dead: Every person can judge himself and his own
cause best: but of others it is very hard to determine any certaynty. Malice is
always a blind judge. Malepart slander is a lying witness. It had been more
sittyng for you and your modesty, beginning at your own home, to have first
purged your own faults, to have plucked the beams out of your own eyes,
before you had uttered such insolent waywardness in troubling of other men's
studies. Admit that it may be free for a man to proclaim openly to the world
the notorious faults and offenses of others, Men's judgments in findyng fault
may be free so that they be upright.
which either himself does see, or does gather upon common report: yet this
judgment as it may be free, so ought it be upright and just. But you, enflamed
with (I know not what) outrageous insolency of mind, not of any judgment but
of a certain frantic fury, do so handle your cause, as though he were no
good man, nor could be a good man, whosoever does bear the name of a
Lutherane, that is to say, a professed Christian: and as though never any such
abominations could have infected the world, if Luther had nener taught at all:
the^ which slannderous manner of speech, what could impudency it self have
spoken more impudently or more untruly?

But not to tarry long upon this point, and to grant you also that you Assume
so impudently: For this I suppose you assume, as matter most certain that
these men did perform no part of that which they promised. Go to, and when
we yield you all that you will, to wit: that they entered into large
promises, and that they performed nothing, and that all things became worsse:
to what end te^d all these at ye last? what do these mountains of Gilboe
bring forth at the length? Come of Luther now with all thy Lutheranes, and take
a full con^clusion of all, and go hang your selves.

Ergo, You be false Prophets, deceitful and fraudulent seducers not only to
be eschued of men, but by Gods law worthy to be burnt also. The Cock crewe and
it was day all abroad. But that we may be so bold to sift out this rusticall
Logic: what do I hear Osorius? Is it so? ought all such as break their
promises and couenauntes, be forthwith accounted false prophettes, and worthy
to be slain? There be many thousand men and weomen, which make many promises
now and the^, nor do always accomplish their promises, Out of Valor. Ansel.
John Stella
but do swerve often fro their words and break promise, shall they be all
accounted false Prophettes forthwith? There was sometime a Pope of Rome John
the xxij. of that name, who by his acquayntaunce with the Stars, made great
brags of a promised long life: who nevertheless dyed in the viij. month of
his Popedom. Yet will you not reckon him for a false Prophette I suppose. What
shall we say to Pope Gregory the seventh? who having secretly suborned some
persons to murder the Emperor, himself in the mean time pearchyng in some
pulpitte the morrow upon Easter day, Out of Be^uo a Cardinal.
did in his sermon boldly protest before the people, that if Henry the Emperor
did not dye before the Feast of S. Peter next ensuing, (for that day had he
appointed for his Prophecy, and for his treason also) the people should never
give any more creditt unto him: nor acknowledge him for their Bishop, but
should drive him and banish him from massing, yea from the Church also as a
sacrilegious person. But what chanced afterward? when as the Emperor by
good fortune had escaped his treason, the Pope with a pretty shift hudled up
the matter on this wise, saying, that when he spoke of the death of the
Emperor, he did mean ye death of his soul, and not of his body.

There are diverse histories extaunt, wherein may be found that many Popes of
Rome have promised many and great matters to Emperors and Kings very largelye
and lowdely, to wit^e, of the power of election, of creating Bishops, of the
title of submission, and many other things: Of couenauntes and promises not
always holden true emo^gest the papists.
who did nevertheless so not accomplish that which they had ratified by
public promises, and autenticke decrees, as that through their treachery and
treason they brought all things to utter confusion almost. Pope Boniface 8. did
promise to the Emperor Albert the kingdom of France, by deposing of
Phillippe, yet did he not hold promise herein. Gregory the 7. did with many
large promises putt Rodolph in hope to attain the Empire against Henry the 4.
but his hope being frustrated, he was not so good as his word. Pope Innocent.
3. did promise to Ludowicke the French king the kingdom of England under this
condition, that he should drive King John out of his kindome: which
notwithstanding was neither the French king able to do, nor the Pope able to
perform. In matter so infinite what should I speak more? What your self
promised in your Baptism Osorius, what you promised also when you took orders
of priesthood, and a^terwardes likewise upon solemn protestation, when you
were enstalled a Bishop, I think you remember. What? have you performed all
those promises? what if some secret contract be made betwixt you and your
Porting all spy here in England, that, whatsoever he may smell out either of
our courtlye affairs, what the Prince does, what her counselors and courtyers
do, what is done in the common weal, how English traitors with covert
dissimulatio^ do persist firm in their oath to the Pope, how the Lutheranes
live and bestow their time: in what estimation the Mass is amongst
Englishemen: That of all these and such like he shall certify you faithfully,
by some true transcript, and he in the mean space, either hundred about some
more profitable affairs do break promise with you: or do certify you
untruths, and abuse your worship with lies and false reports: will you
account him forthwith for a false Prophette, worthy to be stoaned to death? I
do not think it. And why so? Because you will say, that herein is great
difference and odds, when as men we promise any matter to men, in the person
and fidelity of men, and when as we promise or foreprophecy in the name and
person of God, things to come to pass: for in that one, the breach of promise
is deceit, and lying, in the other impiety and ungodliness: in that first, men
only are hurt, in the other injury is committed against God. And therefore if
all these your accusations be bent against these persons, as against false
Prophettes: Make it manifest then if you can, where either Luther, or any other
of the abouenamed undertaking at any time the person of a Prophette, did
prophecy of things that should come to pass, by the appointment and purpose
of God, whereof the Lord never spoke word? If you can not: Then does not your
argument, which you have strayned out of Moses clean against Moses will, and
altogether besides the Cusshian, make any thing at all against them.

Besides this comes yet an other argument of the same stamp, skrapte out of
Jeremy, against those false Prophettes before, contrived with no less
subtlety, then blazed abroad with vanity. And the place, which himself dayneth
not to note, Iere. cap. 23.
is in the 23. chapter. Mark therefore diligently: with what words God has
taught to discern betwixt false prophettes, and true Prophets: If they had
persisted steadfast in my council (says he) and had declared my words to my
people, they had surely turned my people away from their evil way, and from
their wicked thoughts, Out of these words of Ieremye Osorius writing to the
Queens Majesty does frame an argument on this wise. If after the arrival of
this new Gospel (says he) and this doctrine of new religion: had also arrived
together with the same shamefastesse, integrity, innocence and grauitye of
life, and uprightness of manners, if severity of life, if grave behavior, and
ciuility of manners and honesty had been raised up out of that darckenesse,
wherein it was long drowned. etc. I should waste much time to rehearse every
particular sentence, wherewith this trifling Rhetorician, like an huckester of
eloquence, does make a huge heap of words in a needelesse, long, and tedious
rehearsal of virtues and vices: wherein he might have done much better in my
judgment, if leaving this Childish copye of countenance, and glorious
mulplying of variety, he had entered upon the matter more brieflye, plainly, and
more effectually. The purport of his discourse was that he should have
co^uinced Luther, Melancthon and the professors of the same doctrine for false
prophettes. And to make this manifest, he would use an argument framed out of
Jeremy by the signs, notes, and marks wh the prophet does set down in
special words, as I said before, out of which words, if he would have
argued, he must needs have concluded after this manner.

The Prophets which in the time of Jeremy did prophecye glad tidinges to the
people, Osorius argument out of Jeremy.
if they had followed therein the council of God, they had called the^ back to
a Reformation of life.

Luther does preach to the people in the name of the Lord, and yet reduces
them not to a better life.

Ergo, Luther is a false Prophet.

If Osorius do conclude his argument after this manner (as he needs must by
the words of the Prophet) The argument must be denied for the fallax of the
consequent. Answer to the argument. The fallax of the consequent.
For it consists of 4 propositions, contrary to the rule and true form of a
sillogisme. For the Minor ought to have been inferred on this wise. But those
Prophets in Ieremies time, which did denou^ce gladsome tidings to the people,
did not restrain the^ from wickedness. Ergo. They were false Prophets etc. And
so by this reason. The argument would stand well I confess: yet should it not
touch Luther at all: who was nether any of the number of those false Prophets,
nor ever took upon him the name of a prophet. But the argument would be
otherwise, if beginning at the universal, he would descend to the particular,
on this wise: It will appear evidently who be the true Prophets of God: by
this token, if they reduce their auditory from Impyety to the endeavor of
virtue and godlynes: Luther took upon him the name of a Prophett, and yet
reduced not his auditorie from ungodliness. Ergo Luther and others of the same
mark be false prophets. First to the Mayor: Haddon does make this answer:
namely denying that to be true, which is affirmed in the Mayor. If it be
understood of the general predicatum. The answer to the Mayor.
For this supposition is false, that all such as do not reduce their anditory
to amendment of life, be not true Prophets of God: For Jeremy himself was not
a lying Prophet: yet was not his preaching so effectual, as to allure all that
hard him to a reformation of life. The same may be veryfied of John Baptist,
and of Chrst himself, the high and chief Prince of all Prophets: what shall
we say to Noah the eight Partriarche of righteousness? who notwithstanding did
prophecye, and foretell the people by the express word of God of the general
flood, and destruction of mankind, hanging over their heads a hundredth years
before it happened: yet was it so far of, that he could incline the people
(to who^ he was sent) to amendment of life, that of all the generation of
Adam, were no more but eight persons only saved.

But here Osorius will take me up again for haltyng, and tell me, The reason
to discern betwixt false and true Prophets according to Osorius.
that this is not the meaning of the Prophett, as though he should understand,
that all the Auditory generally should be reclaymed, but those persons only
which do believe, and obey the preaching of the Prophets: Go to, and what
error was ever so perverse, what heresy so absurd, that found not creditte,
and fawnyng fawtours somewhere? Again, if you behold the life only, you shall
many times find the conversation, and manners of some heretics less
reproueable, then of some of the chief and principal Protestants, or
Catholics. And what is become now of that mark of your difference Osorius,
whereby you teach a distinction betwixt true and false Prophets? to wit, by
the amendment of life in them, which in faith do obey their doctrine. But to
grant you that sign and mark even to the full, which you chiefly require to
be granted. We come now to the Minor. But Luther (say you) did never reduce
any persons from ungodliness of life, by in stilling into them, this kind of
Doctrine, but made all worse rather every where. The answer of the Minor.
I do hear you, and do answer: if your Assertion stretche to all: surely
this happened not unto Christ him self (as your self do confess) to restore
all ingenerall: if you do affirm that none at all were changed through that
doctrine, I will convince you herein, by as many witnesses, as your Catholics
made Martyrs with in these few years, being a most horrible spectacle of your
cruelty^ who in the profession of this doctrine (which you term Lutherane,
and I name Christian) lived very virtuously and suffered death very consta^tly,
and courageously. If therefore you mean of some particular persons, then is
Luther reasonably acquitted by your own mouth, and by the example of the
Prophett Jeremy: When as (your self witnessing the same) nether all, nor many
were there, Osori. page 190.
but a few of them only that came to the Prophet, which did harken unto him,
and did gladly embrace his doctrine. Finally, The place of Jeremy expounded.
for as much as all that place of the Prophett Jeremy has relation to none
other, but to them only, who (chalenging to them selves authority
prophetical, as men diuynors of things to come) did foretell what should come
to pass: how does this touch Luther, or Melancthon or others of the same
society, which did never prosesse of themselves any such foreknowledge of
things to come? when as yet there wanted not some, who inspired with the holy
ghost doughtles, did long before prophecy of the self same persons, whom ye
do so maliciously inueigh against, which is not the least portion of their
commendation, and praise. For on this wise John Hus was reported to have spoken
a little before his death. John Husse The prophecy of John Husse touching the
doctrine of the Gospel to be restored by Luther.
That after a hundredth years come and gone, they should answer to God and
him euerychone. From what spirit this Prophecy issued, I am not inquisitiue to
learn: but the matter it self did approve the same to be most true by the
sequel, even then when the hundredth years being expired. M. Luther began to
oppose himself against ye high Bishop of Rome: Whereunto what answer you
will make now, aduize your selves. Surely he does accuse you of horrible
crimes, namely of Blasphemy, heresy, Idolatry, error, superstition, rebellion,
conspiring with Antichrist, and treason against the Majesty of Christ the
son of God. There are many other predictions, and prophecies reported in
historyes touching the same matter: but for examples sake, this one shall
suffice. And yet neither is it always simplye true in all men, which Osorius
by his position would prove, to wit, That the Prophets of God must be
measured by the successes, and euentes of things altogether. For it is
manifest that it proved otherwise in Ezechia, and in the Ninevites, the^ was
foretold the^ by the Prophet of God. etc.

Behold yet a fresh supply of arguments, and it comes plainly to pass here,
that is wont to happen in a Canuizado or sodein skarmishe, where whatsoever
comes to hand is forced against the Enemy. And because some small
controversy (I know not what) arose betwixt Hulderick, Zuinglius, and Martyne
Luther about 4. words only in the whole Gospel (albeit in all other things
besides, A small co^trouersy betwixt Luther and Zuinglius.
they did very well agree and in this also not otherwise differing in opinion
but about very small circumstaunces) Forth rusheth Satan by and by, and of a
gnatte makes more then an Elephant of India, and of a very little geometriall
point, draws forth an infinite Shpere: so ingenious, and nimble witted is
Dame Slander. Osor. page 191.
For as much as in Gods spirit is no discention (says he) therein should have
been a full and uniform consent and agreement of minds betwixt them, if they
had been Gods Ambassadoures. Go to: and what more then? therefore, where as
they were at great discention, it follows necessarily hereupon, that they
were not raised up by the inspiratio^ of the holy ghost, but sturred up by
the flaming fyrebrandes of the furyes of hell, and that they applied themselves
not to teach men, but to pervert men. Of diuisio^s of the church.
Of the discention and variable opinions of Deuines, and Churches has been
spoken of before, so that it shall be but needeles to repeat the same again,
only I will answer here to the argument. God is not the Author of
discention, but of peace: I do know this, and confess it to be most true. So
also is the same God the fountayn of all righteousness, and father of all
consolation. The same is also Author of Matrimony, and of all good things. Go
to now: where can you find in all the estates, courses, and actions of this
transitory life, that fulness and absolute perfection of righteousness, of
consolation, or of peace, yea in the most holy estate of matrimonye, as may be
aunswerable to that absolute pattern of perfection? Let it suffice us to have
received the first fruits thereof, though we possess not the Tenthes. There
will come a day, and a place, when as no darkened cloud of discention shall
ouershadow this perfect peace betwixt us. In the mean space whiles we live in
this vale of misery men, with men, we shall never be destitute of one thing or
other, that will always argue us to be men, dwelling in the tabernacle of
Imperfection. And therefore if Osorius will be so nyce, as to exact of us so
precise a knitting together, of vnvariable minds, as may in no point swerve
from each other: let himself become a president hereof in his own Country,
and show himself an Angel amongst his own people.

And what marvel is it, if in so great variety of Judgments, and amongst
so many men, two men only dissent somewhat in matter of so small importance?
whenas in this your so uniform a Church (whereof ye boast so proudly) there is
no parcel of Religion almost, Dissentions in the Papane church
or order in profession: wherein School against School, University against
University, College against College, Council against Council, Canon
against Canon, do not maintain continual iarryng. How is it then Osorius,
that with shuttevppe eyes ye can so lightly ouerlooke, and not look upon so
many, and so monstrous Beams ouerspreadyng your Churches, and not pass over
one little moate in our Church without controllyng your brethren, but that ye
must burst out into such whotte fury of hellish firebrandes? With the Spirit
of God (say you) is no dissensio^. This is most true. And so it is true also,
that Luther and Zuinglius be not taken for Gods, which can not err, nor
dissent each from other in some points. Neither does it therefore follow
hereupon, that because they do not reteigne a mutual constaunt consent of
minds in all things, that therefore they were not raised up by God.
Otherwise, after this Logic, how many ancient and godly Fathers will you
banish out of all Churches? was there never any iarryng betwixt Moses and
Aaron? That contention betwixt Paul and Peter about the mainteynyng of the
liberty of the Gospel: Dissentions amongst the most godly.
and again that separatyng a sunder of Paul from Barnabas, is well known to
all me^. It whiles the Lord him self lived upon the earth, the Disciples them
selves could be at variaunce about preeminence, and superiority, what marvel
now if his Disciples do not so well agree together in all points, sithe^ce
Christ is not present amongst them? who were more familiar then Basile and
Gregory Nazienzene? and yet in this marvelous consent of qualities, and
studies, wanted not a certain offense and breach of that mutual amity.
Victor did not of all parts agree with Policarpus. How earnest a conflict
divided John Bishop of Constantinople and Epiphanius Bishop of Cypres? Neither
did Augustine in all things agree with Jerome. And yet I think you will not
say, that these men were not raised up by the grace, and Divine inspiration
of God.

Well now. Let us see what this so great dissension was betwixt them, which as
you say proceeded from Luther? What a brable was there betwixt them (say you)
about words? what variety and inconstancy of opinions? how disorderly, how
intricately, and ouerthwartly do they speak? in how many sundry matters and
Arguments do they not only not agree with others, but also disagree each from
other? Forsooth if you will know Osorius, A full consent of doctrine in
reformation of Churches.
and since you require the same, I will show you in few words, what and how
monstrous this conflict was betwixt the^. First they do all togethers with one
voice confess one God: they do all with one Faith acknowledge the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. They do all with one mind agree togethers in the
Articles of the Christian Creed. with the true ancient, and Catholic Faith
of the Church of Christ. The Articles of the chief grou^des of Religion, wherein
the Ministers of the Church do well agree together.
Of this Church they do all acknowledge the authority of the Scripture to be
chief next under Christ: the second place and dignity they do yield to the
Church, to the ancient and approved Councels. The godly and ancient Fathers
they do all with one consent allow, and yield unto, so farreforth as every of
them is found to agree with the express word of God: Heresies and false
opinions reproved by the authority of holy Scripture, and the sacred
antiquity of the Church, they do all generally oppugn: besides this
authority of Scripture, and the most couenable proportion of Faith, whatsoever
has privily crawled and crept in by stealth, into the profession of Faith, and
true worshyppyng of God, they do all utterly, and worthly abhor: whatsoever
is most ancient in Faith, and most approved by co^staunt allowaunce of
antiquity, the same is had amongst the^ in greatest admiration. In the
acknowledgeme^t of one only Mediator in heaven, one only Sacrifice for
Sins, which is resiaunt not in the earth, but in heaven, in confessyng one
only general head of the universal Church, in all these is there no
discention, nor brawlyng about words or Sentences.

Moreover, in this they agree together all, and be of one mind and judgment
all, namely, that the Pope of Rome is the very Antichrist, whereof they have
assured and vndoughted proof, by the certain and infallible Rules, and
forewarnynges of the holy Scripture, and by his horrible persecution of the
word of God. Besides this also, that all Idolles and Images ought to be
abolished out of the Church of God: That those choppyng and chaungyng of
Pardons ought to be abhorred. That all affiauce of righteousness of God ought to
be settled in the only Faith of Jesus Christ, and in nothing else. That
superfluous vows and Traditions of men (which do yoke fast and clogge
Christian liberty, and well disposed consciences) ought utterly to be
abolished. That Ceremonies and Constitutions, which are joined with an opinion
of righteousness, of worshyppyng, of Salvation, and merityng, ought worthily
to be banished and abandonned: that Priests Concubines ought to be converted
into lawful Matrimony, that those mo^struous vpstartes of disguised
professions, rules and orders ought be rooted out, that all things may be
reduced and leuelled according to the one uniform conformity of the Gospel
of Christ. In all which howsoever the Lutheranes do differ from you, surely
their minds and agreementes are united together in one mutual and constaunt
well willyngnesse of hearts, so that in these they vary nothing at all from the
unity of the sacred Scriptures, nor swerve from the truth. What can be
required more to fill up the full measure of concord and unity?

And that I may not pass over this also, that in the matter of the Sacrament
(wherein consists the substance of the adversaries accusation against us) I
know not one of all those besides Luther only (whom you call new) to wit,
How great a concord is ctetwixt many Churches in the matter of the Sacrament.
Melancthon, Bucer, Zuinglius, Martyr and Calvin, but do all with one mutual
assent conclude upon this point, namely to withstand and root out that your
more then dotyng devise of Transubstantiation. And in this mind be all out
Churches at this present firmly and unseparably knit together. And I trust in
God will from henceforth daily increase, and grow to a more stable and
corroborate concord, as well here in England, as also that it will come to
pass in all other Churches shortly, that all such Idolatry being extirped and
plucked up by the roots, no block nor obstacle shall remain, to occasion the
Jews to withdraw them selves any longer from the embracyng of the true and
pure simplicity of our Christian Faith. well now: And wherein is that
disagreement now in all this so great a concord and unity of of minds,
whereof you preach? where is this brabblyng about words that you speak of?
where is this variety of opinions, that does neither agree with it self, nor
with others? where be those flaming firebrandes of furies? where flee those
enflamed flashynges of wildfire and gunnestones? Papists murderers of Martyrs.
where else? but even amongst you your selves Osorius, and amongst those your
mo^struous Cyclops, who like furious hellhoundes with wildfire and brimstone
have rusht into ye seely sheepefolds of Christ with more then beastly Sauadgenes,
and have with fire and fagotte burnt so many thousands of Christians and
consumed them to Ashes.

And yet cease not this lyeng spirit but like a false Prophet shouldreth
forewardes. Osori. page 192.
They do alter and change the Articles of our Faith (says he) and affirm now
this now that, nor do persiste in any stable opinion. And do never almost
determine upon any Judge, by whom controversies may be decided.

Amongst all other your rabble of lies Osorius perhaps that your wiffler and
Spy not the best talebearer in the world has reported this unto you. Osori.
does believe fame Author of all his untruths.
And I am much deceived, if this same Outryder of yours be not the coyner of
all this heap of untruths, and forger and furtherer of all those furious
traynes of terrible fireworkes. But to thend you may not from henceforth give
over much credit to such fleeyng tales, herein trust me Osorius, that as
touching the articles of our faith (if you mean the Sacraments) whosoever
reported this unto you, did play the part of a notable Sycopha^t, and was
minded to abuse your credence and worship very shamefully. And in some
respect I can not choose but aduertize you of a great want of discretion in you,
that can so clean forgett the very synowes of Philosophical wisdom, which
ought to have been relieved in time with that precious salve of Epicharmus
Sentence: Remember not to be to light of belief. A proverb of Epicharmus.
All the Sacraments that were instituted by Christ, we do observe in due and
couenable order throughout all our Churches, and have retained the same with a
never interrupted course of continuau^ce, hitherto: on the contrary part, all
such as were not established by Christ, but thrust in from else where, those if
we have changed, then at the least accuse us for our inconstancy herein, when
you shall have first made good proof that they be Sacraments, As touching
those Seven, which you do term by the name of Sacraments, though we differ
from you in the name, Seven Sacraments ordained by the pope, but by Christ two
only were Instituted.
yet have we not so utterly abrogated them, but have them in use and daily
practice as well as you. In deed we do acknowledge but two Sacraments only,
The rest though we call the^ not by ye name of Sacraments, yet do we daily
frequent them in our Churches nevertheless as far as is convenient. Neither
was any great scruple made amongst us in this point, the matter being of it
self so evident and clear: Or if any question hadd chanced at any time about
the same, there was no cause why we should gadd to Rome for a pelting Oracle in
that behalf: we have at home more worthy helps, and more learned counsels,
God be praised for it: we have also the Books of the holy Scriptures: we have
amongst us godly, and faithful interpretours of the scriptures, many other
writers, and grave judgments of learned Fathers. Neither want our Pastors
their several spiritual gifts, nor our Churches plentiful abundance of
Gods large and bountiful benefits powered upon them: so that it is altogether
needelesse to run a roauing to Rome, and seek unto that Apish Ephod, as to
the heavenly Oracle for counsel. We have the law, and the Prophets, and
expositors of the Prophets. Our Churches be replenished with Pastors, Bishops,
Doctors, and faithful ministers, furnished with understanding and knowledge
of tounges: grave and sound of judgment, many notable personages endowed with
singular gifts of wisdom, learning and virtue, There is no cause to the
contrary, but that the Church may be governed in the best manner though we be
never acquainted with the popes supremacy.
so that in things appertayning to the government of a Church, we seem not
any jot inferior to the Bishop of Rome, or to the whole College of
Cardinals, and band of Bishops, unless it be to this one Osorius alone.

What should I reckon up the rest, which Osorius does prosecute afterward,
with no less tedious, then vayneglorious discourse of words, touching the
change of the confession of our faith, touching the weak and forlorn defense
of Haddon, all whose force (as he says) consists in brawles and slanders:
touching the Apology of the Church of England, whereof that lying and false
Prophet does make Haddon the Author: touching the counter answer against the
said Apology: touching the style, Arguments, phrase and flattery of Haddons
writing, touching his glosing, flattery in displaying the virtues, and praises
of his Queen. Finally touching the meare childishnes, and ignorance of
Haddon. As one thath does explane (says he) nothing openly, speaks nothing
purely, concludes nothing substa^tially, and in the finess of the Latin
tongue seeme^h as it were some chaungeling Else. For with this note does he
vouchsafe do dignify Haddon, as that he thinks him not only a smatterer,
and some outcast in the art of Eloquence, but calls him also very Babishe:
Haddon a Babe in the Latin tou^g but Osor. a Gyaunt in Eloquence.
in like phrase of speech I suppose, wherewith that glorious coward Thraso did
sometime rail upon poor Phedria. But go to, whiles this babishe Haddon lies
sucking at the breast, and crawleth creeping yet like a seely goebyground, from
out what heavens is this wonderful Giant slipped down at the last? from whence
came this unconquerable champion? out of the Isles of Calecute I suppose. For I
do verily think that this Osorius was not begotten under our clymate, nor
made of the same mould, chat other frail men are made of: but composed of the
very pryme and blossom of pearl, and framed of the fragrant flowers of Narde,
and his Eloquence nursed with the pure milk of the very Muses, engendered as it
were of ye finest filme of Cicoroes brains, (as the Poets have feigned Pallas
to be borne and nourished in Jupiters Bosom) And except that rotten brain of
this doting dotterell recovering now some fresh sap, hadd discovered him
now to be twice a child, and a very Babe, surely he would have been a
notorious Goliath over these little moathes, and simple shrimpes. Perhaps that
stately tooforked Myter vaunced on high upon his hoary hears, making him
seem higher in stature then other men, does raise the crest of that glorious
Comb. And hereupon hangs that hawtye houering of this heroycall Giant from
aloft, from out the fiery firmament as it were despising and loathing these
small snigges of Babish Haddons.

But enough now of Haddons childishnes: let us therefore see, what it is that
is raked out of Cyprian against Haddon. And first all that which Haddon does
very learnedly and truly discourse in praise of ye godly Martyrs, who by their
exile, emprisonments, loss of goods, yea of life also did with sheadding
their blood confirm and enseale the true, and vndoughted sinceritye of the
Gospel: all this glorious renown of commendation and praise, purchased with
their paynefull labors, and travel, this glorious Thrsonicall Osorius does
transpose wholly from them unto others, and this also not without a pretye
nypping skoffe. To wit: Unto Roffensis: More, Bishops, Priests, Osor page 193.
and Charterhouse Mounckes, men (as he says) endued with singular pietye and
Religion: Whereof some yea not a few of them dyed here in England, many flying
out of England and Ireland, as outlawes and Banished men, hadd not escaped the
axe, or the halter, unless they in running away hadd preserved their lives
more happily then the courtesy of our men would have done. And upon this by and
by is Cyprian chopped in place, his words being nevertheless not noted, as
either unknown unto him, or craftily cloked: whereunto we are commanded to
give our attendance. Now what says Cyprian? Whosoever (says he) as a without
the bowndes of the Church, though they suffer death for the testimonye of
Christ, the same do not deserve the crown of Martyrdom, but the punishment
dew for treason rather. Where find you this Osorius? for sooth in Cyprian.
look for it Reader: peradventure after you have perused Cyprians book over,
Cyprian in his 4. book and 2. Epistle.
you may find it. The place perhaps is extant in his 4. Book and 2. Epistle.
Where he speaks on this wise. Although they be slain afterward for the
name of Christ, being removed from the Church, and divided from unity, and
Christian Charity: they ca^ not be crowned as Martirs at the time of their
death: For those are the very words of Cypryan which no man de^^^th to be most
true. For who doughteth hereof, that the Church is the everlasting kingdom of
Christ, where all the hope, and treasure of our salvation is fast locked up,
and enclosed^ from whose pleasant habitatious if we willingly exclude our
selves, we must worthily perish: But thus goes the matter Osorius, that
Cyprian in deed has spoken very well, but you out of Cyprian have forged a
foolish fable. The Papists do wrongfully define the Church of Christ.
For in all ye his discourse of ye unity of ye church, neither do we rend
asunder, nor pass beyond the bowndes thereof: But you Osorius do not measure
those bowndes and lymittes aright, and withal do wrongfully and untruly
define the Church of Christ.

In this point therefore lurketh all the error, not in our variaunce and
Dissentio^, but in your false Definito^. For let there be a true Church
granted, yea such a Church, as was in the time of Cyprian, Cipria in his 4.
book and 2. Epist.
and we will quickly yield to that unity. Cypria^ could in no wise digest such,
as forsaking the Church of Christ like stragglers went an other way, namely, to
the Gentiles (as he says) to worldly delights, and pleasures to heretics
and Schismatiques. And Osorius is a great deal more squeymish at those, which
fleing from Iewishnes, from heretics and schismatiques, do dedicate the^
selves to ye true Church of Christ. For if a man may tell troth, what else do
Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Bucer, and others their like, against whom this
cruel scourgemutto^ chauseth so extremely? They are fallen (says he) from the
unity of the Church. To whom Osorius I pray you? Are they not come home to
Christ? to Paul? to the Gospel? to the Apostles? to the Law? and to the
Prophets? what? is this to turn unto and partake with heretics, and
schismatiques? or to turn away and forsake heretics and schismatiques
rather? If you be of that mind, beware least you bewray your self to be one
of Antichrists lymmes, before you prove Luther an heretic. If to depart from
them, whose wicked opinions are manifestly contrary to true Religion, and do
seduce from the truth, which is in Christ Jesus, be accoumpted a point of
Schism: why then is the people commanded in the word of the holy Ghost, Apoc.
18. Esaias 52. 2. Cor. 6.
and that not in one place only, to depart from out amyddes of the^? Addyng
thereunto also the danger thereof, least ye become partakers of their Sins
says the holy Ghost. And therefore you see peril not in departing, but in
tarryeng rather there, from whence we ought to depart. Now what manner of people
that is, from the which the holy Ghost does call away, I leave to your
Judgment Osorius, and to others that can Judge thereof.

The peace and the unity of the Church according to Cypriane.
But in the mean space, say you, Unity and the peace of the Church is torn a
sunder. I do answer. Woe be to that peace, woe be to that Unity, which
wageth war against Christ. If you will enter into Unity, and amity with
him, you shall have no discord amongst your selves. I do know and confess
this to be most true, that Cyprian speaks: Who soever he be (says he) and
whatsoever he be, if he be not within the Church of Christ, be is not a
Christian: because without the precinctes of Christ's Church, is no sure road
of sauetie. And wherefore then do Luther and these Lutheranes (say you) tear
abroad these hedges of ye Church and withdraw them selves from the Unity
thereof? I do answer in the behalf of the Lutheranes. They have not forsaken
the Unity, but you have cracked a sunder ye verity of the Church. They have
not offended in forsakyng the Church, but you have grievously erred in definyng
ye Church. For if a man should argue with you at this present in words and
speeches, as I do deal with you in writing, and would urge upon you to define
unto him this Church (which you mainteyne) in her true and natural substance,
what answer would you make? I wis the very same Definition I suppose yt all
your Catholics have imagined, The definition of the Church after the meaning
of the Romish Church.
to wit. That the Church is a multitude of people, such as is bound to obey
the Pope of Rome, severed from other Nations by certain Ceremonies, which the
Popes have ordained) fast tied to the ordinary continued course of Succession
of Bishops, and to that only interpretation of Scriptures, which the Bishops
and Councels do deliver. And this is the true proportion and full Definition
of your Church (if I be not deceived) But this Definition the learned in
Logic will deny to be good and sound, The Popish definition is confuted.
where the thing defined is not of all parts equiuale^t with the Definition.
Which rule is not observed here. For to admit this unto you, yt in ye true
Church of Christ must be Popes, and Bishops, who must be obeyed, who also must
have an ordinary outward succession, and who may challenge unto them selves a
special prerogative in the interpretation of the holy Scripture: yet is not
this by and by true, that all Popes and Bishops, which are entitled by the
name of Popes and Bishops, which do pretend a continual succession, which do
carry the countenance of consentes, which do challenge a right in the
interpretation of Scriptures, What is required to the true definition of a
Church.
are the true sheapherds of the Lords flock. And why so? forsooth because
that thing wa^teth, which making specially for the purpose, you have specially
left out, namely, the truth of sound doctrine, which may be able to tread
down and crushe in pieces error and hypocrisy. That is to say; That Bishops
do truly and unfeignedly become the same in the sight of God, which in utter
show they would feign seem in the sight of men: Again that Succession be not
of persons only, but a special Succession of Faith and virtuous life: that ye
obedience of the people may not proceed so much of fear of punishment, as of
hearty affection and willyngnesse of mind: that ye interpretation of scriptures
be not wrested to the maintenance of error, and men's sensuality, but be
directed and aunswerable to the meaning of the holy Ghost, and the true and
natural sense of the Scripture.

For these be the true marks Osor. whereby a true Church is discernable from a
false: not the title and name of a Church, not the authority and Succession of
Bishops, not the opinion of a multitude besides the truth of Gods word: But the
very Rule of the word must be kept, which will so describe unto us a true
Church, by true marks, tokens, bounds and foundations, That it be a
Congregation dispersed abroad every where over the face of the whole earth, The
description of a true church according to the rule of the scripture.
united and agreeyng together in sou^d^ doctrine of Faith, and the true
worshyppyng of God, which being sanctified by the holy Ghost, and admitted by
partaking the Sacraments, do truly believe in God, through the Son of God
Jesus Christ, according to the doctrine of the Gospel, although some be
enlightened with more spiritual graces and gifts, and some with less.

By this standard, and Rule, let us measure now the Arguments of Osorius.

Osorius Reasons.
Luther and Melancthon, are fallen away from the Pope of Rome and his
Cardinals.

Ergo, Luther and Melancthon have rent in sunder the unity of the Church.

The only Church of Rome has an ordinary succession from Peter.

Ergo, The only Church of Rome is the true Church.

The great part of Christendom does acknowledge the Church of Rome.

Ergo, The Church of Rome is the Mother Church and Queen of all Churches.

The Church of God has a promise that it shall never err.

Ergo, He that does interpret the Scriptures otherwise then after the meaning
of the Church of Rome, or that does not acknowledge him self obedient to the
Romish Decrees in all things, is an heretic, and does sequester him self
from the bounds and communion of the Church.

To this answer shall be made briefly and logically. The fallacy in the
Aequiuocatio^, that is to say in the word of diverse signification.
These be mere fallacyes and deceites of the Equivocation, derived from a
false description of the Church, and the succession thereof and from false
marks. For as touching the names and Tytles, as touching the long pedigrees of
never interrupted course of Succession: as touching the consent of the
multitude, and the promises made by God: if the other tagges were tied to these
points and made suitable, namely, sound doctrine, and true godliness, A
necessary conjunction of sound doctrine with unity.
surely it would seem somewhat to ye purpose yt Osorius mayntayneth. But now
whatsoever they brag and vaunt of tytles and other relics without the
especial coupling and co^ioyning of the Evangelical and Apostolical
doctrine, is altogether naught else but smoke and wind, nothing auayleable to
establish the true unity of the Church. Unity of the Church
First as concerning the name of ye Church, we do hear Christ himself
speaking: Many shall come in my name. Touching Succession we hear out of
Jerome, Not they that sit in the places of Saints. etc. Touching the
multitude. Succession.
Augustine does teach us. That the consentes of voices, must be weyed and
measured, not numbered. Multitude. Gods promise made unto the Church.
Touching Gods promise made for perseverance in the truth, harken what John
Baptist, speaks. Do not say we have Abraham to our Father. For God is of
power to raise up sons to Abraham out of these stoanes.

If Osorius will argue after this manner why should not these arguments be of as
great force.

The high Priest of the old law in the Jewish Regiment did bear the face and
name of the Church with full allowaunce and common consent of all the multitude
yea even in the time of Esaias, Jeremy, Amos, Elias and Christ. The same also did
convey their Succession from the priesthood of Aaron: And did vouch also their
authority, seat, law and the promise against Jeremy, against the Prophettes
and against Christ. The Law (say they) shall not perish from the Priests.

Ergo, Those high priests did enjoy a true Church nor could possibly err at
any time.

But if Osorius shall think with him self that these Arguments were not
forcible enough in the old Church, why should they be more effectual in the
new Church? In the old law it was lawful to examine the very prophettes
themselves, if they spoke the word of the Lord, yea certain infallible tokens
were set down whereby they might be discerned. In like manner even in the new
testament we are commanded to prove the Spirits if obey be of God: being
forewarned by the spirit of God that we believe not every spirit: Popes and
Cardinals will not admit examinatio^s of their cause.
And what kind of people then be these Popes and Cardinals of Rome, which of a
more then Imperious Lordlynesse do command and require all men to receive and
reverence their Satutes, Ordinances, Ceremonies, opinions and all their words
and deeds ingenerall, without exception and contradictio^, upon grievous
pains and Penalties that shall ensue against him, whosoever dare presume to
make a question of the right of their authority? or to make any doubt of any
their devises and imaginations?

And so giving the slip to all those, he comes down again to our Church,
with a maruailous blaff of windy words, but with no reason at all, imagining to
prove against Haddon, that there is nothing in our Church comparable with the
ancient Church: Osori. page 195.
nor that any example out of the ancient Records or Antiquityes can be
alleged for our Church that does favor of any smacke of antiquitye: And that
on the contrary part, the whole universality of antiquity does in their behalf
(as he says) bear witness against us. And that with them remains nothing
at all, but that which is thoroughly established by the testimony of the holy
Scriptures, by the authority of the godly Fathers, and by all the consent of
all antiquity.

How untrue this is, has been sufficiently declared before by the testimony of
the ancient historyes, as much as may suffice for this present purpose. Of
the same stamp is the like devise that follows. For whereas Haddon does
take exception against Osorius writing on this wise. In ye ancient and most
pure age of the Church (says Haddon) was neither name of Pope, Papane.
Redeeming of Sins. Markett of Purgatory. Worthy ppyng of images. Pilgrimage
going. Masses Sacrificatory for the quick and the dead. Osori. page 196.
nor leaden Bulls for remission of sins: nor martes and markettes of
Purgatory: nor croochyng to Images, nor gadding on pilgrimage, nor sacrificing
Masses for the quick and the dead, nor many other such Bables etc. These
words of Haddon as though had been vomited out from a wonderful surfett of
furious fre^sye, Osorius in great choler does challenge, and confuteth with
these reasons. Because without reason (as he says) without any testimony or
example of antiquity, without argument or proof at all, he has spoken bare
affirmatiues only without proof, and the same in such wise spoken, as that he
seems to have done nothing but spoken. And first for ye Supremacy, what does
he show? But we (says he) are wont to make plain demonstration by the
authority of the sacred Scriptures, by the testimony of the holy Fathers, by
the autenticke Records of ancient antiquity, by reason, use, and experience,
and by innumerable examples, that this was the Supreme head of the Church
always. etc. If you have so great and infinite a number of examples, wherewith
you be able to justify this Supremacy, as you say: why then out of this
unmeasurable heap vouche you not one example at the least, for examples sake,
whereby we may likewise discern this supremacy? Osori. does deal with words
and no matter.
hitherto as yet I do hear nothing but bare words, and smoke, and not a
sparcke so much of Reason, example, or proof. But you commit this charge
perhaps to Hosius or Pyghius, and one of you helps to claw an other by the
elbow, so that Osorius with words (whereof he has stoare) and Hosius with such
witnesses as he can suborne, shall underprop this Prymacy of the Romish
Royalty, as Atlas did sometime bear heaven upon his shoulders. But if these
two gallaunt Gyaunts apply no stronger pillars besides the^ selves, to uphold
the Maiesticall State of that their toppegallaunt of Rome, it is much to be
feared least it will have a fall shortly, and be shieuered all in pieces, and
least their bravery come within the compass of that sweet song, whereof we
hear the melody more then once in the sacred Revelation. Babylon is fallen,
Babylon is fallen, that great City the Mother of all the Whoredoms and
abominations of the earth. etc. Apocal. 14, 17. 18.


ANd as for the fayres and Marketts of Pardons, and Purgatory, if you do not
perceive yt to be most true, Of Fayres and markets of Pardons.
ye Haddon has affirmed, surely you are more then poreblinde: If ye doubt
thereof, you are very wittelesse, if you deny it, you are more then Impudent.
First, if you will affirm that there were no Markettes and Martes of Pardons:
whereupon then grew that controversy betwixt Luther and your Church? Page 196.
did it not arise by the means of buying and sellyng of Pardons? and chopping
and changing for Purgatory? If you will say that those Markets were proclaimed
without consent of your Church, and contrary to their commandment, vouchsafe
then I pray you to show us, who it was that suborned that noughty pack
Tecelius the Dominick Friar to be proctor of that Mart? if it were not Pope Leo
the tenth, Out of Chris. Masseus. John Sleidonne. M. Luther.
and Albert Archbishop of Mentz? who made this compact each with other, that the
one half of the spoil should redound to the Pope, the other half to the
Archbyshoppe to pay for his Pall: In which Mart proclamation was made at the
sound (as it were) and the stroke of the Popes dromme (as Masseus does
verify,) yt whosoever would give. x.s. should redeem what soul he listed out
of the pains of Purgatory. But these Markettes (says he,) if any such were,
holy Church does not allow, but does banish away, none otherwise the^ as a
detestable pestilence of the common weal. What Church Osorius does speak of
here, I know not: this is out of all question that as there is none so horrible
a kind of falsehood as that, which (lurking and cloaking her craft under a
false vysor for piety) does dazell the senses of a number: so if we narrowly
sift out the very oryginall of this mischief, we shall find that all this fatt
feast and blessed banquet came from no where else, the^ out of the Popes
kitchen: What darnell grows in the Popes fields.
from hence forsooth come that lewd largess of pardons: those Retchles
Releases of pains: from hence plenary and full remission of sins: from hence
so many Iubiles, so many stations, and visiting of Saint Peter's Church: all
which where were they hatched, but even in the Church of Rome? From hence so
many grauntes of free graces to eat, to marry, to wear linen or woollen, free
liberty to be confessed where men listed were set to sale the penny: From
hence so many Stationars, Treasurers, Fowkers and Pardoners who have long
sithence wearyed out and made deaf the ears of the simple people with crying
out Imponite, Putt in. putt in, putt in.
Imponite, Imponite for such was their proclaymation, protesting withal, that
it should come to pass, that all such as would buy those pearls of Pardons,
their souls should be sure to skippe up into heaven at one leap without any
let: Masseus. John Sleido^ M. Luther.
Addyng hereunto that all such souls who^ they were willing to redeem out of
ye flaming fire of purgatory, should immediately mount from thence into heaven
as soon as ye money, which should be thrown into the red Box did cry
chinke. For it was out of all question, yt the Pope of Rome was of power to
rake Purgatory clean (by virtue of his Pardons) of as many souls, and
whatsoever souls he listed. And him also they magnified so gloriously, The
horrible impudencye of the Romanistes.
that (as they said) no Sin could be so horrible, yea though (against all
possibility) a man had defiled the mother of God, but could be redeemed by
pickpurse Pardons: were not these the very speeches of your Romish rufflers? wh
if your Church did not allow of, by what authority then did your Pardoners and
scrapers for money presume to pynche all Churches by the purse with such kind
of wares? why were not these shameless Ru^neagates put to scilence? why could
your holy mother Church suffer so horrible a Tympany, and Impostume within her
own bowels so long, if she were not partaker of the spoil, and did not only
wink at them, but authorize them also by her own Bulls so to do? Again when
these fellows Tecelius and Wympine were gone, to what purpose was Cardinal
Caietane posted abroad in the year. 1518? who in in the Council of Augusta
might revive the same opinions again, and force Luther (who had already
confuted these abuses by open Disputation) to recante: And how will Osorius his
defense now hang together with these practizes of his Pope? denying utterly
that these Pardones were never scattered abroad by the consent of that holy
mother Church? If it be true that the Church did not so, what did that form
of Commission usually given from the Sea of Rome emporte? the tenor whereof
was this: He that sows niggardly, shall reap sparely: but he that sows
bountyfull shall reap aboundauntly unto life everlasting. And again, what
means this? We do exhort you all generally in the Lord, and do enjoin you
upon pain of Remission of your Sins, Out of the Decretalles Gregory 5. in
the title of Repentance and Remission of Sins. Cum ex co.
that of the goods that God has given you, ye enlarge bou^tifully your
charitable devotion unto the^. etc. For these words were every where scattered
abroad by Masters of Hospitalles. Which what is it else, the^ to set up a
common Mart, and moneybancke of remission of sins, which is due to Faith,
not to works? and which the Scripture wills by all means possible to be
free? and what is it else, then as Chrysostom says, Chrisosto Homel. 38. upon
Math. Tridentine Council.
to turn the form of worshippyng and prayer, into an occasion of wicked
buyeng and sellyng? But Osorius will cite us forthwith to the Tridentine
Council: wherein these Markettes of Pardons were after a sort mitigated with a
certain quallification. Uery well. But how much better had the Fathers of that
Council provided, if they had utterly abrogated, not the Markettes of Pardons
only, but the very Pardons them selves out of all Christian Congregatio^s and
Regions? But these Fathers now (fosteryng continually this frettyng Fistula
within the Bowels of the Christian common weal) think, they have besturred
them selves gayly, if they foresee not that the ca^ker may be thoroughly cured,
and kept from crawlyng any farther: but that it be suppressed aloft, and so
suffered to creep more closely below: that is to say: that men may freely now,
and witho^t money plunge their souls into hell. But what is this to the
purpose, whether Pardons be put to sale, or not put to sale? For this is not in
question now, whether Pardoners may be abridged of their bold presumption: but
ye question concerns Pardons the^ selves: not whether they ought to be sold,
but whether they may be tolerable, how free soever they be: whether it be
consonaunt to Christian Faith, or lawful by the authority of the Scriptures,
for the Pope of Rome, to make any kind of choppyng, and chaungyng with men's
peltyng Pardons, for the redeemyng of men's Sins.

The pardons of the popish church.
I speak of those Pardons that are now in use, not such as were delivered by
the ancient Fathers. For the Church had always her Consistories, and
Judicial Courts, wherein for notorious offenses, certain public
chastisement was ministered, the Greeks called it (...) and we call the^
Canonical Satisfactions. The rigor of the Church did use many times to
quallifie or acquit by releases and pardons, as occasion did serve, according
to the quality of times, places, persons, and offenses: As if a man had
revolted from the Faith of Christ without any cause (which kind of backsliding
was not thought worthy to be received to mercy in the primitive Church) yet
afterward some courtesy was extended unto such as repented them of the same,
and showed them selves hartly sorrowful for the same: and such were enjoined
to penance by ye space of 12. years: as appears by the 11. Canon of the
Nicene Council. Nicene Canon 11.
Women that either would procure untimely birthes, before they were borne, or
would murder their children being borne, were by the same Canon excluded from
the Congregation for ever. After this ensued ye 21. Canon of the Council of
Antycira. Antycira Canon 21.
Which moderatyng the ancient censure with lenity, did prescribe unto such
women ten years penance. If a man had committed manslaughter by
chauncemedley, the same according to the ancient Canon was enjoined seven
years penance: which afterward thorough gentler mitigation of the same
Council, was abridged to five years penance by the 22. Canon. Antycira.
Canon 22.
At the Council of Agathe was a Canon made, Agathe Council Canon 37.
which was in noumber the 37. speaking on this wise. The ancient Fathers did
enjoin a grievous pain upon such as forsook their Faith, whom we (abridgyng
the noumber of years) do enjoin only two years penance. Eusebius 6. book
Cap. 35.
We read in Eusebius that a certain Bysh. returnyng with tears to the Church,
from the heretic Nouatus, was received into ye Congregation, ye whole
Congregation making earnest Supplication for him contrary to the order of the
Canons. Cyprian 3. book Epistle 15. 16. 18.
Cyprian reports that the Martyrs of his time (considering the earnest
amendment of life in certain Penite^tiaries, and perceauyng the time of their
penance limited unto them by the Church to draw near to an end) obtained by
their earnest petitions made to the Elders of the Church, that they releasing
some part of their penance, might receive them into the Congregation again as
reconciled, notwithstanding their satisfactions being not fully accomplished.
And the Reason of this Pardon does the 5. Canon of the Counsel of Antycira
declare. Antyciran Canon 5.
A Bishop (says the Canon) ought to have this prerogative, as that he may
(upon consideration of the demeanor of Penitenciaries) become somewhat more
tractable and either quallifie the rigor of the penance, or aggrauate the
censure, as he shall think convenient and as necessity shall require. So also
in the Nicine Council the 5. Canon. Nicene counsel Cannon. 5.
Let them stand excommunicate (says the Canon) until either the Congregation,
or the Bishop shall think it convenient to mitigate the time of their penance.

Thus much I thought not amiss by the way to note brieflye of the manner of
public penance, and Canonical satisfactions exercised in the old Church:
To the end it may more fullye appear by what means those ancient ordinances
of public penance, did first decay and were abolished in the Popes church,
and how by little and little certain new Satisfactions were crept in and thrust
in place. For albeit this name of Satisfactions be of some auncienty: yet were
Satisfactions exercised far otherwise in the ancient Church, New
satisfactio^s crept into the Romish Church unknown to the Antiquitye.
then they are now in daily practice in the Popes Church. For in the Primitive
Church such satisfactions were enjoined as public penance for public
offenses only. But your Popes Co^fessioners do enjoin satisfactory penaunces,
for certain private and secret sins: The first sort were never ministered but
in presence of the congregation only, to serve for outward Discipline only,
and not to redeem the wrath of God, for their sins by way of satisfiyng: and
ye cause why they were called Satisfactions was, because they did satisfy the
opinion of ye congregation in public offenses only. Eue^ so and in such wise
Releases and Pardons were esteemed, not to be in any respect valuable to cleanse
the sins of guiltye consciences in the sight of God simply: but should be as
pledges and witnesses of a full releasing their penance, enjoined unto the^ by
the Church, or of mitigating the same with some gentle quallification. As
appears by a Transcript drawn out of the Penitential of Rome up Burchard
treating much of those exchaunges of satisfactions: Burchard.
namely that in stead of this penance, where a man was enjoined to fast one
whole day with bread and water, he should be released thereof, and say fifty
psalms or Lxx. psalms kneeling, and relieve some one beggar with food: If he
were a rich man and unlettered, he should redeem one days penance by paying
iij. pence: if he were poor and unlettered, he should pay one penny, or feed
three poor folk. The penance of a whole weeks fast, was redeemed with CCC.
Psalms: a whole mouethes fast by saying xij. hundred Psalms: for one years
fast, he should give in alms to the poor xxij. shillinges. etc. Many other
like exchaunges of penaunces are mentioned in Burchard: all which respected
none other end, but that they might quallify the rigor of the old Canons
touching public penance: ministered to this end, not as necessary
instruments to obtain remission of sins, and to pacify the wrath of God,
but instituted for examples sake, that they might be special pricks and
prouokementes to stir up such as were fallen, and allurementes to earnest
amendment of life.

On the contrary part, the custom of our time, and of our Popes has so far
degendred from the ancient ordinances of the Elders, in dispensing with
Pardons and Satisfactions, that it may seem to have overwhelmed not only all
discipline of the ancient Church, How much the order of the old discipline
does varry from the Romish Nouelty.
but also almost overthrown the whole force and efficacy of Christian faith.
For whereas the Sum and Substance of all our Religion consists in the
cleansing and purging of Sins: and the same comprehended also in the only
obedience and passion of Christ: these new vpstart Popes have translated all
this Release and satisfaction for our sins, from the merit of Christ, to I
know not what newfangled absolutions and Pardons: And whereas the old
penitential Canons were only men's constitutions, wherein men might dyspence
with men according to the necessity of the time, hereupon our Popes (taking
heart of grass) are become so shameless impudent, that with their Pardons they
dare presume to dispense with men's sins, yea and their consciences also, and
to make their satisfactory merits (by merit meritorious as it were) worthy,
and able to encounter the wrath and judgment of God.

And now behold how many pumples and fretts lurk under this one skabbe of the
popish doctrine. The errors of the Popish discipline.
First they do so ouerlade men's consciences with a commandment of confession,
without all authority of scripture, and contrary to all the presidents of the
primitive Church: they force all persons to render an account of their sins,
whether they be contrite, or not contrite, and this also upon pain of eternal
damnation: As for Absolution they leave clean naked of all effectualnesse,
denying it to be auayleable without works precedent: over and besides this
also, they do clogge them that are confessed with an unavoidable necessity of
doing penance, they do thrust in Pardon of sins granted by man's authority,
which they call Satisfaction for sins, to deserve free release from that
punishment and pain, which the justice of God may duly exact. Out of which
Syncke proceed many untimely and vyperous birthes, full of lies, sacrilege and
blasphemy against God. Namely Mounckes: vows: The Sacrifice of the Mass for
the quick and the dead: Pilgrimages to stocks and stoanes. Iubiles: Pardons
and Purgatory: and out of that Purgatory sprang forth that momish maxim of
Scotus, Scottish and crabbed enough, to this effect: That Sinners after
absolution, ar either turned over to pardones, or to Purgatory.

I do not here complain or expostulate for those portesales and crafty
conueyaunces of Pardons: Let Pardons be as francke and free as they would seem
to be for me. The ordinances of the Pope are contrary to Christ and his
Scriptures.
But this is the thing that I do demand: by what title, by what scripture, by
what example, finally by what (I do not say authority) but by what honest
color, the Pope of Rome may presume so much upon his authority, as to
challenge to himself an interest, and as it were, an inheritable possession of
those things, wh Gods own mouth and the promises of the whole scripture do
give franckely and freely unto all them that repent and believe, even by their
faith in Christ Jesus? and how he dare also affirm that such men are not
otherwise to be dispe^sed withal, then by his Bulls of Pardons and his
deputary Co^missaryes: Saint Peter cries out with a loud voice, and confirms
his saying with the authority of all the Prophets, that shall receive
forgiveness of Sins, as many as do believe in Christ. Act. 20.
So does also the Apostle Paul proclayme boldly, that all things are pacified
by the blood of Christ, both in heaven and in earth, Collos.
and adds moreover. And in him (says he) you are made perfect. And because
no man shall be of opinion here after, that there wants any thing to the full
accomplishment of our salvation read in John. 1. John. 1.2.
The blood of Christ does cleanse us from all Sin. And immediately after. He is
the propitiation for our sins, not our sins only but for the sins of the
whole world. And John Baptist poynting to Christ with his finger does affirm
Christ to be the Lamb appointed by God to take away the sins of the world.
John. 1.
And Paul to the Hebrews. By one only oblation Christ made perfect for ever
them that were sanctified. Heb. 10.
And in an other place we are taught that our hearts are purified by faith. To
conclude: The whole meaning and intent of the scripture, being nothing else but
a certain never interrupted course of recomfortable refreshyng in Christ: it
does so allure us all unto him, that it leaves none other medicine or
restoratiue for our ouerladen and encombred consciences, but the only blood of
the Son of God. Romans 3 4.
And therefore if the only death of Christ once offered for all, be a full
Rau^some for our Sins, and the full price of our Redemption. If Christ's
only death and Passion be imputed to the faithful beleuer for righteousness:
What need then any other Pardons? If Christ pacified all things in heaven and
in earth, why could he not as well pacify all things in Purgatory, When full
power was given unto him over all things in heaven and in earth? what? shall
Christ have nothing to do in Purgatory, but that the Pope must be only Prince
of that Region?

The blood of Christ (say they) did Ransom us, The absurdity of the Romish
doctrine.
from guilt and everlasting punishment. But there remains yet a Temporal
punishment to be endured, partly in this life, partly in Purgatory, out of the
which is no redemption at all, but by the Popes Pardons. Although the last part
of this doctrine by monstruously absurd, yet if they would grant the former
part thoroughly, and wholly, the matter were somewhat more tolerable. But now
they are in this their partition, so parciall and uneven dealers, that they
will not leave to Christ, the whole cleansing of the guilt, Eccius
interpretation upon the Popes decretalls.
but will herein also join a topemate with him, that Romish vicar. For this is
their assertion: to wit, That ye Pope of Rome being the vicar of Christ, does
by power of his keys, bring to pass both that he may release from guilte, and
punishment both at once with his Bulls of Pardons, That is to say,: From guylt
through the Sacrament of Penance: and from punishment, by the Popes
satisfactions and pardons.

If this be true, let us bidd the books of the Evangelists and Apostles
adieu: Farewell also Gods promises: let faith, and the Church pack up their
trunckes, and get them to Cattai, and let us with solemn procession receive
into the Church of Christ most holy Pardons and Indulgences, and turn Christ
out at the Belfrye: Sithence these pardons alone without Christ do dispatch
all matters clear through the authority of the Pope. No say they, not so,
without Christ: but partly by the superabou^daunce of Christ's merits, partly
by the blood of Martyrs, partly by the merits of Saints, partly by charitable
alms, works of supererogacion, by the obeying the cou^celles, and partly by
seueritye and straight keeping the charge of holy orders or Indulgences, do
stand in force, and are auaylable. The form of which absolucions forged by
the Mounckes and Friars to the behoof of the common people follows on this
wise.

God be merciful unto thee good Brother.
Out of the Commentary of M. Luther to the Galath. cap. 2.
THe merit of our Lord Jesus Christ and of ye blessed Mary ye perpetual
virgin, and of all Saints, the merit of holy orders, the heavy burdeine of
Religion, the humblenes of confession, the contrytion of heart, and the good
works that thou have done, and shall do for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ,
grant unto thee remission of sins, The Papisticall absolutions.
to ye increase of merit and grace, and to the reward of life everlasting.
Amen. There be also other forms of absolution extant, which others granted by
the Popes Bulls: as when hospitalls and brotherhoodes do communicate with
others ye participation of all good works on this wise. We do testifye that
we have received into the Beaderoll of the holy Brotherhood of S. A^^^^ny those
persons: granting unto them full partaking of all the good works that have
been done, and are to be done by our brethren from the beginning of our
foundation, even to the end the foresaid order, day and night, in three
hundredth, sixty iiii. Monasteries and hospitalls. etc.

Like as Apothecaries do compound their Tryacle of many simples and drugges
mixed together. Even so the Popes by gathering together the merits of Christ,
of the blessed virgin of ye Martyrs, of Saints, and Mounckes, as it were
special spices and herbs do make up their hochepott of Pardons: of which
Pardous they do make portesale as parcel of the treasory of the Church to
hospitalls, Churches, Chappells, Brotherhoodes, Monasteries and Selles, not for
shillings or crowns, but give the^ unto every of them gratis very hountifully.
If we may credit Osorius herein. But in the mean space I would very feign
learn this of Osorius, how we are said to be made perfect and for ever
sanctified, if the only oblation of Christ once offered be not sufficient to
save us, without the merits of Saints and heaps of good works? Moreover,
whereas out of this unmeasurable treasory of the Church, there is such an
ouerflowing plenty of gracious Pardons, I would also know this, by what reason
the Pope of Rome does challenge himself to be only Porter and keybearer of
this precious Treasory, excluding all other ministers and Bishops of the
Church, but such only as whom by his power Apostolic he has authorized to
play fast and loose? How great an absurdity is in the popes pardons.
what now? Are not the merits of Christ open to all and singular indifferently
without exception? or otherwise then as they be received by every ones
particular faith? Or what kind of power is that of one Bishop in the Church,
which is not also general and common to all other Byshopps together with him?
Do ye not see Osorius how filthy and how absurd these reasons of yours be?
what an horrible deceit to the people, what a great injury is this to all
other Bishops and how full of sacrilege? and what a monstrous reproach it
is against Christ him self.

And yet for all this, you can not but marvel in the mean time, what moved us
to abandone this proud prelate with all his pelf as a pestilent viper of the
Church of Christ: and why we cut our selves away from him, as far as we may:
whom your self Osorius (if you were endued with any dropp of Christian blood)
would never take upon you to defend with such a profane targett of Tullies
Paganism: But would rather give an onset upon him as the general Enemy of
all mankind, if your heart were as well enlightened with the true and sincere
knowledge of Christ, as your fickle brains are lewdely incensed with the bayne
and heathenish admiration of Ciceroes eloquence. And to say the truth, I know
not by what mishappe this happ has happened, that all these untimely
sproughtes of Ciceroes plants are (by a certain secrett yet most just
judgment of God) infected with this general lurcking cancker, and continually
pestered as it were with a falling sickness. Which I have specially noted in
very many: If question be moved of the proportion and qualitye of framing the
speech delicately: If matter must be debated of the most excellent, and finest
phrases of Eloquence, of the dignitye and chief ornament of an exquisite
Orator, that is to say, of plain human toys, and earthly trifles: good
Lord, what a glorious majesty of words, what hawty loftines of speech: what a
childishe and foolish stroaking and flattering of themselves, diriding, and
skorning all others besides themselves, perking over the^ from aloof, as it
were, upon poor and abject shrimpes? But if they be required to show their
conning to declame of Christ, of the statelynes of his mighty Kingdom, of the
greatness of sin, of man^es forlorn nature, of the power of faith, of
justification by grace, of the natural imperfection of mankind, of man's
reconciliation: a man can not but wonder, how cold, how astonished, how void of
reason, how cowardly, without any spirit at all, almost Colourlesse, hu^gry,
barrayne, mute wretched, hartlesse, barbarous, speachlesse, and senseless they
be, unable almost to utter their minds or open their mouths. Moreover if
these matters must be decided with the pen, they behave themselves therein as
though they were raking after the Moon, forreners, strangers, and altogether
unacquainted with the cause. As not long sithence a certain person taking upon
him in Rome, before the Pope and his Cardinals to exclayme against Luther,
was hissed out of the place not without great glee and delight of the
beholders. So small and so no acquayntaunce at all has this proud hawty and
loftye kind of myncing Minnions with our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I do
willingly abstain from naming of men, because I would have them forewarned
rather to their benefitte, then reproched to their infamy, if there be any
besides this Osor. whom this Ciceronian skabbe has infected with like dottage.

But I come again to Pardons: wherewith as they say they sweep all Purgatory
and make clean riddaunce when they will, and by which picklockes they lock
fast the gates of hell, and open the gates of heaven to whom they list. But I
pray you Osorius, by what authority do they this? By the same authority you
will say, where of was spoken to Peter, I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, etc. Math. 16.
That the keys were given to Peter no man will deny. But what is this to the
Pope of Rome? because next unto Peter the succession of the Sea Apostolic
falls upon the Pope forsooth: And why so? how will you prove this to be true?
I beseech you? What? because he does enjoy Peter's Chair? what? and had Peter
no more Chayres but one? or did he fit no where but at Rome? The Keys and
Chair of Peter.
And what if he never sat at Rome? But putt the case he sat at Rome. I will
give you an argument not much unlike unto this. It was not unknown to be old
Poetts what a skillful Harper Orpheus was, whom they imagined to have drawn
after him with the sweetness of his Harp stoanes and woods: It came to pass
in process of time that one Neanthus Son of Pittacus chanced to come by the
same Harp, Lucian. 2. part. page 525.
who being far unlike this Orpheus in skill of playing, and altogether an
Ass (as ye proverb speaks at the harp) yet through a foolish opinion
conceived of himself did persuade himself that he should be able to draw
after him Rocks and Woddes immediately upon the sound of the Harp. This
clownish Cocklorrell therefore wandering abroad over hills and dales, and
maruayling that the Rocks and Woods stood still as before immovable, and
would not stir out of their place at the sound of the Harp, never surceased
from striking, from stretching, from thumping the Harp, until having made
himself loathsome to the very cattle with the tedious and brutish noise of
the Harp, became a pray to dogs, and was guawed and rent in pieces by them.
And what else does this popish Prelate emport with his pompous pride, Orpheus
Harp makes not a Harper, not does Peter's Chair make an Apostle.
and stately Chair, whereon he is no less ^rantickly fond, then this seely
soul was upon the Harp? I list not as now to guess the garbroyle of his
glory: of the thing it self I dare boldly speak this much: as Orpheus Harp
makes not an Harper forthwith, so neither do Peter's Keys shape a right
succession, but the only confession and faith of Peter.

And yet did the Church always acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be the
Successor of Peter the Apostle, The succession of Peter the Apostle.
So did also the consent of the Fathers and the Antiquity of time. I do hear
you. But by what authority, by what testimony, and witnesses will you justify
this to be true? or by why what reason or argument will you prove it? what?
because he can show the Chair that Peter sat in? Nay rather let him
express the virtuous life, and gracious gifts of Peter, and in his life give
forth unto us, as Peter did, a President and pattern of the causes precedent,
and the true Circumstaunces for the which the Keys were delivered unto Peter.
The circu^stau^ces must he considered, wherefore the keys were delivered unto
Peter.
For on this wise are we informed by the Gospel. Because flesh and blood has
not revealed this unto thee but my Father which is in heaven. You do hear
mention made first, of the notable testimony of his faith and open confession
of the Son of God, which was not discovered unto him by flesh and blood, nor
by any natural Philosophy, nor engraffed within him by any force of natures
lore: but which (being endued with heavenly inspiration) he had received from
above, beyond all reatch of humayne Capacity. For the knowledge of Christ
comes by the only inspiration of the holy Ghost. Which as soon as the Lord
perceived was engraven within Peter, wondering (as it were) at the greatness of
the miracle, does first declare unto him ye glad tidings of blessedness from
God. Thou art blessed Simon Bariona: Math. 16.
then alluding to the nature of his name (because he was called Cephas that is
to say Peter) upon that Petra that is to say upon that Rock of his faith an
confession, he does promise to establish the building of his Church. And added
hereunto the promise of the Keys: I will give thee (says he) the Keys of the
Kingdom of God. etc.

The foundation of the Church is faith and the knowledge of the Son of God.
By which Circumstau^ces what are we taught else, then that the foundation of the
Church of Christ wheresoever it be, is grounded upon nothing else, then upon
true faith, and unfeigned confession of the Son of God? For when the Lord
spoke this unto Peter, he made no accou^pt of his righteousness, nor of his
virtues, and conversation of life, neither of his fastings, nor his dutiful
observation of the commandments, ne yet the holiness of his Religion:
forasmuch as all these ornaments did shine as aboundauntly in others, as they
did in Peter. But at the first vtterannce and confession of his excellent
faith, the Lord does denounce him to be blessed, builds his Church and does
promise the Keys upon the same: Whereupon, remains that we conclude at the
last most truly, that wheresoever the Keys are exercised which are Christ's
true Keys in deed, there of necessity must an influence, What Circumstaunces
do go before the true keys of Christ and what do come after.
and special inspiratio^ of the holyghost, and a certain earnest and hearty
effectualnes of faith, and constant confession of Christ go before.

On the contrary part, where no perseueraunce or feeling can be perceived of
the ingraued knowledge of Christ from the heavenly Father: whose mind being
not endued with any influence of the holyghost, sauoureth of nothing at all,
beyond the retch of flesh and blood: who has wedded his heart to earthly
treasures, to the Royalty, pomp, and gorgeousnes of this world: who neglecting
the glory of Christ, is vassal and bondslaue to Ambition: subject to
affections, gives himself to pamper the paunch, and is drowned in the deep
doungeon of worldly cares: who does breath out of his nostrilles the blood and
butchery of his brethren: That person, in what Chair soever he sit, does
with to much shameless arrogance vaunte upon the possession of the Keys. And
therefore if this Romish ruffler do mean to royst stille with Peter's keys,
he must endeavor to express in his manners the virtuous life, and godly
conversation of an Apostle, and not chatt so much of a Chair. Otherwise to
what purpose is it, how sumptuously soever a man be enthronized, if he be
wicked and unworthy the place? the place does not always commend the person:
but if the person be good, he does always commend the place, otherwise if he
be evil, he does shame the place. And what if Peter did receive the keys from
Christ? Peter received the keys first but not only.
did he alone therefore receive them? was it not also spoken indifferently to
all, without exception: Receive ye the holy ghost? whose soever sins you
louse, or bind upon earth etc. Could Peter be sent by any greater authority,
then by the authority of Christ himself? Finally was not this spoken to all
thapostles indifferently by Christ himself? As the living father sent me, even
so do I send you: Peter therefore did bind, Peter did louse: I do perceive
you: so did also Paul louse the Corynthian, and reteigne Hermogenes and
Alexander. John the Evangelist did louse the thief once or twice as Eusebius
does record in his 3. book Cap. 17. Out of Eusebius. third book. cap. 7.
Other Apostles did louse likewise others, even by the same authority received
from Christ himself, and not from Peter at all: What then? because Peter did
before the rest of thapostles confess his faith, and because the keys were
first given to Peter, does this argue forthwith, that the keys were given to
Peter alone?

But to go foreward: Putt the case that the keys were delivered to Peter's
custody, both first, yea in respect of his confessing of faith, besides this
also to him alone, since you will have it so: yet what kind of chopplogick is
this?

The keys were delivered to Peter confessing Christ with a true and sincere
faith.

Ergo. The Popes of Rome only be the successors of Peter, and are invested in
the possession of the same power of binding, and lousing by the express word
of God.

A trymm conclusion surely, and very Catholic: Wherein neither the Antecedent
is true, and the consequent much more false: Forasmuch as neither this force of
binding and lousing was given to Peter alone, and their assumption hereof
surmised, (that the Popes of Rome only are Peter's Successors) is altogether as
false. The Succession Apostolic is not to be measured by place or time.
The reason is because the simplicitye, and native humilitye of the Gospel
does no where acquaint it self with any such carnal successions, which are
applied to places, persons, and times: as neither Christ's philosophye does
acknowledge or regard carnal Fathers, Sons, affinities, and kinreddes? as
the which does mount on high, and does enter by far more excellent means. Go
to, yet for example sake, let us imagine, that Peter hadd a son borne unto
him by his lawful wife, and an other Cephas, resembling the father, and by
descent and course of nature next heir: What shall we say? that this Son
shall claim the privilege of his fathers Portershippe, The nature of the
Gospel is altogether spiritual, nor regards earthly and carnal things.
because he is his next heir? Not so you will say. And will you so flattly
deny that privilege to natural descent, which you yield to place, and to a
rotten outward Chair? If Christ did neither acknowledge mother, brethren nor
sisters upon the earth, but those only, which yielded their due obedience to
his fathers commandments, will the same Christ vouchsafe any other
successors, or vicars of Peter, then such as present themselves with the same
cognifizaunce and badge that he did acknowledge in Peter? And admit also the
very best that makes for you, that the Bishop of Rome does with never so
good a face pretend this authority from Christ: what? and be not other
Byshopps of other Churches endued with semblable faith? what prerogative has
he then in this office and keeping of keys now, as to challenge any
superioritye over other Bishops, and Preside^ts of the Church?

The Scripture does in a certain place deny, that he which has not the spirit
of Christ, is of Christ.: The spirit of Christ.
Now this spirit of Christ (wheresoever it rests) is humble and meek,
regards not the things of the earth, seeks not her own, suffers the
injuries of others: offers injury to none, neither reuengeth any injury
offered to himself: haleth no man to the slaughterhouse: thyrsteth after every
man's sauetye: yea prays also for his enemies earnestly: does receive the
weak in faith: does oppress no man: endures many things: becomes all in
all to all persons, that he may win all unto Christ: accompteth other men's
chances, good or badde, as his own: lives not to himself: but to the
public benefit of many: does amend that is amiss: The succession of Peter
does consist in spirit not in external things.
addresseth that which is out of order: recouereth the lost: recomforteth the
dispeired estates: finally does not break in pieces the shieuered Reed: For
in very deed the spirit of Christ can not be unlike to Christ himself:
And therefore hereof we may well conclude, that wheresoever this spirit does
plant his Seat, there doughtles is the successor of Peter, there be the true
keys of the Church.

I do not presume here to judge of ye spirit of the Pope, he has his Judge,
and shall have his day of judgment, which shall display abroad into open
light, and secrets of all darkness. In the mean space touching the Popes
Pardons, (whereof these praters preach so presumptuously) this is most certain,
and sure: Pardons.
That thorough the whole scriptures, or ancient Fathers, one sentence so much
cann not be found, Succession.
to make those their Pardons Justifiable or coulorable, First, touching their
whole allegation of Succession, The Keys.
it is plain fraud and deceit: their brag of the singular prerogative of
Peter is false. The power of the keys does no more belong to the Sea of Rome,
then to the universal Church of Christ. For if by those keys, power of
binding and lousing be figured (as has been already spoken) these keys
though Peter received first in deed, yet did not he alone receive them: nor
did ever at any time exercise the power of the same otherwise, then as he did
enjoy them together with the other Apostles, which for as much as is confirmed by
very many infallible profes, and established by the continual vnbroke^ course
of ancient Antiquitye: as also witnessed evidently, by the testimony of the
Cannons in the Councels of Ancyra, and Nice, (whereof we made mention before)
where it is said, that the custom of the Church was then such, as that every
Bishop should have the order and oversight of every his peculiar Province,
and upon due consideration of the behavior of the Penitentiaries, might
lawfully either mittigate, shorten, or cut of the time of their penance, The
5. Canon of the council of Ancyra.
or prolong the same according, as they should think in necessary, and
needful for reformation and correction.

So that it was shameless presumption, and most arrogant insolencye of Pope
Innocent the 3. to make this indiscreet decree in the Council of Laterane in
the year 1215. Because (says he) through vndiscreate and superfluous Pardons,
which certain Prelates of the Church are not affrayd to grant, both the keys
of the Church are despised, and penitential satisfaction is weakened: we do
decree, that when the feast of dedication of Saint Peter's Pallaice shall be
solemnized: Pardon shall not be granted above one year: and so forth in the
feast of the yearly dedication, the time of appointed Pardons of enjoined
penance shall not exceed, and pass forty days. And imediately after: This
number of days of Pardons, Ex titulo de penitent. and Remiss. cap. cu^ ex eo
also we command to be abreuiated, which are granted for every light tryfle:
Forasmuch as the Bishop of Rome who does profess the Fulness of all power, is
accustomed to use moderation in the like causes. etc.

The fulness of power first brought in by Innocent.3. first Author thereof.
And from hence, if I be not deceived, was this Fulness of power derived of the
first, which the Romyshe Ruffians have raked most shamefully to themselves:
Whether to the great reproach of the glory of Christ, or the intolerable injury
of their brethren, more I can not easily determine. What? sufficed not to
usurp either equal power with other Bishops, or encroche upon the^ somewhat
higher, unless their insatiable pride must mount also to the Fulness of all
power? Go to: and may we learn of you Osorius what it is that they seek for
by this word Fulness? If that be said to be full, whereunto no drop may be
iustilled more: it is out of all question that this Fulness is proper and
peculiar to Christ alone, of whose Fulness we all have received, The fulness of
power.
not the ministers of the Church only, not Deacones, not Bishops only, but
the chiefest Apostles and Evangelists, out of which number Peter himself (yea
though never so much prince of Apostles,) may not be exempted. The only Son
of God is a continual flowing founteyne, that can never be exhausted and
spent: to whom the Father gave the spirit without measure, full of mercy,
and truth.

All others being of our selves barraine, hungry, naked and beggarly by nature,
must needs seek relief of his aboundau^ce, to whom Esaias the Prophet does
allure all me^ to repair and to borow. Come (says he) all that be thurstie,
and have no money, and draw from hence freely with gladness, from out the
founteines of the Savior. Esaias. 55.12.
Moreover the Savior him self also does generally call all whosoever be
oppressed with penury, and distressed with anguish and labors, to come. What
then? Sufficed not to come to this fou^teyne plentyfully flowyng, and most
largely set wide open for ye house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
to resort unto, for the cleansing of ye Sinner and defiled, but the Romish
Rutterkyne must call us back to his filthy Cesternes, and durty Dytches, that
so him self being a most filthy and durty Sinner should cleanse us with his
fullnes?

For as much therefore as the mouth of God has spoken it, the consent also of
all the Prophets have testified, that God has given all Fullness to his only
begotten Son, wherewith only he is able, and willing also to wash away all
our filthynes, and corruption: from whence then comes this Fullness of so
absolute power to this Roman Prelate, that this one Prelate alone may by a
certain superexcellent, Prerogative bring to pass that, which all other
Bishops can not do? namely that he may franckly grant full, more full, yea
unmeasurable full Pardon of all manner of offenses, to the most common
barrettours of the world? For such is the very style of their Pardons many
times. Out of a decree in the Lateran Council. Anno. 1215.
Such was the wild Bull of Innocent 3. upon a solemn Decree enlarged to all
them that would fight for the holy land, or would give any aid thereunto.
Wherein he promised full remission of all their Sins, in the fullness of his
Porterly power, and increase of life everlasting in the full partaking of the
fellowshyp of all Saints. After the same manner Boniface the 8. did grant unto
all persons that would as pilgrims come to visit the holy mother Church of
Peter and Paul in Rome, A decree of Boniface. 8. Extraua.
not only full, and fuller, but most abominable full forgeuenes of all their
Sins. So also Clement the 6. in his Bulls of Pardons does power out
ple^tyfully to them that will fight for the holy Cross, not only Remission A
poena and culpa but with much more bountye and liberality does grant unto
every of them, three or four souls out of Purgatory whom they will: and
withal gives also an especial commandment to the Angels in heaven, if any
of those warlike pilgrims chance to dye in their journey, A shameless abuse
of the keys
that they forthwith transport them into heaven. This is a wondrous efficacy
of keys surely, if they be able to perform in deed, that which they brag
upon so arrogauntly in words. For they vaunt a full and most perfect power of
doing, I can not tell what, far exceedyng all other Churches, Bishops,
Prelates, and Councels.

But from whence they fetch this full power they have not yet taught fully. If
they say from Christ: but Christ being him self the only perfect founteine of
all fulness, not able to be made empty, does never power forth him self to
fully into one man alone, as that he leaves not him self as accessible
indifferently to all others: of whose fullnes if every person according to his
portion do draw forth as much grace as suffices: The Bishops of Rome can
challenge to themselves fulness of power by no Argument of proof.
then has not one man alone made clean riddua^ce to him self of all. Neither
can it be possible that he which receaueth of any one that thing whereof all be
ioynte parteners, that he alone shall possess all that, whereof all others have
a ioynte interest and possession. Again what difference of power shall there
be betwixt Christ and the Pope, if each of them be of like fullnes and power? Or
what needs any man to apply unto Christ, if he may be otherwise fully
satisfied in the full fullnes of the Pope? Or what shall remain in heaven from
henceforth for Christ, if this Lieutenaunt of Christ can dispatch all things
upon earth with the fullnes of his power? To conclude in a word. If this Porter
of heaven be of such supercelestiall power, as that he want nothing, but may
without resistau^ce open, and shut, when, and to whom he will: why then let
him once scour the coast clear and proclayme a clean gayle delivery out of
Purgatory, and set all souls at liberty, that are in that fiery lake, and
make a quick dispatche of them, from out those horrible flames, and send them
to Paradise if he can: but if he can not perform as he would, then where is
his fullnes? If he will not do that which he can, where is his charity?
Wherefore sithence one of those two must needs be granted, that either ye
must confess him a poor beggarly pope, or a cruel careless cutthroate, let
Osorius or his Pope choose which he will: or to give better counsel in this
case, at the least let the Roman Church foresee, and be very well advised it
self, least in this brave brag of fullnes, it self be nypped with as full a
scarsitie, Apoc. 3.
as we read sometime written of the Church of Laodicea. An objection.
Because thou say I am rich, and full, and do want nothing, and do not
know that thou art a beggar, miserable, poor, blind, and naked. The state of
the Question is mistourned by-the Romanistes.
I do advise thee that thou come and buy of me fine pure gold, of the finest,
that thou may be ritche, and be clothed in white garments, least the shame
of thy nakedness do appear, and annoint thine eyes with precious ointment that
thou may see. etc.

But here will some one interrupt me and say that the keys of heaven were not
given in vain. The words of August unto Peter have no plain application
unless they be referred to the church.
Neither do I gaynsay him herein. But that is not the thing that we seek to be
satisfied in, at this present: whether Christ gave any such keys, but this is
it: whether the keys were given to the Bishop of Rome only. For we do not
defraude the Church of her right, but according to right we do plead against
the Pope, who raketh up unto him (self as matter of his proper profession)
that which was given to the whole Church in the name of Peter, Thomas Aqui.
lib. 4. distinct. 18. Extrauade Re. and paen. Cap. Cum ex eo and nostro.
excluding all other Churches ioynte commoners with him in the same.

By means whereof the Pope does incur a double trespass, and is to answer
double damage: for the one, wherein he entruded wrongfully upon the right of
the whole order: for the other, wherein he does most filthely abuse the right
use of the keys. For if it be true first, that Augustine does protest boldly,
Thomas Aqui. lib. 4. did. 18. Extrau. de Re and poeni. ca. Cum ex eo. and
nostro.
and which Thomas Aquinas does not deny, That in the person of Peter the keys
were committed to the other Apostles, and to the whole Church: herein surely
that most horrible abuse of the Romish challenge does bewray a notorious
fraud: who scraping to it self full prerogative of all power, does pen up
within such narrow streightes, all other Archbyshops and Byshopps as that it
shall not be lawful for any one to give Pardon above the space of one whole
year within his peculiar Province or Diocese, without leave of his Lordshypp.
Again he does committ as great an offense in the use of the keys. For whereas
this power of bindyng and lousing, wherein the whole force and efficacy of the
keys consists, was received of the Preachers, and Ministers of the word, for
none other end, but to the necessary consolation and comfort of the Church, nor
was executed at any time by the Apostles, but in very hard and weighty
necessity only: As if a man had dispayred of the mercy of Christ, or had
committed some heinous and notorious offense publicly: The Keys were given
for the necessary benefit of the Church nor to men's lust nor yet to Revenge.
here was their power employed, either to comfort, and raise up them that were
fallen: or to suppress and bridle the insolency of such as seemed manifestly
injurious, and rebellious against the glory of Christ. Which kind of Judicial
use of the keys was not very commonly frequented by the Apostles, The
Judicial use of Keys.
nor yet applied but in great and urgent necessity.

There was besides this at the same time an other more usual execution of the
keys, and is now commonly in use, in every well ordered Congregation. For
whereas the Preacher does openly proclayme by the authority of the word,
everlasting life to all whosoever, truly an unfeignedly repenting and beleeuyng
in Christ Jesu: what does he else then open the kingdom of heaven to me^, as it
were with a key? and close it fast again as need shall require? For even as
with a material keye (as witnesses Thomas) doors be opened, Tho. lib. 4.
did. 18.
the bars and gynnes being forced back, which did forclose the passadge to
them that would enter in: Even so when as by hearing the word, faith arises,
and the blocks and bars of Sin be turned out of the way: these keys
therefore are rightly said to be committed to the Ministers of the Church:
wherewith as it were vnlockyng the locks, and vnloasing the obstacles of
sins, they do lead and conduct Sinners into heaven, and open the eyes of the
blind. With this power was Paul also furnished by the Lord him self, being
sent unto the Gentiles. Acts. 2^.
That thou may open their eyes (says he) whereby they may be converted from
darckenes to light, and delivered from the power of Satan unto God, may
attain Remission of their Sins, and their portion amongst the Saints
through faith which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. The power of the keys how
great and to whom are given.
I beseech you Sir, could Peter be sent with more authority in any respect
unto the Jews, the^ Paul was sent unto the Gentiles? And what shall I say of
the rest of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ? was this a small and slender
authority, wherein was committed unto them the whole world to be taught in the
word of GOD? whereby also they wrought so many miracles, and so great signs
amongst the people? wherefore if these words byndyng and lowsing do consiste
in the power of the holy Ghost: in propagation of Faith, in the ministry of
Reconciliation: in publishyng the Gospel, what answer will mine opposed
adversary make me here? does the Bishop of Rome only Preach the Gospel? Or is
he only endued with the power of the holy Ghost? do not other Bishops and
Ministers Preach the word as well as he? And from whence then has this notable
Prelate this so notorious a fullnes?

Now to grant this much to the Ministers of the Church that the keys are
commended to them together with the Bishop of Rome, Whether no Remission of
sins is in the Church without the use of the keys.
wherewith they may deteigne and release Sins according to their power
co^mited unto them: yet ought not this power be so narrowly streighted either
to one Bishop only, or emparted also with other Ministers in such wise, as
though there were none other Remission of Sins besides in the Church,
unless it come by the Ministers keys, or the Popes Pardons: or as though no
man could make him self a way passable into heaven, How much the public keye
and how much every man's faith is effectual to the Remission of Sins.
unless he be admitted by this Popish Porter or his Ministers. The Minister
does open in deed: Be it so: Yet does he not so open, but ye every one may
open also to him self by his own Faith. So also does the voice and authority
of the Ministers break the bands of Sins a sunder in those which do heartily
repent. Yet nevertheless this sentence remains always unreprovable: Being
justified through faith, we have peace with God through our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Romans 5. Luke. 8.
Again this also: fear not, believe only and thou art made whole. All things
are possible to him that does believe. And in an other place purifiing our
hearts by faith. Moreover we hear our Lord himself speaking. That they may
receive Remission of their sins: and their portion amongst the Sanctified
through faith which is in me. Math. 9.
And although it serve to great purpose in the Church to have due
consideration, what, and to whom release is made in Christ his name, by the
ministry of a faithful Minister: Yet is not the force and effectualnesse of
faith any title diminished hereby, but that she may make a way passable to the
throne of the Majesty in assured confidence. Neither must we think that the
Lord gave unto the Ministers so large a commission of these opening Keys as
that there remain none other means of attain forgiveness of sins. When
the use of the Keys ought to be ministered.
It may sometimes come to pass, and even so it happens very often, that the
voice and counsel of the Ministers must needs be inquyred: as when a man is
at any time over grievously assaulted in his faith, or that the conscience be
miserably entangled with timorous fear, or if the conscience be brought to
despair: or if any greater mishappe shall happen to urge, there must the use
of the Keys be applied of very necessity: And hereof came it, that the Lord
would vouchsafe to furnish his Ministers with the power of opening and
shutting: not to make perfect the full work of our justification, but only
for the necessary relief and comfort of our unbecillitye and weakness.

Thomas. lib 4. did. 18.
And therefore Thomas Aquinas does err, and is fowly deceived as in many other
things, so in this very notably: where he reasons in his comme^taries of
distinctions, that the Keys of the Church of releasing and pardoning were
therefore committed to the Ministers, because no man is able without the aid
of the Ministers to open himself an access unto the kingdom of heaven. The
error of Thomas Aquinas.
For thus he writes. Because no man is able to open to himself (says he)
therefore were the Ministers authorized to forgive Sin: Whereby the kingdom
of heaven is made open. Thus much Thomas. And out of this established error
sprang up (If I be not deceived) that necessitye of compulsary Confession
whereby all Christians are constrained to crave Pardon of all their sins, not
of Christ through faith, but of the Priest by Confession. I do not speak this
because I think Confession is altogether unprofitable in the Church, but I
mean of the superfluous necessitye of reckoning up the particularities of
sins. And I know not whether ever a more deadly poison could be scattered
abroad in the Church by that wicked Seedes-man the Devil, The disco^modities
of the Shauelinges confession.
then this most pestilent Cancker, as well for many causes, as in this respect
of all other chiefly: That forasmuch as all he perfection of our righteousness
does depend upon the mercy and promise of God through faith in Christ Jesus: the
Christian people are by means of this doctrine trained away to flee from
faith, to Merit Meritorius: so that now this treasure proceeds not from God,
that makes the promise, but from the Priest, that grants absolution: our
Salvation rests no more now upon the mercy of God, but upon men's deseruings,
not upon the free gift, and bountiful liberalitye of God, but upon
satisfactory acquitall, and sufficiency of Co^trition, and upon rendering full
recompense of enjoined penance. For so we be taught by John Scotus, John
Scotus.
and by a received custom in opinion long before his days, Confession (says
he) after absolution given, either does committ the party over to Pardons: or
else sendes him packing to Purgatory.

And thus much hitherto of the Popes Pardons: whereof albeit no portsale had
been made, nor any gain and lucre reaped: Yet of their own nature they are
such, as neither cann be made Justifiable by any color or pretense, nor proved
by any argument, nor ratyfied by any Antiquitye, nor ought to be suffered in any
Christian common weal, without horrible sacrilege, and execrable empietye.
Now I return again to that which Osorius does deny. And this is it: That
these Pardons were never put to sale, and set out to hyre, by the knowledge or
permission of the holy mother Church of Rome. O holy Church doughtles, that
was never of this mind, that, such Fayres, and Markets should be proclaimed
and frequented in that most holy Church of God. And therefore as far as I do
perceive, this holy and worshippfull mother Church of Rome, The Romans See does
sell nothing forsooth.
applying her self to that notable predside^t of that heavenly Paul (because
she will make the Gospel free for all men) does power out all things freely:
makes sale of nothing, she makes no price upon Palles, upon Miters and
Hattes, and gives freely without money Prebends, Benefices, Pryuiledges,
Exemptions, and Immunities: If any thing be dispensed with all, or any release
to be made of special Reseruations, tushe they are given for pure love: there
is nothing done in all this whole Church couetously, nothing filthyly, no nor
any corruption, or Symony at all. And no marvel: gifts are accou^pted
loathsome trashe. Rewards are trodden under foot. Money is Maysterlesse; and
despised as a Roage. Here be no lymetwigges laid for pencio^, for tenthes, for
first fruits, nor for Iubiles: the only lu^re and gain here is the
recoueryng of the lost sheep. Finally ye shauelynges, and whole crewe of this
Church dare not abide to be greaced in the hands: And although the Pope do
daily furnish abroad so many Pardoners, so many Bulbearers, though he poaste
abroad so many Pardons, and coin daily so many fresh Bulls: yet for all that,
as he received gratis, so he gives gratis, and dispenceth with all things
gratis, and gives wax, seals, lead, paper, and partchment gratis, there is
nothing putt to sale: all things of free gift I suppose: surely his Legates
likewise when they Ruffle abroad, his Byshopps when they go in visitatio^s,
and give orders: his Suffraganes when they do confirm, when Mounckes and
Feyers do confess, when the Priests do sing and say Mass for the quick
and the dead, they take no money at all, nor yet for Trenta^^s, for Mortuaryes,
nor Marriages. After the same order the Friars Lymptoures when they gadd abroad
a begging: Stationars raunging from Church to Church with Boxes and Bulls,
they do it not for any gain, beware that. If this be true Mantuan was a great
liar, where in his book of Lamentations, he writes on this manner.

Steades and fatt Palfrayes are presents for Popes,
Mantuan in his book of Lamentation.
So are Churches, and Chapels, Altars, and Copes,
Perfumes, and Prayers, Crowns, and Attyres,
Tapers, and waxelight, Incense, and Friars:
Rome sells all things for money and cost,
Yea heaven and all with God and his host.
But because this lying Southsayer Mantuan does lie openly: we will salve this
soar with an other kind of dittye of a certain other Poet whatsoever he were,
who dallyed not altogether vnpleasauntly, yet somewhat more clenly with two
vearses to the same effect, in the commendation of this Church.

Pauperibus sua dat gratis nec munera captat The matter does agree, if you
read the verses backward.

Curia papalis quod modo percipitur.
Free Pardons give nor Brybes receive
Do Roman Popes that we perceive.
What need many words? who is he that will not clapp his hands for joy, to
see this exceeding bountifulnes of this holy mother Church, which does so
plentifully reward such as come unto her, with such aboundaunt store of
comfortable Pardons, and other wholesome Drugges, for never a penye so
franckly, abhorring and utterly detesting these gaynefull Fayres and Marketts
none otherwise then botches and blaynes: if all be true that Osorius preaches.

But by what Marks may this appear any thing probable (worshippfull Sir) that
you do affirm so boldly unto us? seeing as yet you feed us but with lean
affirmatiues only, approved neither by witness, nor by reason. But I think
it not amiss to cover Osorius nakedness here? And because the Reader may more
easily discern the whole substance of these Pardons, we will deryue the very
pedigree of them, from their first ancestors, and show how they sprung up
first amongst the old Fathers, and so by little and little in what order they
proceeded: lastly by what degrees they clymed up so high to become
marchauntable in the Primitive Church. When as Emperors raged furiously
against the first entrye, and beginning of Christ's Church, albeit very many
godly Fathers gave their lives, with wonderful constancye, for the testimony
of the truth: Yet did not all persist in like constancye of mind: but many of
them falling away from their profession to Idols, were holden guiltye of
Idolatry and sacrilege: Who notwithstanding, renouncing their Paganism, and
retourning to Christ, ministered occasion to the Elders to pause awhiles, and to
take breath upon good advise, what were best to be done, with them. It was
concluded at the last, ye mercy ought not to be denied to these backslyders:
Yet so, as they should not by and by be restored to the congregation, whom they
hadd offended by their evil example: by perfourming some penance prescribed
unto the^ for a certain space of time. In the mean time as every of the
Penitentiaries seemed to grow in greater carelessnes of their penance, so was
their penance aggrauated, and less consideration hadd of releasing their
punishment. At the last the persecution being ceased, yet ceased not the
infirmity of sinning: Whereupon the posteritye followed the example of their
predecessors upon like occasion ministered by obstinate sinners.

Then were added certain Cannons gathered together out of Counsels, first from
the Counsels of Ancyra, and Nyce, and from the Counsels following. Canons
penitential described by Burchard and Gratian.
A transcript whereof was made by Buchard and Gracian which the Latins do
call Penitentiales and the Grecians (...) as is before mentioned. Wherein was
comprehended how much penance was prescribed for every particular fault.
Nevertheless some qualification of the sharpenes of the said Canons was
ministered to the Penitentiaries, through the clemency, and humanitye of the
Pastors, according to the qualitye of the trespasses and estates of the
persons. And this kind of discipline of the Canons, was exercized yet in a
certain mean state of the Church, by the space of a thousand years, and
somewhat more: until at the last the ancient sincerity of the Primitive
pureness beginning to wax cold, and the rigor of the old Canons growing by
little and little out of use, or changed into lighter burdeines: new Pardons
exept in place, which were not only abrydgementes, and easementes of those
penaltyes, that apperteined to the censure of the Church, but which did stretch
further a great deal, to absolution a paena, When began fayres and markettes
of Pardons first.
and culpa, not in this present life only, but even to Purgatory it self:
Wherein were promised not only Releases of Ecclesiastical satisfactions, but
full and general acquittaunces delivered of those forfaytures, and trespasses,
which appertayned chiefly to Gods own Consistorye.

Whiles these things were a doing: and free Pardons flewe abroad now every
where thorough all Churches without measure (which happened not long before ye
year of our Lord. 1200) by and by began question to be made by whom those
Pardons might be granted: by their Parish Priest only? or by any other of
like dignity? or by a superior power? After that this kind of dispensation
was translated to Bishops and Archbyshops only. And at the last came it in
question where the full power of plenary Pardons should rest? Which after
solemn disputations, was agreed and concluded upon, must needs be in the
power of the Bishop of Rome. In the mean space was a Council Sommoned to be
holden at Laterane, Ex Co^cillo Latera. Extran. de poena and Remi. Cap. Cum ex
co.
under Pope Innocent the third in the year of our Lord. 1215. Wherein
complaint was made of that common scatteryng abroad of Pardons, whereby certain
Proctours of Spittellhouses (which gathered the good devotion of the people,
for their poor houses) were wont to grant out great and large Pardons,
because they would procure the people to deal their ahnes somewhat more
franckly.

There ensued afterward a Counsel holden at Vienna (which I do wonder why
has been omitted in the books of the Canno^s) under pope Clemente the 5. in
the year of our Lord. 1311 In which Council the ancient Fathers perceauyng
the subtle practizes of certain Pardoners: The Council of Vienna. 1311.
and their over greedy outrage in setting their Pardons to sale, and their
scrafty conueyaunce to cratche up the pence: thought good to prevent this
mischief betymes: and thereupo^ made a solemn Decree, Ex Clement 5. Lib. 6.
De^creta. Cap. Abusionibus.
wherein the dissolute licentiousness of these pratyng Proccours was sharply
suppressed, because they gave of their own minds and motion (to speak their
own term) Pardons to the people: dispensed upon vows: absolved such as
would confess open periuries, manslaughters, and other horrible crimes:
because they would release for money ye third or the fourth part of penau^ces
that were enjoined: because they would dispatch Purgatory of three or four
souls whom they listed at a choppe: because they would grant plenary
remission of Sins: and would make out their Bulls relaxatory A poena simul
and Culpa. And at the last the holy Synod concludyng: We (says the Canon)
will and command that these abuses, by color where of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction grows to naught, and the authority of the Church keys is
brought into contempt, be utterly abandoned and abolished. etc.

Certeinely I am sure that this doing of the Fathers will set a good face upon
the matter Osorius, that these good fathers had respect to nothing else, then to
the Reformation of the said abuses only: But the matter it self bewrayed the
contrary, whatsoever pretense was made here of the peril of souls, of the
infamy of the Church, of the contempt of the keys, and of over greedy rakyng
for money: yet this was not the principal cause that pricked forward the Romish
Prelates to prevent this peltyng powlyng of the Proctours: But there was an
other cause. For they did presume to absolute A poena and Culpa. Ex Clement.
Cap. Abusionibus. in Glossa.
Which according to the Gloss upon the Decretalles, is called the fullest
forgiveness of Sins, and is granted by the Pope only: Moreover they were
to bold to give out their Pardons to the people upon their own authority, not
receauyng nor obteinyng first license and power thereunto from the Sea
Apostolicque. This was so heinous a matter, that the Popes Council could not
be able to digest it. And hereupon began that crowyng against the poor
Proctours, as I said before, not so much for that they did abuse their
Indulgences, to gain and lucre (for what else have the Popes them selves done
at any time) But because the Romish Ravens felt no small feathers plucked from
their backs. For these great wise men foresawe that (which was true in deed)
that if other Churches might be at free liberty to bind and louse as
farreforth as they, this would grow to no small prejudice to the Primacy. And
therefore was a pretty way found out, whereby all this absolute power of
Pardons (which at that season seemed in deed general to all Churches
indifferently) being afterward taken away from all the rest, should be
annexed to the Sea of Rome only: nor should from thenceforth be attempted by
any other inferior Bishops or governors of Churches, unless special grant
thereof were obtained and had from the Majesty and fulness of the Sea
Apostolic first.

And these things for the more part began to be done in the same year of our
Lord, wherein Innocent the 3. did procure that this Council at Laterane: and
invested that See first with that notorious, prerogative of that fulness of
power: The first (...) of ^u^^^^ institu^^^
Which fullnes being now planted and established by Innocent 3. not long after
Succeeded in that place Innocent 4. and after him again Boniface the 8. in the
year. 1300. Who groundyng him self upon this fullnes (as him self confessed)
was the first that did institute the year of Iubilee amongst Christians which
should be every hundredth year. Extrauag. de P^nit. and Remi Ca. Antiquoru^.
Wherein he grants Pardon not only full and more full (as aforesaid) but
the most fullest Pardon of all Sins. But to whom was this largess proclaimed
at length? to them forsooth who should come and visit the most honorable
mother Church of the Prince of the Apostles Peter. And why I pray you was it
not in force to them that tarryed at home? since the Popes were so enriched with
such an ouerflowyng plenty of Indulgences, and that so great a journey could
not be ouerrunne of all persons ingenerall, without unmeasurable charge,
toylesome labor, and present peril of life? why then did he not power out
from out of that infinite heap of abundance to all men gratis, which he
received gratis? But the Porches and gates of the holy Apostles (says he) must
be visited. Go to, and what then afterward? when men were come once within
the walls of ye City, was there no charge of money? might men feade freely at
ye Popes table? must the Apostles be saluted with bare Pater noster without
penny? There must a Bull be desired at the length I suppose, or some scrow of
Release from the Popes Scriuanoes. What? must there be no pence here for
parchement? for wax? for yncke bestowed upon these Romish Rauenours? No, for
all offices in Rome are frequented gratis for sooth. What remains? I will
conclude Osorius. After that a man is come once to these holy Pardons by
infinite and great charges, through so many dangers, labors, watchynges,
fastings, co^fessions, penau^ces, bribes, rewards: Finally when as nothing
almost is attained in all that your Church without some present pay, or
special covenant: with what face, or with what credit do ye think to
persuade us, that there were never any markettes and portesales of Pardons
procured in your Churches, which this holy mother Church did not prohibit and
abhor with all their hearts worse then pestilent botches?

Now say you to this? whereas Clement the 6. which abridge the Iubilee from the
hundredth year to the fiftyth in the year 1348. Out of the Greuau^ces of
Germany.
Whereas Gregory the 11. reduced the Iubilee to the 33. year. Moreover whereas
Paul 2. and Sixtus the 4. not contented with these bounds, streighted the
Iubilee to the 25. year, in the year. 1475. what think you was the cause
hereof Osorius, except it were that holy hunger of gold, where the belly of
that holy mother thinks every mynute her throat cut without present food?
After, these Succeeded Alexander 6. in the year. 1500. Who scattered his
Jubilees into far Cou^treyes, Out of Polydore Virgill.
far of from the Church of Rome. That is to say, wheresoever any money would
be given, there were plenary Pardons granted as witnesses Polidor. Virgil.

To speak nothing in the mean space of Leo the 10. who devising upon a like
shift of descant, to make sweepestake for money: nor being able to abide the
full end of the Iubilee: with a new slipper devise, gave for present pence the
same grace in all respects as effectual before the end of the year of
Iubilee, as was accustomed to be granted to pilgrims that wonted to visit
the Church of S. Peter at Rome: and for this purpose sent his Proctours through
all Nations, erectyng up coffers in every Church openly, as it were bowthes
for their Receipt, which was done in the year. 1515. And yet Osorius does deny
that ever any such sales and markettes were made of such marchaundise of the
Roman Church, either known to the Pope, or allowed by him.

Now I would desire thee gentle Reader to think upon this with me. Whereas in
disposing these Pardons, the Popes use not a like proportion toward all
persons: whereof to some grau^ts are more large: to some more cutted and short:
whereas to some persons full Remission is given: to some everlasting, and to
others a third endeale of their Sins forgiven: to some xij. thousand years,
to others viij. thousand years, to many vij. years, or xij. years are
released out of Purgatory: upon what grew this inequabilitie and parcialitie of
dispensation, if there were no stakes laid down for the game? whereby it came
to pass, that the best purse escaped the greatest curse, and the more man
would give, the more the Pope would relieve, even to the full fullnes: but he
that sowed thin, his Pardon should be scarce worth a pyane. I purpose not to
rippe up the remembrance of these Relics by examples, which are past
noumber. I will tell you of one in our own Realm of England in a Town called
Boston, The pardons of Boston.
because I was borne nigh thereabout. I can speak somewhat the better thereof,
I have the Bulls of the same remaining yet with me, both of the great, and the
less Pardon. which they purchased of the Pope for the safety of their
shipping, and solue the same again afterward to others, to their great
profit and advantage. I am not very inquisitiue to learn what the Sum
amounted unto of that monstrous markett: only this one thing would I have
Osorius to be thoroughly persuaded, that if he be of that mind yet, that those
Bulls are obtained gratis without money, and begged only of the Sea of Rome:
I have president sufficient in my custodye, wherewith I cann convince him of
vanitye, and folly.

There are not many years sithe^ce the Surges of the swelling Seas surrounded
all the low country of Flaunders, A History of Flaunders.
which ministered a lamentable spectackle to the whole nation to behold: By and
by flew abroad Bulls of the highest and most liberali fullness. The case it
self moved all men to pity very much, and amongst the rest the favor and
authority of the Pope Adrian being a Germayne borne, during whose Popedom this
pittyfull case befell: Legates were sent abroad, who taking view of all places
and breaches, were able to make a true report of the wreckes that needed
relief, and what the charge thereof would amount unto. The mass of money that
was levied by the means of those Bulls, as was unmeasureable, so where it
vanished away could not be known: yea but it was known to well: the poor
country bare the name, but others carried away the game, and no penny thereof
employed to ye use for the which the foresaid collection was pretended. Many
such pageantes have been played by the Bishops of Rome. But Mystres money made
up always the peryode of the play. Let us call to remembrance the ages of
our ancestors which were but a whiles sithence, and note well the Acts and
Records of the same within these few years: for what is he so blockish, who
but meanly acquaynted with the late Chronographers can not easily perceive
those practizes? whenas he shall read of so many bloody battles, so many
preparatio^s for ye recovery of the holy Land, shall hear of so many redd
Crosses beautifully blazed and embrodered with the Popes trypie Crown, and
with a skarlett Box, whenas he shall perceive the perpetual prating of
Proctours, and Friar beggars: which had skill to claw the poor clownes for
their croomes voasting much, promising infinite, performing nothing: Whereunto
were added sweet names, and titles of Renown. Now must there be a leauy
raised against the Turk: by and by the Pope is in great hassard, by force of
the enemy: then comes there a Iubilee every hundred year first, not long after
an other Iubilee every fifteth year: the last every xxv. year: that so the
return being more speedy might also be more needy, and call for more relief.
Within a whiles after the Church of Saint Peter must be built upon the hill
called Vaticanus mons in Rome. Then began Saint James of Compostella in Spain
to wax hu^gry: sometime the holy Ghost in Rome was driven to extreme beggary:
So also the world went hard a board with the poor Mounckes of Mount Sinay:
Then was compositio^ offered for a Restitutio^ to be made of loan money, or a
Justification of goods evil gotten: And so to cease here, what were all these
but open Marketts? deny this to be true Osorius if you can. If you cann not
deny it, with what face shame you to make warrant, that no portesales have
been made of holy Relics at any time in your holy mother Church? But the
matter goes well, peradventure these fellows are to much ashamed of their
powlyng pranckes, The Papists flee to denyals.
and because they can render no reasonable excuse for their bribery, and
pilladge: they believe that they shall be able to stop men's mouths with
dissimulations and lies. And I doubt not but it will shortly come to pass,
that they will as stiffely deny hereafter, that they did ever worship those
holy mysteries and signs of the body and blood of Christ in the holy
Sacrament, in steed of the very natural body and blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ. And so let this suffice for Pardons.

Osori page 196.
OF Images what shall I say? sithence hereof has been spoken sufficiently
enough already: and since he also alleges no new matter but old and bare
names only of Nazianzene, Basile, Jerome, and Ambrose: neither vouching any
places of ye Authors in the mean space, nor citing any example at all out of
any their writings. Go to, and what is it that these, Nazianzene, Basile, and
other Doctors do say at the lenght? For sooth even this they do say. They do
extol and magnifye with all the ornaments of Eloquence such holy Saints
and godly Martyrs, to whom was given this high honor and glory to persist
stoughtely in the face of the Enemy, for the testimony of Christ, and to wash
their garments in the blood of the Lamb, their vnua^quishable constancy and
heavenly fortitude of courage: their names, acts, and Monumentes they do
advance very studiously and religiously, they pray all night before their
Tombs: and exhort other godly congregations to read over their Acts and
Monumentes, and to celebrate their memorialles: Where is all this Osorius? and
from whence fetch ye this ware? Seek for it good Readers, and let it not be
tedious unto you to peruse the volumes of the Doctors over and over. And here
by the way especially, let Haddon be ashamed which has so whollye addicted
himself to the perusing of Accursianes writings, that he could spare
himself no vacant time to read the Books of these Doctors.

But to pass over these trifles: let us consider the Argument of Osorius. The
ancient Fathers do honorably set forth, extol and magnifye the holy
Martyrs that suffered death for Christ's cause. I do know this. I do know (I
say) that the books of the holy Fathers are full of such commendations and
praises of godly men. So does Basile describe famouslye the virtues of Saint
Iulitta, Gordius, Barlaa, Mamantes and forty Martyrs more: Nazianzene does
highly commend Marcus Arethusius, and Cyprian: Chrysostom prayseth his Babyla:
Ambrose also is full of the like commendations, so do many others extol and
magnify above ye skies such as they accou^pt prayseworthy. But what is all this
to ye purpose? who ever practiced to defraude any godly Martyr, one title so
much, of his worthy commendation? Neither does our discourse now concern
Saynctes or Martyrs, It is one thing to praise Martyrs, and an other thing to
worship Images.
but Pictures and Images. Let the holy Martyrs have their co^digne praises:
Let the Fathers be abundantly and plentifully eloquent in their comme^datory
Declamations: Yet did all that garnyshing and magnifiyng of Saynctes and
Martyrs virtues and constancy tend to none other end, then to express unto us
a certain lively president, thereby to imitate their patience, and to practice
their integrity of life: and not with crootching and kneeling to worshipp them.
Neither was that ancient learned age ever so superstitious and bussardly
blind as to adore and make intercession to men in stead of the Lord their God:
But would glorify their God rather in his Saints. And for this cause do I
think were ancient Monumentes erected, Temples builded, wherein the Christian
people might hear the Acts and virtues of those holy Martyrs, to be taught
to imitate their example, not because the Martyrs that were dead should be
worshipped.

Afterward some Portraictes were added perhapps wherein the conflictes and
intolerable torments of these valiant Martyrs were curiously painted: as may
appear in Gregorye Nicenus in his commendatory treatise of Theodorus the
Martyr, The Oration of Gregory Nissenus in the praise of Theodorus Martyr.
which labor peradventure was not altogether fruitless according to the
capacity of that age: that so by the beholding of the History, and noting the
manner of their agonies and passions, others might be the more encouraged to
endure the like, as occasion should be ministered. But that any Pictures and
Images of dead bodies were seen erected in the Churches of Christians to be
worshipped in those days, unto the which the Christian people might be so
affyed, as to celebrate the dead portraict of dead bodies with more then
profane Religiousnesse, to wit with prayers, with owches and brooches, with
sacrifices, with vows, with supplications, with Pilgrimages, with temples,
with Altars, with Capers, with hollidayes, with fasting days, with
excommunications and cursinges, with intercession, with invocation, with
affyaunce, and hope of assistaunce in the stead of their Christ, or should
worship Christ in those Images, or by those Images: Certes no man can make
this justifiable, by Basile, Gregory, or Nazianzene, or any other writer of the
ancient primitive Church. No, they are altogether new devises of this later
age, or plain forgeries rather, as has been declared sufficiently enough
before.

But take an argument now stronger then Hercules clubbe, wherewith at one chopp
he will cut of the heads of all those Image breakers ingenerall, so strongly
compact and clowted together with so singular a dexterity, that if all the
Deuines in the world else hold their peace, Images are made so desensible with
this one argument, as shall be able to endure all the force and counterbuffes of
heretics. For upon this kind of Similitude he frames his argument.

If the dumme Pictures of the Cross and of Saints, Osorius Argument page 197.
which did put men in mind of the things whereof they were representations, were
so highly reverenced of the ancient Christians: it was much more convenient
that the lively Images of Christ should be worshipped.

But holy men are by the workemanshippe of the holy Ghost, fashioned to the
lively and express Images of Christ.

Ergo, It remains that we give reverence and worship unto Pictures as to the
lively Images of Christ.

I do hear your Argument Osorius, and I do answer thereunto. And first
even to this whether any dumme Images and portraictes at all were ever erected
in the ancient Christian Temples, may be with more reason doughted of us, then
Justified by you. And yet to admit you this much, that such Signs were not
altogether unknown to the ancient Fathers: yet for as much as ye portraicts
(being not in Temples) did serve only to feed the eyes, and minister occasion
of some remembrance, and calling to mind the doings of the Martyrs: will
your Logic therefore argue an adoryng upon this memorial? and establish a
worshyppyng of dead stocks which ought only to be given to God alone?

As for example. Admit that some Apelles would in Tables describe unto you,
Osorius ill-fauoured Argument derived from Resemblaunce to worshipping.
the Passion of Christ after a most exquisite and lively manner. What? would you
prostrate your self on the ground, and with cappe and knee worship the Table?
would you bequeath your prayer unto it, and honor it as reverently as you
would Christ? To what purpose then serves that which you sing in your Church.
All honor and glory be given to God alone: if you can be contented to turn
that forthwith into a God, whatsoever is object to the view for a memorial
only, and to transfer the honor and worship that is due only unto God,
to painted puppetts and balde blocks? But now as concerning the lively Images
of Christ, as we do not deny that a certain lively resemblaunce of Christ
does after a sort shine in them, whom the spirit of Christ has truly
sanctified, so do we neither defraude them of their due commendation and
praise: for that were a point of singular impiety, either to conceive
slenderly and lightly, or to speak reprochefully of the notable acts of them,
whom God the Father does honor and sanctify: namely, since the very Scriptures
are aboundauntly stored with plentyfull examples, whereby we be admonished of
our duty that we owe to Gods holy ones. But it is one thing to reverence and
esteem well of Gods Saints: and an other thing to make Invocation to the
dead, and to part stakes of honor betwixt God and his Saints.

Who be called Saints.
Saints are called Saints, and the Temples of the holy Ghost in S. Paul,
not only such as did shedd their blood for Christ's sake, but all others also
that in this life live here unto Christ sanctified thorough Faith. Such a
Temple of the holy Ghost was Paul him self, and the rest of ye Apostles with
him: who being after a sort fashioned to the likeness of Christ, by the
workemanshyp of the holy Ghost; did bear about them a certain proportionable
resemblaunce of his Image. And yet the same Paul and Barnabas were said both
to rende their garments, Saints not to be worshypped.
least they should seem to admit them selves to be honored as Gods. Acts.
14. We hear the same both spoken and performed by the Angel of Christ in the
Revelation. Apocal. 22.
Worship God (says he) I am thy fellow Servant. Go to now, and are you of
this opinion, that honor and worship is to be given to the dead bodies of
them, who being alive would not suffer them selves to be worshypped? But of
Saints and their Images enough at this present: namely since before is spoken
plentyfully enough and so much, as will suffice (though not Osorius) yet any
other indifferent Reader I trust.

Popish Purgatory.
Of Purgatory the Popes Kater.
GOod luck a Gods name to our holy Father the Pope and Osorius their kitchynes:
we are come at the length unto Purgatory that is to say, to the kingdom of the
Pope, and the Region of darkness of this world. A goodly Territory forsooth
meet surely for such an Emperor, according to the old Proverb a Scabbed Jade
good enough for a scalde Squier. About which damnable devise, being the most
foolish Babble that ever was heard of, and the most fybblefable yt ever could
be imagined, this raungyng Rhetorician besturreth his slumpes so earnestly, and
stretches out his throat so fervently, as if the matter were of wonderful
emportaunce.

A man would take him to be some notorious Hercules fightyng as it were for
life and death, in defense of his Country, he so chaufeth and moyleth in
sturryng the coals in princkyng up the glory of this whotthouse. And no
marvel. For the man as he is not altogether blind, nor unprovided of forecast,
does very deeply and wisely consider of the matter as it is: That all the
kytchynes of the Catholics are kept in a good lyking with the coals of this
Purgatory fire: Why the Papists do strive so earnestly for Purgatory.
and that upon this foundation is builded the whole Majesty of the Romish
Monarchy, and withal that this is the head corner stone and chief coin of
their doctrine. For upon this groundeworke stand all the pillars and buildings
of their Church to wit, Merits, Satisfactions, Councels, Perfections and
absolute Righteousness in the sight of God. Finally all the Ceremonies in their
Churches: Watchynges, Soul Masses, Trentalles, Offringes for the dead,
Pilgrimages: Pardons: Works of Supererogation: Brotherhoodes, Memorialles:
Diriges, Processions, Holy water, Consecratyng of Churcheyardes, and such like
gaynfull markettes: all which do come altogether to utter ruin, if Purgatory
decay once: but if Purgatory hold fast, then are they all of good footing. And
hereof proceeds that stiff and stought sta^dyng with such an unappeasable
contention and brawlyng about the mainteynaunce of Purgatory, that they will
seem rather to let slipp heaven out of their hearts, then let Purgatory depart
from their kytchines.

But there was never man behaved him self more Apishly about this peevish and
peltyng Purgatory, then this our doltishe and most senseless cou^terfaite of
all the rest: who in this his discourse of Purgatory is so whott in words,
Osorius great stir about Purgatory.
and sweateth so lustely, that a man would swear he were but newly run out
of the very scaldyng house of Purgatory it self: Again in Arguments and
Reasons so cold, that no man is able to endure from laughyng to see in so great
a sweat, his teeth nevertheless chatteryng in his head for very cold. For this
practice is (if it may please the Poets) to persuade us with help of his
Rhetoric, yt there is a certain Purgatory fire and flames, I know not what,
not that everlasting fire of hell, but beyond all measure intollerably burning
and horribly scorchyng, prepared for sinners departed out of this life: through
which flames seely wretched souls, after that they have been miserably
afflicted in long and grievous torments, and have thereby thoroughly satisfied
the Judgment and wrath of God, do atteyne at length to be translated from
thence into Paradise. The purpose and full meaning of all which sweet
persuasion tends to this end at ye last: That we may be brought in belief,
that Christ has not yet thoroughly pacified the Judgment and wrath of God his
Father, and that our Sins are not sufficiently cleansed, nor that as yet we
have obtained full satisfaction by the blood of Jesus Christ: But yt there is an
other supply to be made, which because the most loving and sweet Savior could
not accomplish to the full, in redeemyng the Sins of the world, the same must
now be botched up with our own Torments and Tortures in a certain other
place. And this place yt Catholic gosseppes have Christened by the name of
Purgatory: The popes Pnrgatory Mores folly
surely I would rather have called it Vtopia Mori or rather Dame folly it
self, which our late blessed Deuines have lighted upon by chance a great
deal more luckely then Christ or any his Apostles, who never heard of any such
thing before: not much unlike to ye Spanish Trauailers, who have not long
sithence escryed certain new Islands, which they have annexed to their
kingdom, and called them by the name of Noua Hispania. Even so this victorious
and Triumphaunt Senate and State of Rome, being not satisfied with the whole
Empire of one world (whereouer they were Lords and Rulers already) must needs
annexe unto their dominion this new found Vtopia (as it were a certain new
world under the earth emo^gest the Antipodes) where the Pope may be Emperor
not only over the quick, The new Ila^d of Purgatory newly found by the
Deuines.
bnt rule the roast over the dead also.

In which discourse notwithstanding I am forced to utter a marvelous mayme that
I find in Osorius, as I do many pu^ples in him besides. For whereas many
other before him have bestowed much cost and travail in the setting down of a
platefourme of this Purgatory: Whereas also they do all confess it to be such
a place, as what kind of thing this Vtopia is nevertheless, where it
stands, or how wide it outstretcheth it self, no man has hitherto described
plainly enough to be conceived: namely, whether it be an Island enuyroned round
about with water? or an Island almost enuyroned with water? or a firm and main
Land? whether it stretch to the West, or bend to the East? whether it be
habitable under the whotte clymate, or under the Cold? What day Purgatory was
made.
at what instant of time it was hatched at the first? when? or of whom it was
created? by God? or by the Pope? For if all the works of God were finished,
and at an end the sixth day, and himself rested the seventh day, it must needs
follow of necessitye, That Purgatory must either be contryued within these six
days work, or else not to be any work of God at all. Besides this also they
can not agree about the scytuation thereof, as in what part of the world this
Region may stand? whether in the round firmament of the heaven? right over our
heads? or in the concauity, or some bottomless gulf of ye earth? or near unto
hell in the length thereof? or above hell in the height thereof? or leaning
toward hell in the compass thereof? For before Beda, and Thomas Aquinas, was no
certenty to be hadd, whether this doungeon should be placed under the earth,
above the earth, or in the Air. Gregory said, Gregory.
that souls were purged in whott skalding Lakes, in Ice, and in Darkness.
Alcuinus did apporcion Purgatory in the Air,: Alcuinus.
And in Beda we read that Purgatory was revealed in a dream to be under the
earth, and very near unto hell: the creditt of which opinion I see not how it
can be of any force: for if they do prick out a place for this purging
plattforme about the Center of the earth: it is credible enough that that one
portion of the earth is to narrow, and to little to hold all the bodies that
are dead since the beginning of the world, sithence this whole outstretched
compass of the earth it self is skarse great enough to receive such an
infinite multitude, At what time the flame of Purgatory was kyndled at the
first.
as I suppose.

In the mean space to pass over many ambiguities and doughtes, as doughting
thereof and hard of conceiving, and yet willing to learn when this fire began
to be on flame first, whether before the law or in the time of the law? or
else in the time of grace? how will you resolve me herein good Catholic Sir,
but that ye shall speak always against your self? If in the time of Nature
or in the old law? how comes it to pass then, that whereas so often mention
is made of Heaven and Hell amongst the Patriarchs and Prophettes, no syllable
so much is to be found in all that old Testament of Purgatory? How comes it
to pass that their hearts were never terrified with the remembrance of any
such place? Again how illfauouredlye will this matter seem to have been
handled, that such a skalding Furnace should be established by our Divines,
before any Sacramental confession, any Masses, or any Romish Bulls were
created which might serve at a Pinch, or change those everlasting pains into
temporal punishments? for that kind of temporal Censure is by your
Catholic Dyuynes made peculiar and appropried to the Sacrament of penance.
But if the fruit of Christ's passion did redound as well to the old ancient
Patriarchs, and Prophettes, as it does unto us, whereby they might be
delivered from everlasting torments: and on the contrary part if there be no
remedy else provided as yet against those temporal pains, but only the Popes
Bulls, surely it had been heartily to have been wished for, that whiles our
first Father Adam and other sinners of that first age, and long sithence lived
upon the earth, the same most holy Father Pope Boniface the 8. had lived also
together with them, who out of the huge heaps of his Pardons might have
released unto them 8. thousand years, out of these horrible flames of
Purgatory fire: whereby it seems not agreeable to reason, that there was any
Purgatory as then, when as yet no Remedy was provided for the mitigation and
quallification of those cruel torments.

It Remains therefore, that either there is no Purgatory fire after this
life: or that we must needs confess that it was never kindled before the
Deuines of this Catholic generation did blow the coals first in these latter
days. All which to be far from all possibility of truth many probable
reasons do offer matter of proof. First when as God rested from all his works
the seventh day, It follows that this new forged work of Purgatory was never
begone by God after that seventh day, but made and devised in the Popes
Shop. Whether God be author of Purgatory or the Pope.
There is besides also an other matter as full of absurdity as this is. For if
God were the author of this skalding house of Purgatory: and if it have
continued even from the first foundation of the Creation: it is marvel how
after so long preaching of the gospel of grace, it could be found now first by
these Deuines, being so long before hid from so many great Prophettes of God,
so many Patriarchs, Kings, Judges, Apostles and Evangelists: or if the
knowledge thereof were kept from them, because there was no use of any such
purging, or necessity of satisfiyng by Fire, before the faith of the Gospel
received, then was the case of the Christians much more miserable then of the
Jews and circumcised people: which is abominable to be spoken with tongue, or
to be imagined in thought.

Many other like questions might be moved on this wise concerning the kingdom
of Purgatory: Other questions of Purgatory.
whether it be a Kingdom of darcknesse? whether it lie in the compass of the
Popes Jurisdiction? and by what title it is subject to his Judicial
consistory? whether it be a material place, or a spiritual place? whether it
be attended upon with Devils or Angels? whether the fire of hell, and the fire
of Purgatory be all one? or whether the place be all one, as seems to Thomas
Aquinas? Thomas Aquinas opinion of Purgatory.
what passable way there is for the efficacy of the Pardons and Prayers to
descend to the souls that are there? or by what messengers it is carried
thither? Moreover considering those Torments are not said to be eternal, but
transitory, and withal the Releases of punishments determinable by certain
numbers and spaces of days, months and years (as the Popish Bulls do
assure us) what measure or space of time may be apportioned there, where the
Son has no course? where the Stars have no rising nor going down, which
do measure the proportions and distinctions of times. These and such like
questions as might be somewhat tedious to the Reader, that were somewhat
wavering in faith, so had they need have been resolved every one in order by
Osorius, first, if he would have uttered his skill handsomely herein, and as
the matter it self required. But he turmoyles himself now to give some color
to his Purgatory, by force of the scriptures, whereof he never has read one
title so much in the whole Scriptures, nor cann make any evident Demonstration
what manner of place it should be, or where it should be. But it is well yet
Osorius, for so much as after so long skolding, after so much brabling with
Rhetorical terms, we shall hear somewhat at the last out of the Scriptures,
yea vouched by Luther himself, that shall be able to maintain the credit of
Purgatory: And this is the point of an old beaten and expert Soldier in deed,
Luther is vouched to defend Purgatory.
not only to be able by his own prowess to repulse the Enemy at the push of
the Pyke, but also to recover his Enemies Pyke out of his hands, and with the
same to thrust him through, and kill him: which is happened to Luther now in
this Combat. Go to then. And what is it at the last that Luther speaks?

Osor. page 197.
But Luther did say, and that not once only, and affirmed also that there was
a Purgatory: and that he did not only conceive so, judge so, believe so, but
knew it to be true of a very certenty. Where find you this? and by what reason
do ye prove this? By the place of Matthew which speaks of the sin that
shall not be forgeuen in this world, nor in the world to come: whereby is to be
noted that in the world to come God has gently reserved a place for many to
hope upon pardon. Moreover by the place of Machabees treating of the offerings
that Judas made for the sins of the dead. etc. Where these sentences are to
be found in Luther, does not our Osorius show us place nor book: But this must
suffice us, for Osorius can not lie. Howbeit in mine opinion he seems to have
pyked this out of Roffensis, Roffensis against Luther in praefatione veritatis.
or out of the skrappes of some other, rather then out of Luthers books,
against the which he will more willingly make a whole volume of Inuectiues,
then peruse over any of them himself. For so does Roffensis report of Luther
in the very same words almost, that Osorius does rehearse here. You do say
(says Roffensis) in the exposition of the 37. Arti. that ye believe there is a
Purgatory, and that you advise and persuade others to believe so likewise. But
much more openly amongst ye conclusions, In the 15. conclusion. Luther in the
15 Conclus.
I am (say you) well assured that there is a Purgatory. Thus much Roffensis.
And what will this brawler frame hereof at the length? Ergo, Luther does make
on our side for Purgatory. So also did Luther being once a Mouncke, make for
Moncks. So did August. say yt he wrate as one gladd to learn, and yet being an
old man recanted many things, that he wrate when he was a young man. So also
Pope Pius ye 2. did not write the same being Pope, which being a young man he
published before of the council of Basile. And who ever of the most famous and
learned men have so circumspectly and advisedly framed themselves to write, in
whom age, use, or experience has not supplied oftentimes somewhat afterward,
whereof their youth had no perseueraunce? And therefore it mattereth not so
much, what a man writes at any time, but it must be considered of what
judgment he is, and how he does persist and continue therein. Wellaway surely
may Purgatory sing, if it have no better Proctor to uphold it, then Luther.

But let us see how Osorius goes foreward: the cause why Osorius does cite
Luther, is not because he gives any great creditte to his testimony, but
because he may by this occasion bring his name the sooner into obloquye: and
withal may make Haddon affrayed to deal any further in Luthers defense, by
this too forked argument or subtle Sophisme so craftily framed of all parts,
Osor. page 198. Osor. subtle Sophisme.
that whether part so ever Haddon shall confess, he shall be overthrown in his
own Trippe. For if there be no Purgatory (says he) Luther does lie: if he do
lie, he was not sent from God, and Haddon also does lie, that doh affirm him
to be sent from God. And here forsooth as though the spurs were wonn, Osorius
begins forthwt to pranck up his Tryumphant pageant. Giving unto Haddon free
choice to take which part him lists. As though a man might not as easily
overthrow this challenger with his own collers here, if it might be lawful in
matter of Diuinitye, to dally with such quirkes and Sophistical shifts, To
wit, if there be not a Purgatory, Osorius does lie: if he be a liar, Ergo he
is not sent from God: but from the Devil the father of lies. Which
counterbuffe is so much the more probably applyable against Osorius, then
against Luther, by how much he persisteth more obstinately in the maintenance
of that filthy quauemyre of Purgatory, For as much as although Luther did err
somewhat in that matter at the first yet afterward knowing ye truth, did
reduce himself to a more sound judgment: so that now he neither makes for
the Papists in affirming Purgatory, neither by that his former untruth and
error, sins against God at all. Therefore as touching his forked and double
horned argument: wherein the first part of Osorius his Position. If there be no
Purgatory Luther does lie: If Osorius here do understand of a lie Formaliter,
Luther does not lie, but Osorius does lie: But if Luther be adjudged according
to that, which he once thought, and taught once, why should he be more
reproched with a lie, in affirming Purgatory? then commended in the truth, in
denying Purgatory afterward? Moreover, if a lie be such a kind of thing, Ex
Thoma. secunda. secundu^ did. quest. 110. cap. 1.
(as you do affirm in your other Position) wh does separate us from God,
surely he is to be accoumpted a liar, not that reuoketh the error which he
maintained before, but he that still persisteth obstinately in his overthwart
opinion, manifestly against the truth.

But ye Scholemen that in their Schools dispute somewhat more subtly of the
nature of a lie, do join together to the full proportion or making of a lie,
the will also of him that does make the lie, (to speak the schole terms)
with the part of the false surmise. In the one whereof they ground the matter
or substance, in the other, the form or qualitye: Therefore for as much as
there is no sin, but that which is voluntary (if we will speak after the
proprietye of speech) he that in teaching or disputing, does mainteyne a
falshoode, thinking that he does maintain a truth: Di^ers kinds of lies.
he is to be said that he erreth, and is deceived in opinion, but does not make
a lie properly, but per accidens, (as the school men speak) and materialiter.
And therefore touching the one horn of your sophisme. If there be not a
Purgatory: Luther does lie. If you mean it formaliter as I said. it is untrue
and a devise of Osorius. Now remains the other horn, whereof we must be well
advised how we do answer it. If he did lie (say you) Ergo, He was not sent
from God. If this be true, that never any man was sent from God, that did make
any kind of lie at any time: Let Osorius look well to the matter, how he may
be able to crack me these two nuttes that I will likewise give unto him, as
evidently in each respect against him. If Sara were not Abraham his sister, then
did Abraham lie: Abraham.
If Abraham did lie, then was he not sent from God. Yea further also, to add
hereunto an intent of deceauing. Here is yet an other matter. If Jacob were not
the first begotten son of Isaac by Rebecca his wife, Jacob.
both Jacob lied, and the Mother also. If the Myddwyues did not drown the
young sucklings of the Hebrews, Rebecca. The Midwiues of Egypt.
then did they make a lie unto Pharao. If king Saul gave unto David no
commandment by word of mouth commi^g to Achimelech, then did David make a
lie. 1. Kings. Chap. 21. If all these of whom I have spoken, Jacob. Rebecca,
the Middwiues, and David did lie. David.
Ergo, they were not sent from God. which if Osor. will not deny to be a most
arrogant untruth, what remains? but that this cruel Sauadge two horned
beast, together with Luther goare ye holy Patriarchs also with his horns, or
casting away his horns acquit Luther and the Patriarchs also both together.
Now I put Osorius to his choice to take which he will.

Howbeit I speak not this to acquit Luther clear from all spott of error.
Luther is not cleared from all error.
Notwithstanding it is not all one to hold an error, and to maintain a lie. It
is one thing to be unskillful and ignorant: and an other thing to revoke in
season, as soon as a man does know his error. The first whereof is a special
point of human infirmitye: the other a singular benefit of Gods mercy. Both
which we have seen to have chanced even in the most holy ones of all. We
read of the most holy messenger and forerunner of the Lord, speaking on this
wise: And I (says he) knew him not. John. 1.
Nevertheless in an other place, we hear the same speaking on this wise.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. And what
marvel was it, if Luther were ignorant in some things a whiles, which were
discovered unto him afterward? And where has ever been so quicksighted a
Spinx that was able to see all things at once? which prerogative the
Barnardines dare not give unto Barnard himself.

But Osorius will not leave of his handfast: Osor. page 198.
And would gladly know (as he says) Whether sentence of Luther Haddon will
determine upon to be true, seeing Luther is Author of both. Of the first,
wherein he affirms a Purgatory to be? or the last, wherein he denies the
same thing again? That I may pass over in the mean space whose Cartloades
full of Tauntes, Mockes, and Mountains of lies: which he vomiteth out in the
bosom of the good man most brutishly, even to the ridding of his gorge almost:
I will answer to the matter and the reproachful Taunt it self briefly
without Tauntes. As concerning the very truth, Truth is always one.
and natural substance of Doctrine, howsoever men's opinions, and Judgments
be carried hither and thither in wavering vncerteynty, yet truth is never
unlike it self, but remains always one, and the same also unchangeable:
which suffers not it self to be toste to and fro, after the whirling
variablenes of men's imaginations: but stands always sound, and unshaken,
builded upon the vnpenetrable Rock of the Scriptures of God. Now if Luthers
rule be agreably apporcioned according to the infallible squarier of that holy
sta^dard, whether it be first, or whether it be last: why should it not be
worthily embraced? not because it is the last, but because it is the truest. On
the other side: if in all his doctrine be any assertion that deserves to be
reprehended, as repugnau^t or varying from the true touchestone of Christian
profession, there be extant the holy Scriptures of God manifest and laid open:
there be ancient ordinances of the Primitive Church: There be approved
Testimonies of learned men: Error ought to be refuted by Scripture and
doctrine, and not with tauntey and reproaches.
There be grounds and principles of doctrine, wherewith ye may lawfully
convince him: Yet orderly notwithstanding, and courteously: that the Readers
may find you to be a learned Divine, or skillful Logician, not a railing
Slaunderer, and fryuolous brabbler. Now to what purpose serves so much cursed
railing, no less unseasonable, then unreasonable? so many Tauntes? so many
slanders? so many subtiltyes? and so many bitter skoffes? what needed you so
besides all order, and without all cause, to whirle your self into such
outrages? exclamations? and outcryes? and so often to double, and redouble the^?
whereunto you have so tied your self by common custom, that if you should not
utter your old choler, you would surely burst your gall.

Faults laid Luthers charge.
Go to: and what kind of incestuous Marriage at the length is it (I beseech
you for the love ye bear to that smoathe shaueling Uirginitye of yours
(worshippfull Sir) that ye obbrayd against Luther? what kind of procurement of
Citizens to commit treason? what kind of war speak you of leuyed against
Chastitye, and sacred holiness? where were these tumultes and vproares sturred
up? where is this state of Churches rent a sunder? where is destruction? where
be these discipatio^s, burnings, and fierings of holy Relics? Or what
frantique speeches be these? Finally, what kind of Battle and wars are
promised against heaven it self? against the earth and Seas of Neptune? and
against the faith of the Church with most abominable attemptes? And why was
not this added against Purgatory also? that so ye Rhethoricall amplification
might have flowen above the Weathercock? I wis the defense of this skalding
house hadd waxed very cold I suppose, unless these florishings hadd been
choppt in amongst, to increase the vehemence of the speech, and extol the
Majesty of his Rhetoric. But how much more beseemed you Osorius (since you
were so minded to uphold and defend the creditt of Purgatory with some
Majesty) to have uttered your skill by way of Argument rather, Osor.
mainteineth his cause with slau^ders nor with Arguments.
then by skolding and slaundering? and so Justified your cause good with
reasons, not with accusation? But now you show your self in railing not half
so courageous and foreward, as you bewray your dastardly cowardice and
fearefulnes in disputing. You cite the names of Augustine, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, and Dionisius once or twice, and those you name only: but nether
vouch any sentence of these Doctors: nor show any Testimony of their books,
nor yet compare any authorityes together. Osori. page 199.
And although I need not so to do (say you) yet because Luther does deny that
Purgatory can be veryfied by any testimony of Scripture, you will convince his
falsehood herein by force of your Diuinitye. Luther does deny that Purgatory can
be proved by the scriptures in the declaration of his 37. Articl. Mar. 9.


At the length you are tumbled down to the very closetts of Scripture,
alleging out of Scripture it self (besides the common places yt have been
usually set out by others) certain new testimonies culled out by a certien new
ingenious policy: Whereof the first shall be out of that place in Mark the 9.
Chap. In the which when the Lord hadd made mention first of those, Osori. page
200.
whose worm should not dye in that fiery Lake, nor where the fire should be
never putt out, he annexed imediately, for every man shall be Salted with fire,
and every sacrifice shall be seasoned with Salt. Surely he that can discern
one spark so much of this Purgatory fire in these words, hadd need to be
quicker of sight then ever Lynceus was. Lynceus was a man that could every a
ship at the Sea xxx. mile of.
But you wonder peradue^nture (gentle Reader) whereunto this compass of
Osorius does tend? Note therefore diligently. For in this place two points are
specially to be observed: First: where you hear the Worm and the Fire spoken
of which does not dye, which do express unto us the everlasting torments of
Hellfire, what do you conceive by this worm that does not dye, and this fire
which never cease to be on flame, but yt there is a certain Worm that never
dies? and a certain fire that is never extinguished: Otherwise the Lord would
never have used these words in Esaias: The Women that dies not, and
vnque^chable fire, but by alluding to some other worm, which does dye, and
some fire that is put out. Lo here you have the very groundwork of Purgatory.
O notable strange divinity doubtless, never heard of before hitherto amongst
all the deuines of the world.

The other is, where you hear mention of Salt: for this is an vnauoydeable
reason to establish Purgatory by. Osorius reason of Salt, very fresh and
unsavory. Osorius page 200.
For as in the old law no Sacrifice was performed without Salt, even so is it
not convenient, that men's souls should come within the kingdom of heaven but
by purging all the faith of their sins first with Salt, and fire, and with due
punishments, which because can not be performed in this life, that which
wants must of necessity be supplied in an other life. For whereas ye
Lutherans do teach yt sin is by ye singular cleme^cy and mercy of Christ
s^ayne and extinct in them, which are endued with a lively and effectual faith
in Christ: albeit this saying is true after a certain sort: The words of
Osorius page 200.
yet this is not sufficient enough. And why so? Forsooth because cleanesse it
self obtained by the liberality of Christ, has certain degrees so what whom
the blood of Christ has purged, the same may be washed more clean, and ought
to receive increase of their cleanesse in Salt, and in the fire of Purgatory,
whereby the Sacrifice may be made more clean, and more acceptable in the sight
of God. Words of Blasphemy and v^^ncet for a Christian.
But as concerning those parts of Christ's clemency. We must defend them in
such wise, as not passing over the majesty of his righteousness unregarded,
to the pattern and likeness whereof our unrighteousness ought to be co^formed.
As that blessed heavenly Doctor Saynct Thomas does teach us: The crime being
inordinate (says he) is not reduced to the order and rule of Justice, but
through some punishment. For it is convenient that he which has with a
voluntary will followed his own appetites more then he ought, should against
his will suffer some punishment more then he would. Which Sin albeit be
released by Christ, yet is not the Sinner forgeuen therefore: But the trespass
being pardoned, there remains yet a punishment appointed for the purging of
the other dreggs of sins: So that it is necessary now that the Justice of God
be satisfied even to the uttermost farthing. And because this doctrine shall
not want a Patron: the matter is made manifest by the example of David to whom
albeit the offense of aduoutry was released, the punishment remained
notwithstanding to be executed upon his Son and the subjects of his kingdom.

I have in few words described the substance of Osorius judgment. It
remains, that we answer him in as few words. First, whereas he alleges
the text of the scripture touching the Worm gnawing the conscience, and that
unquenchable fire: we do confess the same to be true. Moreover that other also
which he does affirm touching the other torment which has an end in process
of time, over and besides that other endless horror, we do not gaynesay. But I
look for the knitting up of this knott. Purgatory is a witness of Gods
clemency and Justice also.
Ergo (says he) it appears manifestly that there is a Purgatory after this
life, that is (as himself does interpret it) a pledge or witness of Gods
clemencye and his justice withal. Of his justice, which does punish the
souls with the Worm and the Fire: of his Clemency which does make an end of
his punishment. An Answer to Osorius of the Justice and Clemencye of God.
I do answer, and confess that this Justice and Cleme^cy of God (whereof you
speak) have their place and time. But you have not yet proved, that the time
and place of executing this Justice, and Clemency, does belong to any Purgatory
under the ground: neither is it concluded by that your manner of arguing,
through any necessitye of consequence.

There is a Fire that shall torment in everlasting pains the Persecutors and
Enemies of Christ.

The reason of Osorius.
Ergo, There is also a Fire else where that may be putt out.

If this argument should be examined by the exact Rules of Logic, ye Logicians
would surely say that there is no form at all in your Consequence: howebeit in
respect of the material points, both propositions be true. For as it is
certain, and assured by the authority of the Scriptures, that the fire of
hell shall never be extinguished: so has this life also his fire and te^porall
pains, wherewith Gods elect are now and then tried and purged, both which we
do read in the history of the Rich man and Lazarus: Luke. 16.
whereof the one feeling no greeuaunces in this life, was thrown into the
Torments of Hell: The other contrariwise after many grievous storms, and
daily miseries of this life was received into the Bosom of everlasting joy. In
which Similitude every man may behold his own estate and condition. For such
as with barbarous cruelty, do outragiously rage against the Gospel of Christ,
and triumph in this world in careless security, shall taste of bitter wormwood
in an other world: on the contrary part, such as are afflicted with wretchedness
and purging calamities in this life, their passadge from hence is not to
Purgatory, but to glory.

But the troublous turmoyles and paynefull afflictions wherewith the godly are
overwhelmed in this life, are not sufficient after the opinion of Osorius: for
besides all these temporal miseries, punishments, and plagues, a certain
mean place yet is sought out, which they call by the name of Purgatory. Gods
Justice must needs be satisfied iu Purgatory.
Where grievous torments do abide for the clensing the remnaunt and dregs
of sin which do deserve vengeance through a certain unavoidable necessity
of justice. The chief reason of the Catholics, whereupon they ground their
Purgory.
And how so? Forsooth because the justice of God must needs be satisfied. And
because this satisfaction once purchased by the merits of Jesus Christ is not
so absolute and sound, but has certain degrees, as that it may be made more
absolute and perfect: therefore are our passions and afflictions required of
necessity, which if be not superadded and coupled together with the merits of
Christ, it can not by any other possible means be brought to pass, that the
crime which is inordinate may be reduced to the order of Justice. O sacred
Faith: O new tradition not procured out of Portingall, I trow, but coined eue^
in the very forgeshop of Purgatory it self. If Calvin or Luther were alive and
present (whose doctrine you affirm to have proceeded from the most detestable
devil of hell) and did hear this communication of yours, how lowdly, how
extremely, how forcibly, how vehemently, would they exclayme and cry out with
full mouth against you in this place? surely as fiercely as they might against
an open enemy of Christ. For what shall we say if this be not a notorious
reproach and blasphemy unto Christ? Many hundred years ago did S. Paul teach
that we were all made perfect in Christ Jesus: and your worship now like a fresh
vpstart Gospeller creepyng out of the crooked crowdes and ragged skrappes of
the Thomystes, dare take upon you to pyke out certain degrees, I know not what
in this most excellent clensing purchased by the great bou^ty and liberality of
Christ, which neither Paul, nor any one of all the Apostles could ever descry?
Go to, let us hear then I beseech you from out that Syluane Pulpet, what
steps be these of amplifieng this clensing and purifieng.

Without salt (say you) no sacrifice was accustomed to be offered in the old
Law. Therefore in this salt, and in this fire, that is to say, in the
punishment appointed for purging sins: all this amplification of purifieng
does consist, that so the sacrifice may be more pure and more holy.

I do hear it, and do answer to this most unsavory argument of Salt, An
Answer to the Argument of Osorius touching the Salt.
if he will vouchsafe first with all the seasonable Salt of his wisdom, to
declare what was signified by these Priestly sacrifices: and moreover what the
wisdom of God did mean to express by this Salt, and Fire: for it is not to
be doughted, but that under these carnal shadows lay hidden some more darcke
and covert mysteries: whether will he say that this mystery did represent ye
body of Christ? or our bodies? If he mean ye body of Christ, that was wasted
with the fire of Gods judgment, being seasoned and besprinckled with a
certain heavenly Salt of most sweet smelling savor: The Purgatory of
Osorius co^suted.
But this pain of fire and Salt can signify none other kind of Purgatory,
but that only Purgatory, that was finished and accomplished upon the Cross,
If he mean our bodies which are filthy by nature, but this cann in no wise be
true: for that the ceremonial law it self would not admit any unclean
flesh to be sacrificed. Furthermore whereas that Frye and Salt also of Gods
judgment did consume, not the spots and filth only of those Sacrifices, but
the holy substance of the Sacrifices also for the clensing of Sins: It
remains therefore that either there is no Purgatory after this life, that may
increase the degrees of purifiyng with Fire and Salt: or else that the
Sacrifices themselves, that is to say, the Souls of the faithful must of
necessity be swallowed up, and consumed wholly in this Purgatory. For not the
Bodies but the Souls be tormented there, I suppose.

Which way will our Portingale wend himself now? to the example of David?
Osor. page 200.
in whom although the condemnation of the trespass committed was forgeuen, yet
was he not clearly delivered from punishment notwithstanding. It is true:
David's punishment after pardon for his fault
but this Punishment (good Osorius) was exequuted upon him in this world, and
not reserved for an other world. How the^ can you square us out a new
plattforme of Purgatory myddway betwixt heaven and earth, for them that are
departed out of this life, by this example of David? Because a recompense must
be made (say you) for the trespass committed according to the dew and just
rule of Gods Justice. An Answer.
But this Justice of God being provoked to displeasure by infinite and
unmeasurable ways and means, cann not be duly recompensed without endless
punishment: or perhaps it will not be satisfied without his own vicar the
Pope, and his propiciatorye Masses? Not so: but he will exequute his punishment
upon us for our sins nothwithstanding. Osor. page 201.
And why so? because the sacrifice (say you) may be more pure, more holy, and
more acceptable unto God. May we be so bold by your patience Osorius to take a
taste, how this assertion of yours will agree with the rule of the Apostles
Doctrine? And first I would feign learn whether you think it stand more with
reason that we should believe you, or believe Saint Paul? If we shall credit S.
Paul. What answer then will you make to him that shall frame out of Saint
Paul an argument to overthrow the whole force and estimacion of your Purgatory
on this wise?

Fe. Christ needs no Purgatoriall Expiation.

Ri, Christ is our Righteousness, out of S. Paul.

So. Ergo. Our Righteousness needs not any Purgatoriall Expiation.

Be well advised now Osorius? and consult with that your companion of Angren
thoroughly. If you do not know that Christ is our righteousness: let Paul teach
you: but if you confess him to be so: 1. Cor. 1.
what degrees and increasings of purifying and clensing may you vaunt in those
persons, unto whom Christ does both impute and apply his own righteousness
also: Romans 4.
not unto them that do satisfy for it: but to them that do believe in him?.

And thus much hitherto to that place cited out of S. Mark There remains yet
a sentence or two of S. Peter. A place of Peter cited by Osorius.
that will serve to no small purpose for the maintenance of the creditt of
Purgatory. The first whereof is plain enough by these words of Peter written
in the 4. Chapyter of his first Epistle. 1. Pet. 4.
If the just man (says he) shall scarsely be saved, what shall become of the
wicked and unjust? poynting iwis (with the finger as it were) and noting that
by this difficultye of being saved, salvation is not obtained otherwise, then
by trauayles and labors and pains endured before. Surely this will no man
deny unto you as I suppose that such as will skratch for heaven by force, must
undertake no small trauayles and labors: For that crown of glory is not
atteined but by many tribulations: and they that purpose to live godly in
Christ Jesus (says Paul) must needs suffer persecution. Math. 11.
Go to now, what will this clouter patch together out of this at the last? 2.
Tim. 3. Osorius Argument.
Mark now I pray you a wounderfull downishe conclusion, meet for such a
clowting botcher. Peter does treat of the travails and affictio^s wherewith
the holy ones are exercised before they attain to be crowned in glory: Ergo.
Such as departed hence not washed clean enough in this life, must be new skowred
in the Popes Purgatory. The Answer.
Shall I laugh? or shall I answer? truly I cann not tell which I were best
to do. Peter in deed does treat of the travail and tribulatious of the holy
ones. I confess it to be true. What afflictions I pray you good Sir? If you
mean the afflictions, wherewith the holy ones are ouerladen and pressed down
in this miserable life, you say true. If you mean other torments to be
suffered after this life: your conclusion is false. And least I may seem to
contend against Osorius, after Osorius accustomed guise with brabbling words,
and no matter at all, and to maintain my cause with taunting and snatching,
and not with sound arguments: I will use for my proof the most manifest
testimony of the Scriptures, whereby I will make it good without all
gaynesaying, that the speech of Peter in this whole Epistle, ought not in any
wise be stretched to the pains of Purgatory.

Peter does in all this Epistle treat of those afflictions properly wherewith
the faithful are persequuted of the unbelievers for the testimony of Christ and
for righteousness sake: as in the 3. Chap. 1. Pet. 3.
If you suffer any thing for righteousness sake, you are blessed And in the 4.
Chap. 1. Pet. 4.
Least as strangers you be stryken down and confounded with that trial
through fire, which is laid upon you, to prove you. And again in the same
Chap. If you suffer rebuke for the name of Christ, you are blessed. etc.

In Purgatory no pains are laid upon souls for Righteousness sake, but for
wickedness: and that not by men, but by spirits.

Ergo. This place of Peter cann by no means be wrested to serve to establishe
any pains of Purgatory.

An other Argument.
Peter does treat of those afflictions, which do begin at the house of God,
and do fall upon the Apostles themselves, 1. Peter. Chap. 4. 1. Pet. Cap. 4.
For it is time that Judgment begin at the house of God. If it begin at us
first, what shall be the end of them which will not obey the Gospel?

But the torment of Purgatory fire does not fall upon the Apostles.

Ergo the place of Peter cann in no wise be made appliable to serve for
Purgatory.

I am constrained gentle Reader, to Combat hand to hand with Logical
conclusions, against this iangling cauiller, because else we should have no end
of Chattering: as also because he complayneth many times in his books that he
is not confuted with any Reasons: so that now he has a Nutt to crack if he
cann, or else if he cann not, that he cease hereafter to complain without a
cause. And this much hitherto now of the first place of Peter. Let us come
down to the other place.

The same Peter in ye same Epistle To teach us that there is no way foreclosed
for the dead to come to Salvation does say That Christ did preach the glad
tydinges to the souls that were in prison. Osor. page 221. 1. Pet. 3. 1. These.
4.
We do so not deny, that the dead have no passable way to Salvation, that
withal we confess with Paul that the living shall not go before ye dead in
this journey. And where as you annex immediately out of S. Peter: 2. These. 4.
That Christ going in the power of his spirit, did preach the glad tydinges of
peace to the souls that were shutt up in prison. There yet is no controversy
betwixt us here at all. And to what end at the last shall all this matter
inferred and confessed tend I pray you? forsooth out of this flynte must the
fire of Purgatory be stricken, with this cutted gadd of steel, I suppose.

The glad tidings of peace were brought to the souls of the unbelievers that
were shutt fast in prison. Osor. cutted Sophisme.


Ergo, There were souls of unbelievers in Purgatory then,

A trim Divine truly, and a profounde patron of Purgatory I warrant you.
Wherefore Go ye to, O ye Ghostly Confessors, and worthypfull Massemongers, O
ye holy company of Monckes and Nuns, O ye honorable Cardinals and
Catholic Bishops, and your sacred Synod of Fraunciscane Friars, goodly
brotherhoode of black powdered liars, finally all ye generation of cowled
fraternities, smoath and sweet shauelyngs, All you (I say) all you holy orders
general and special, I do call upon and humbly beseech you, in the very
bowels of those Seraphicall Saints, S. Frauncisce, S. Bruno and S. Benedict,
that you apply all your devour and diligence that ye can possible, with
mumblyng up of Masses, Sacrifices, Liturgies, Prayers, Uigilles, Nocturnes,
Completories, Diriges, and Trentalles: pray ye, knock ye, ringe, spryng holy
water, sing Masses for the quick and the dead: find out some way and bring to
pass that this treasure of this holy mother Church may amplify, and increase
daily more and more, through your most holy merits, and whole mountains of
Pardons, whereby if this scaldyng house of Purgatory may not utterly be
quenched, ye intolerable flames thereof may yet at the least be somewhat
quallified. For surely ye matter is come to this pass now, that unless your
masses and Pardons do help at a pinche, there is no cross of comfort left
for the poor souls that are dead: upon so fast and so firm a Rock has
Osorius planted his Purgatory with these new conclusio^s, that it can never
hereafter be impeached with any assault of the Lutheranes, nor undermined with
any there engynes or crampes.

The Souls in Prison.
For what can be more manifest and clear then this saying of Peter wherein he
affirms that the glad tidings of peace was brought to the Souls that were in
prison? For if the souls were in prison, we must needs confess that they
were not in heaven: and if they were in hell: but from out of hell is no
Redemption at all: It remains then of necessity that there must be a third
place somewhat severed in the high betwixt heaven and hell I suppose. Lo here
into what narrow streightes this Cratippus the deepest conceited man of our age
has forced us, with the profoundenes of his skill: to the huge commendable and
prayseworthy mountain of whose singular and superexcellent learning capacity
and wisdom this also may be added, not the least part of his praise, that
whereas this so lucky an Exposition of this place has ouerscaped so many
sharp sighted Doctors of Divinity heretofore, yet could it not possibly now
escape this deep Clerk, but must needs fall into his mouth. For whereas
besides a noumber of old notable men and no small sprancke of the newer sort
also, as Eckius, Pighius, Hosius, Torrensis, Surius, Mayronensis, Andradius and
to couple with them likewise the Gloss ordinary: whereas all these (I say) and
many others have uttered much matter of Purgatory, A new proof of Purgatory
never hard of before.
yet was there no one of all these hitherto (as far as I ca^ learn) besides
our Osorius only that ever durst be so bold to vouche this place for the
building up of that plattforme of Purgatory.

And no marvel: for these wantes wanted the eyes of Epidaurus, which our
Osorius has gotten, who is able to devise all things out of nothing: yea
those things many times, that never were, not much unlike unto Pentheus as it
seems who standing upon the scaffold of Eumenides saw a far of whole armies
of warriors, and did esery two Suns and two Cities named Thebes: So also do
the Poets report that Hercules being madd saw the heavens ready to fall down
upon him: so did Ajax scourge swyne in steed of Kings and Princes. Ixion does
embrace a cloud in steed of Juno. Orestes does see his mother and furies
setting upon him. And how often do Maryners in their dreams see Te^pestes,
shipwrackes, soldiers, Gunnes, spoils and slaughters? lovers also how osten
dream they of their lovers and woers? And what is it that children do not
Imagine in ye clouds? Even so Osorius whatsoever almost he reads in the
Scriptures, does seem in his eye to be naught else but Purgatory.

But to return again to ye Apostles words, and to note somewhat more
curiously and diligently both what the Apostle says, and what Osorius also
does gather thereupon. Let us hear the Apostles words, which are these. In
which Spirit Christ going down did preach the glad tydyngs to the^ that were
in prison. 1. Pet. 3.
First whereas the words of Peter be thus in Greek. (...): Osorius by evil
translation does turn the words that do sound in Greek aright, The error
of Osorius turned back into his bosom, by co^traposition.
on this wise: to the souls (says he) wh were in prison. Wherein how truly he
does translate ye same, let him answer for him self: even as if a man should
on this wise turn the Greetyng of Paul. (...): To the Saints that were at
Colossa, whereas it should rather be spoken on this wise, to them that are at
Colossa Saints. But the other fitted Osorius purpose best, yt by that slipper
devise Peter might seem to express, that these souls which were holden fast
in prison first, were now no more in Purgatory, but were fetched from out of
Purgatory, to meet with Christ. But I will not be so squemish about these
trifles.

I would very feign learn this above all other: whose souls were those that
were so holde^ fast in prison? Peter will answer the Souls of the
Unbelievers, which were disobedient to the preaching of the Prophets. And by
what reason can you say that those souls were taken out of prison at the
sound of ye glad-tydyngs, which were them selves disobedient to the preaching?
for if they had harkened unto and believed, what infidelity then could be in
them? But let us go foreward: May we be so bold to demand this of you
Osorius? when and at what time the preaching of this glad tidings happened?
For in this point sticks all the pithe of dought. Osor. is of opinion that
these glad tydyngs came not unto the souls, before Christ had finished his
Passion, and descended him self down into hell. But in what sense then does
Peter call them Unbelievers, unto whom Christ him self did preach? For there
could be no infidelity by any means, where was no preaching of true doctrine
going before: whereunto these souls should have given attendaunce: For
Unbelievers are not said to be Unbelievers (according to the definition of an
Unbeliever) of that which they do never hear, but of that which when they have
heard, The place of Peter skanned.
they will not believe. But now Peter does evidently declare that Christ did
preach unto them in deed, and that the very same to who^ the glad tidings
were preached, were as then Unbelievers, and thereupon annexeth further the
certain determination of the time. Whiles the mercy of God (says he) was
looked for in the days of Noah and whiles he was making ready the Arc.
Whereby you may easily conceive, even by the very order of the text: what time
that was of preaching those glad tydyngs. Not as Osorius does dream: when
Christ is said to have pierced the helles after his Passion to them that were
dead: but many years before that, before the the general destruction of the
world by waters: whenas the Spirit of Christ did foreshew by the mouth and
preaching of Noah the general destruction of mankind, that was then hangyng
over their heads, and did allure them to speedy repentance in season with
continual, earnest, and most comfortable exhortations which they did abuse at
that time wickedly through unbelief.

And because Osorius shall not think this advise of mine own imagination, and
therefore will give me no Creditt heerin: let him have recourse to his own
common Gloss, which they call the Ordinary Gloss, which does expound this place
of Peter in the very same words and sillables almost. I will set down the
words of the gloss as they be. The ordinary Gloss. 1. Pet. 3.
Coming in the spirit (says he) he did preach. etc, For coming in the
spirit he did preach to the people before the flood which as the^ were
unbelieving, and lived after the flesh. For he was in Noah through the power of
the holy ghost and in other good men, through whose godly conversation he did
enstruct others, that they might be converted unto God. Thus much the Gloss:
which if cann not yet satisfy your incredulitye. Let us hear Lyra harping
upon the very same string on this wise. He did preach in spirit (says he,)
that is to say, by the preaching of Noah when he enspired to make the Arc, and
to preach Repentance, although Christ's humanitye did not appear as yet.
Nicholas Lyra upon the 1. Peter. 3.
Lo here Osorius you do hear now, that the things were done not before
Christ hadd clothed himself in flesh, but before the general flood.

Howbeit I am not altogether ignorant from whence you skraped that your
illfauored toye, to wit, out of an other patch of a certain Gloaser: who
forsaking (as himself does confess) ye gloss and the solemn aucthoritye of
the Doctors not without craving pardon of his malepert saucynes, Out of an
other patch of some other Gloser patcht up to the Gloss of Lyra.
does chopp in an exposition of his own illfauouredly botcht together, far
differing from the other: so that he does interpret this Prison whereof Peter
makes mention in this place: to be that Lymbus Patrum, In the which, Christ
(as he says) descending in soul, did make manifest to the ancient Fathers
that the mystery of his redemption was accomplished: Amongst whom (says he)
were some that perished bodily in the general flood. etc. But how shall this
appear to be true? for whereas that Lymbus did receive none but the godly
Fathers and holy ones only, and Peter affirms that those to whom this
preaching came were unbelievers: how then could this Lymbus be a fit place to
chopp the unbelievers and holy ones together? But here again will our Osorius
and his glauering Gloaser iumpe with me, alleging that those sowles were
unbelievers first, but afterward repented and amended their lives. For on this
wise writes he And it may be spoken probably enough. The Gloser upon. 1.
Peter. 3.
That many of them which did not believe, perceauing the waters to increase more
and more, did then believe, and repented them of their Sins and so descended
into Lymbum with the other holy ones. etc. But this probable conjecture is
overthrown clean by the words of Christ himself. Luke. 17.
They were eating and drinking (says Christ) and the flood came and destroyed
all. Where is that your Repentance then Osorius? unless peradventure you flee
to this shift with your shuffling Gloaser, Out of the same Gloaser.
to say, that although this ouerflowing of waters came first suddenly over the
vallyes and low places: yet came it not so unawares over the hills, but that
such as dwelt on high, and stype places, seeing the ouerflowing increase, might
repent the^. Which if be true, then did Christ according to this saying, preach
to those mounteyn men only, Mounteyne men.
that were in prison: And all the rest that were low Country men, Low
Country men.
were thrown down into hell. Now I beseech thee gentle Reader, did thou
ever hear a more eloquent exposition, and more worthy to be laughed at?
howbeit, to admit this pleasurable Trifler, his merry conceit of mounteines
and vallyes: yet this pretty Mounteyne Gloser will prevail very little to the
building up of Osorius Purgatory. For whereas after the judgment of that
mystical Divinity of your own Schoolmen, Out of Fra^cisce, Marcion and
others.
there be said to be 4. Mansions in hell. Four mansio^s in hell.
The deepest whereof is said to be the pit of hell. The second Lymbus a place
for such as are not Baptized: wherein the pain of the want of fruition only
is assigned. The third Purgatory where both the pain of the feelyng, and the
pain of want of fruition is sustained. The 4. the Aboade of the ancient
Fathers (as you would say) the bosom of Abraham. In whether prison of all
these 4. you shall shutt up your mounteyn men, will very little prevail you to
prove your Purgatory by. First I am sure that you will not thrust them down
into the lowest Doungeon of Devils: no more can you in Limbo of the
unchristened, from whence is no possible way to get out again. And if you
will send them to Purgatory, then your Gloser does lie: who affirms that they
did repent in the end, and therefore does reckon the^ a place in the fourth
room amongst the holy ones: And if this be granted also, then does Osorius
lie, who has thrust them not into Lymbum Patrum, Osori. page 201.
but into Purgatory: by this reason: Because he says that although they might
have repented them of their filthy and wicked life at the last: yet ought they
nevertheless be kept fast locked within the gayle of Purgatory: until such
time as they hadd suffered sufficient punishment, according to the appointment
of God. Wherein if our Osorius do say truly, his Gloser does lie as I said,
who assigns a place for these mounteyn men after repentance in Lymbo
amongst the holy ones. But if he speak the truth, then must Osorius needs
be in an error. Now whom were best for us to believe? Osorius besides his
Glosers? or his Glosers against Osorius: I referr me herein to the Judgment of
Deuines. Or if Osorius will not agree, that other Deuines shall determine upon
the matter: I will set over the matter to this Syluaine Bishop himself, and
his copemate Angrenc. to be more curiously overlooked, that in their next
Invectiues upon more deliberate advise they may send us word what answer they
shall Judge to make to these Gloses, and Commentaryes.

I do make have to the other proper Reasons, which are in number two: the one
fetched out of Baptism, the other out of Sacrifice for the dead. I will answer
to both. What shall they do (says Paul) which are Baptized for the dead, if
the dead do not Rise again. These be Paul's words in the I. to the
Corinthians. the 15. Chap. 1. Cor. 15. Osorius objection out of the words of
S. Paul.
Wherein Osorius does committ a doubble error. First in the very sense of the
words: and next in the knitting up of the Argument. For whereas Paul has
these words (...), Osorius does expound it as though this should be
necessaryly spoken of them, Osorius does err in the meaning of S. Paul.
who do receive Baptism in stead of them that are dead, and do answer for
their faith. Whereas the meaning of the Apostle does seem more agreably
appliable to them, who in receiving Baptism, do as it were putt on the nature
and condition of dead men, in profession and conversation, though they live
otherwise after the manner of natural living men. And therefore as often as any
man is be sprinkled with this holy founteyne, he is said there to protest,
that he does utterly renounce and forgo the vanities of this world: The place
of Paul expounded.
as though he were not now in this world, but dead unto the world: whereupon ye
Apostle says, that we are Baptized for ye dead: he does not say that we are
Baptized in the behalf of the dead, but for dead bodies, or after the manner of
dead bodies: that is to say, after such an estate and condition, that all which
are Baptized into the death of Christ, the same renouncing the vanities of this
world (whereunto they were addicted first) should from thenceforth behave
themselves as it were dead men, and profess a mortification of the flesh: not
much unlike to this phrase and manner of speech, wherewith we are wont to say:
that a man is left for dead, not which is dead in deed, but he that is like
unto one that is dead. So in the 2. of the Parali. 9. We read that Silver was
esteemed for naught: 2 Paraly. 9.
not because it was no manner of Metal, but because that Metal then was
esteemed nothing worth. Many are of the mind that this Reason of Paul was
derived from the custom of certain ignorant persons, which were Baptized for
them that departed this life without Baptism. Out of which stock sproughted
out the Marcionites, and other young Nouyces, of whom Chrysostom does make
mention: who being blinded with the like error, as often as any of them died
without Baptism, did supply an other in the bed, demanding of him in the
behalf of the dead carckase, whether he would be Baptized: then was he that
supplied the place Christened in the name of him that was dead: of which
disorder when they were appeached, they alleged for their defense this place
of Paul. wherein it was said, some were Baptized for the dead. Thus much
Chrysostom. Chrisost. upon the 1. of the Corin. Cap. 15.


Now to confess that this was a custom of certain ignorant persons: yet
because neither Paul him self does allow of their deed, but does derive his
Argument from the end and effect that followed Baptism: whenas all other
Expositours of Scriptures do utterly condemn this error, what ca^ Osorius
pyke out of this to establish any certeintie upon? who, if would have
vouchsafed to have sought counsel of Chrysostom, would have rendered a far
other manner of sense and Exposition of this place, namely the same whereof I
spoke before. For after this sense were men said to be Baptized for the dead,
What it is to be Baptized for the dead.
either because such as should receive Baptism, did after the usual manner
accustomed in those days, profess to renounce this world, as if they were
dead men: or else because as Chrysostom witnesses, they were commanded to say
before they were Baptized first, I do believe in the Resurrection of the dead:
and because they were Baptized into that Faith, Cyprian to Fortunatus in his
exhortation to Martyrdom
therefore they were said, that they were Baptized for the dead. Moreover, if
Osorius be desirous to know the manner of that ancient time, in ministryng that
Sacrament of Baptism: Cyprian does express it unto us much more effectually
then Marcion. For we do learn this by Cyprian, that such as were lyeng at the
point of death, and were not as yet Christened, did then crave to be received
unto Baptism: which Cyprian does note unto us in these words: The Baptism
(says he) that does by and by couple us unto God, whiles we are going out of
this world. Augustine also does make mention of the same custom: Aug. in his
book of Confession.
who also did desire to be Baptized him self, being at the point of death.
The same chanced to Nazienzen likewise, In the life of Nazianzene.
whenas being on Seaborde he was in danger to be drowned: whereupon this
sentence, to be Baptized for the dead, is more properly spoken of them, which
being even now upon ye last gaspes, are Baptized, being taken as it were for
dead already, rather the^ for the living and the quick. From which manner of
Exposition Theophilact seems not to vary very much. Who understands, that
this Baptizing for the dead, ought to be taken after this manner: yt they are
Baptized in this faith, to believe yt these bodies and these bones must be
raised again from the dead. And therefore many do conjecture, that this
custom, to be Baptized in Churchyardes, and near unto the graves and tombs
of ye dead, was an ancient custom received from the Elders, yt so such as
were to be Baptized, might be made ye more myndefull to confess a rising
again from ye dead, not only through ye force of their Faith, but also by the
application of ye Ceremony it self.

And thus much hitherto touching the sense of the words. From the which how
much the exposition of Osorius does swerve, a blind man may easily perceive.
Now let us consider the force of ye Argument, whereunto Paul does apply, Paul
does argue in deed from Baptism to ye rising again from the dead on this
wise. The Argument of S. Paul deryued from the Reason that leads to an
Absurditye.


Bodies are Baptized for the dead.

Ergo, There is a rising again of the dead.

And this does Paul fittly and applyably enough, to wit, deducyng an
Argument, from the reason which leads to the absurd. For otherwise (as
Chrysostom says) if the Resurrection be of no force, why are men's bodies
Baptized for the dead? for to this end art thou Baptized, because thou do
believe that thy dead body shall rise again, and shall not remain always
dead. Chrisost. in the same place.


And without all question this is the very mind and meaning of Paul, which
if Osorius would have followed simplye and sincerely, he should have
concluded the same out of Paul, and out of Paul's words. Now this lyeng
Sophister framyng an Argument out of the words that Paul did most aptly
gather for the establishing of that Article of the faith, to wit, the
Resurrection of the dead: does most foolishely pervert, to uphold his peevish
Purgatory. What shall they do (says he) that are Baptized for the dead, if the
dead do not rise again at all? Now what says Osorius? what shall they do
says Osorius that are Baptized for the dead, if there be no Purgatory at all?
Now I beseech you Osorius for the honor of your Logic, whereas you have
scattered abroad every where in your books so many outrageous, madd, and
frantike exclamations against M. Luther, did you feel your self infected with
no spice of frenzy, or more then harishe maddnes, when you sat knittyng such
fleyng moats, and spyderweuett and such stubble I do not say of Beanehealme,
but very chafe of oats together?

You will have us confess that there is a Purgatory in any wise. And why so?
Because (as you say) they that are Baptized, are Baptized for the dead. What
else a good fellowship, but this baptizing for ye dead were to no purpose, if
there were no Purgatory: After this manner does our deep Logician Osorius
conclude: But S. Paul the Apostle does conclude otherwise. In vain were it to
be Baptized for the dead (says S. Paul) if there be no Resurrection of the
dead: Here does Paul conclude of the Resurrection: and Osorius of Purgatory:
This does Paul rightly and like an Apostle: but Osor. on the contrary part
peeuishly altogether, and like an errand liar. For what has Baptism to do
with Purgatory? what has fire to do with water? Nay rather what one thing does
more directly and more effectually overthrow Purgatory then Baptism? Purgatory
and Baptism two conttary elements.
And by what Logic then ca^ you forge fire out of water, whenas there be no
elements so contrary one to the other, as fire and water? After this manner
therefore do I argue against your subtle Sophisme by contraposition, out of S.
James. For if it be true yt mercy does far exceed Judgment, Jacob. 2.
and that the water of grace be of more efficacy to quench and putt out, then
the fire of Judgment to bourne and consume: Such as are Baptized in Christ
Jesus need not fear any purgatory.
why may not I frame an Argument A Fortiori: that there is no Purgatory after
this life to them, which in this life are Baptized in Christ Jesus? wherefore to
knitt up the knott in few words, I see no such Buggbeares yet in that your
Purgatory fire, of whom they which be Baptized in Christ, need to stand in any
fear or dought.

But Osorius shouldereth out the matter again and again. Why then (says he)
are men said to the Baptized in S. Paul for the dead, if there redounde no
profitt at all out of Baptism? Baptism profitable 3. manner of ways.
Those that do discourse of the efficacy and virtue of Baptism, do divide the
virtue and efficacy thereof into four Branches: namely, Into renouation: into
washing away of Sins: and into making men myndefull of the Resurrection to
come: These three qualities be so annexed unto Baptism, that they do neither
profitt otherwise, nor to any other persons, but unto them only, that are
washed in this founteine whiles they live in this world. Whereupon they are
worthily rebuked in Chrysostom, Which do cast away water upon the dead, and
holy things upon the earth: Chrisost. upon the Acts of the Apostles homel. 1.
And for that cause was the heresy of the Marcionites detested, because they
did substitute others to Baptism, in the behalf of them that were dead, as is
before rehearsed. And this not without great cause: For as no man does feed
him self to quench an other man's hunger: nor any man is washed to cleanse the
uncleanness of an other, and as the Church does not allow, that the holy
Communion of bread and wine be thrust into the mouth of them, that are dead:
even so Baptism, which is ministered with the element of water, does wash away
not an other man's filthynes, but the corruption and filthynes of every
particular person that is bathed therein. Whereupon Thomas Aquinas discoursing
not altogether vnfruitefully of the intention and meaning of Christ, Thom upon
the Corin. 1.15. cap. lect. 4.
does expound thereof in this sort: to wit, that Baptism is profitable to
them which are in this life Baptized in the Faith of Christ. For it were not
convenient that it should be profitable otherwise. For whereas the Sacrament of
Baptism (whereof Paul does treat in this place) is of this nature, yt it
ought not to be ministered twice: what will Osorius answer to me here? whether
he that is Baptized for an other, be Baptized for him self before, It is not
lawful to be baptized twice.
yea, or nay? if you affirm that he is, then you make him an heretic
whatsoever he be that does reiterate Baptism. If you deny that he was Baptized
first, the^ does he stick fast cloyed yet in the filthe of original Sin:
and therefore he can not be Baptized for an other man's bondage, but that by the
same means he becomes him self a bondslaue, and needs now to be purged him
self first: Moreover what reason can you render that the living ought to be
Baptized for the dead, according to your Sophistical collection? For if you
mean of the flesh being dead: but unto this you will not agree, to wit, that
any such flesh is in Purgatory: If you mean of the Souls? but sithence your
self can not say in any respect, that the Souls be dead: your Assertion
therefore must needs be false, To be Baptized for the dead according to the
Deuines.
that they are Baptized for the dead, which are Baptized for souls which do
live in Purgatory. Therefore to be Baptized for the dead, according to S. Paul's
rule, is nothing else in the Judgment of the Deuines (if you will esteem of
the matter aright) but to be dipped into that founteyne, and so to be taken
from out the same, into the mortification of the flesh, and into ye rising
again of the same flesh. Whereupon Chrisosto. not unaptly: Chrisost. upon the
1. Cor. cap. 15
To be dipped into the water (says he) and to rise out of the water again: is
a pledge or toke^ of our going down to hell, and our returning from thence
again. And for this cause Paul does term Bapptisme by the name of a Grave
or sepulcher: You are buried together (says he) through Baptism into death.
etc. Thus much Chrisost. From who^ Jerome does not differ very much: who
discoursing upon the same place of Paul, to be baptized for the dead: does not
expound it otherwise then to be so baptized in the death of Christ, Iero. upon
the Corin. Cap. 15.
that with Baptism we show our selves dead unto the world. And proceeding
foreward: What avails it to dye to this world (says he) if life everlasting
do not follow the contempt of the world? and therefore Jerome does apply that
saying to be Baptized for the dead, Out of the ordinary Gloss. Thomas Aquinas
upon the Cor. 1. cap. 15 cap. 4. Paludens. did. 21. que. 1. Bonauenture.
not to appertain to the dead that are in Purgatory, but to our flesh in this
world, being as it were mortified already. For what avails (says he) the
flesh to be baptized in this life, if it rise not again to another life? To
pass over in the mean time other Glosers of our new vpstart schoolmen,
whereof many do interpret this place of Paul for the dead: That is to say,
for deadly sins, and works of sin that be dead. If this be true, surely
Baptism can by no means agree with Purgatory, forasmuch as souls are cast
into the bottomless pit of Hell for deadly sins only, and into Purgatory
for none other but for venial sins only as they say. By these so manifest
and so many Testimonies of writers I do suppose that every man may plainly
perceive ye very meaning of the Apostle in those words, to emport nothing
less, the^ yt which Osorius with his most shameless definition would seem to
enforce on this wise. Osor. page 202.
To be Baptized (says he) is for a man to offer himself a Satisfactory hoafte
to wash away and to purge clean the filthiness of the souls of the dead. And
by and by again. To be Baptized for the dead, he does affirm to be nothing
else, then to honor God with a Satisfactory offering and with a Sacrifice for
the salvation of the dead, and to offer also the host of the body voluntaryly
for the salvation of their souls. Say you so Osorius? To be baptized for the
dead is it nothing else, then to offer a satisfactory Sacrifice of the body, for
the cleansing and washing away the sins and filth of the dead? And where be
those dead a Gods name? Iwis in the skalding house of Purgatory. Uery well
done. Ergo the^, Christ when he suffered his passion, was baptized for the^ yt
were in Purgatory. Yea marry Sir what else? Foreward now: what say you then of
Paul and others, that were likewise baptized for the dead? No less I warrant
you. Osor. page 202.
For even so we hear Osorius uttering his own words. It appears plainly
(says he) by this place, that not only Paul, but many others also did offer
most holy sacrifices for the dead, that is to say, for the salvation of the
dead.

I do commend you. But will you hear me agaye? If the death of Christ were
undertaken for them that are in Purgatotory, in the manner as you before said,
then is it a good conseque^t hereupon, that either your Purgatory was utterly
abolished by the death of Christ: Osorius opinion very absurd.
or else that Christ himself suffered death in vain. Answer either of them
which you list. Moreover if this be true, that your Divinity does infer, that
Paul and many others did dye (as you say) a satisfactory death for the
cleansing of the dead, and for the salvation of the whole world: what
difference then will you make betwixt the death of Christ, and the death of
those others? Nay rather what need have we of the death of Christ at all, if
Paul and many other did dye a satisfactory death, for the salvation of the
world as you say? how this your reason and communicatio^ delights you and
your Catholics I know not: in my judgment surely it seems none other then,
as if any Turk or Jew had taken penn in hand, and of set purpose devised to
write against Christ, he could not have written any thing more despightfully
against Christ, nor more horribly against the Catholic faith: The Lord of his
mercy open your eyes, and endue you once at the length with a better mind, if
it may so please his heavenly Majesty.

But I return again to the course of your disputation: wherein albeit I see
nothing worth the refuting, yet because you bragg here so shamelesly, that we
be utterly overthrown with your most manifest Testimonies, and that your
arguments are not resolved: I think it convenient to make manifest, what
manner of arguments you have set down: and of what force the substance of
your arguments may seem to be. First touching the testimony of Saint Paul in
the 1. to the Corinthians the 15. Chapter before mentioned, where Saint Paul
treats of Baptism and Resurrection: You think to have a great aduau^tadge
here to build your Purgatory upon. And why so? Because Baptism is many times
used in the Scriptures, for Sacrifices and offeringes: Where find you that?
Forsooth, where the Lord does demand of the two brethren, that were at strife
betwixt them selves, for the chief and highest seat in the kingdom of heaven,
whether they were able to be partakers of the same Baptism. In deed the
scripture uses many times peculiar Tropes and figures: and I am not ignorant,
that amongst the latter Deuines, Baptism is divided into three sorts: Three
kinds of Baptism.
to wit, Baptism of water: of Fire, and of Blood. Howbeit these two latter
kinds have not in them any proper nature of a Sacrament, if you have regard to
ye natural propertyes of Baptism, to wit Matter and Form (as they call them)
And therefore howsoever it pleases the new Deuines to ascribe unto the^ ye
matter of a Sacrament, yet do they not attribute unto them a Sacrament, no nor
so much as the name of a Sacrament, but acquiuoce. AEquiuoce diversely
signifiyng in one word or term.
But what does this concern this place of Paul cited by you? where it is out
of all controversy, that the words of the Apostle ought to be understood not
of Blood, nor of Fire, but simply of that kind of Baptism only: wherewith all
Christians in general without exception are washed through the fou^tayne of
regeneration into hope of rising again to life everlasting. Therefore I do here
appeal to the Judgment of the Reader, how blockishly Osorius does wrest this
discourse of Paul to Martyrdom yea much more Doltishly to Purgatory. There is
besides this an other place cited out of the same chap. where Paul (as
appears) purposing to sanctify himself not only for the dead, but for the
living also: has these words: Why do we undertake danger every hour? I do
daily dye through the rejoicing that I have of you in Christ Jesus our Lord. And
these forsooth be those substaunciall Testimonies wherewith we are overwhelmed
a Gods name, accordaunt to the matter now in question, as iumpe as Germaynes
lips.

It remains now that we discuss the substance, and pith of the Arguments
likewise derived from the prayers and oblations of the Church. You do maintain
stiffely that Sacrifices offered for the salvation of the dead, be very
effectual: which forasmuch as are available to none, but such as be in
Purgatory: Purgatory is confirmed by the Supplications and Sacrifices of the
Church.
hereupon therefore you do conclude, that there must be a Purgatory of very
necessity. But what if I would deny all this unto you even by the same law, and
order as you have propounded them? For what reason is there to the contrary,
but that I may as well deny at a word, as you affirm at a word? First as
touching Prayers which you affirm that the Church is enured unto for salvation
of the dead: If you mean here the true and Apostolic Church: You say most
untruly. If you note ye usage of your own Babylonicall Temple, it forces not
of a rush what you do there. Neither do I enqurie what you have in ha^dling
there, but what you ought to look unto, what duty does exact of you, and what
you ought to do according to the prescript rule of the scripture. Moreover
whereas you annexe afterward that these Supplications and Prayers made for
the salvation of the dead, are altogether ineffectual and unprofitable unless
they be applied only unto them, which are afflcted in Purgatory. We would
feign learn first how you prove this? Osori. page 202.
Forsooth (say you) because the souls that be drowned in the deep doungeon
and everlasting darcknesse of hell, can be redeemed from thence with no
prayers. This is true? and what hereof? Again (you say) the Souls that are in
heaven, have no need of those prayers, neither am I displeased with this
Rhetorical partition. Go to, what is it that this Orators pertition will
conclude at the last? Behold reader now a conclusion more then logical,
wonderfully wrought and called from out ye very brains of capacity it self:
whereby you may forth with note a very disciple of Theophrast. Damned Souls
being in hell (says he) are not eased by the prayers of the living: And again
the souls that are in heaven have no need of any supplications. It follows
therefore that there is some middle place betwixt heaven and hell, which we are
wont to call Purgatory.

As if the Argument were on this wise.

Oso. Argument for the creditt of Purgatory.
If there be no Purgatory the supplicatio^s of the church for the salvation of
Souls are void and ineffectual.

But the Supplications for the deadd are not void and ineffectual.

Ergo, It is concluded that there must be a Purgatory of very Necessity.

We are come back again now ad Petitionem Principij, Petitio principij, a
Demand back again of the first proposition.
as the Logicians do term it. Where one uncertainty is confirmed by an other
uncertainty in all respects as uncertain. For I am as far to seek whether
Prayers and Supplications for souls departed be unprofitable, as when Osorius
does affirm that there must needs be a Purgatory. And therefore in my conceit
you shall do very discretly Osorius (because you are so malapert to write to
Kings and Queens) If in your next Letters addressed to Queen Elizabeth, at
your convenient leisure: you will vouchsafe to teach us by some evident and
infallible testimonies of Scripture, how we may be thoroughly certified of that
which you take here for confessed, to wit. That Prayers powered forth for the
redemption and salvation of the souls that be afflicted in Purgatory be not
unprofitable but effectual and auaylable: I for my part, that have read the
whole Bible over, can not as yet light upon any substaunciall or likely matter
enough to move nor conceive any cause, why either such as be alive now should
dreadd any Bullbeares of Purgatory, or that such as are departed hence in the
Faith of Jesus Christ, should stand in any need of any pettyhelpes of
Supplications or Prayers. For as touching the salvation of souls, whereupon
Osorius does discourse so largely, I am fully resolved, that the same is
singularly and absolutely safe, and shielded in Jesus Christ wholly: and does not
in any respect depend upon any force of our prayers: Neither will Osorius deny
the same I suppose. Yet he supposes that the Temporal pain must be entreated
for: And because this pain must be endured in the scaldyng house of Purgatory,
therefore the Supplications and Prayers of the Church are worthily employed to
the ease of those torments.

I do answer: if ye souls of the faithful be afflicted with any kind of
punishment in Purgatory: surely those pains are either the very scourges and
whippes of Gods Judgment, or else must chance unto them besides the Judgment
of God. If besides Gods Judgment, then are they wrongfully punished, but if
the dead by the just Judgment of God be tormented after this life, then is the
promise of Christ false: John. 5.
Which does affirm that they shall not come unto Judgment, but shall pass
(says he) from death to life. And again. My Father does from hence forth
Judge no man. Luke. 23.
And what say you to the promise made to the thief on the Cross? This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. So also were that sentence of Paul no less
false: Romans 6.
We are no more under the Law, but under Grace. For what Grace is there, where
Judgment ouerruleth?

What then you will say? shall we account the Prayers for the deadd usually
powered forth by the Church, to be altogether fruitelesse? First I do verily
think, that ye ought not abuse the name of the Church to your abominable
superstitions. The true Church of Christ must be esteemed by the word of God,
and his good pleasure, and not measured by men's traditions. Neither is it
convenient to color all such Bastard trinckettes, as are crept into the Church
by fraud, under the title and badge of the true Church. But we must make good
trial by the touchstone of Gods word, of the means, whereby they challenge an
interest in the Church. Now to grant you this much, that Supplications for the
deadd were ordained in some places, by Tradition of certain old Fathers: yet
this makes nothing at all to the purpose to establish your plattforme of
Purgatory.

Basile and Chrisosto. in their Lyturgies.
There be public Liturgies fathered upon Chrysostom and Basile carried abroad
after this manner and form: We do offer unto thee this reasonable offering for
them that sleep in the Faith, for the ancient Fathers, Elders, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs and Confessors. etc. But
chiefly for our most holy and immaculate Lady the perpetual Virgin Marie,
blessed above all other women. etc. Not much unlike unto the same is it
reported of Cyprian. Cyria. lib. 3. Epist. 6.
We do Sacrifice (says he) for the Martyrs. etc. And yet I suppose no man is
so wittlesse to say, that ye Martyrs, Confessors, Apostles, and Patriarchs
together with the holy Uirgine, be either in Purgatory, or do stand in need of
the Prayers of the^ that be alive. Whereupon we read in Augustine on this wise:
Aug. Sermo. de verbis Apost. Magist. se^tent. Lib. 4. Distinct. 45
To pray for a Martyr is adjudged very injurious. etc. What shall be said to
this? where the Papish Churches do use to pray after a solemn manner in their
Masses for the dead on this wise, that God would vouchesafe to deliver them out
of hell, from out the deep lake, and from out the Lions laws? by wh words
appears manifestly that Purgatory is not understood here, but those
vnque^chable flames of hell it self. Whereby you may perceive perfectly that
the Prayers of the Church be no sure foundations to ground Purgatory upon: for
that they be no more powered forth for them which are in Purgatory, then they be
for others in some other place.

In like manner fares with Sacrifices: wherein your Divinity raungeth very
much at randon, as if it were strayed and runnyng in some wilderness a woll
gatheryng: For whereas the true Church of Christ does acknowledge none other
satisfactory Sacrifice, but that only one Sacrifice of the Son of God, once
accomplished for all: You do spend to much breath upon us, and many times
altogether in vain about your satisfactory offerynges, and Sacrifices of
Christ, Paul, and many others offered up for the dead.

Osori. page 204. 205.
Paul (say you) as often as he adventured his life for the preservation of the
state of the Church, even so often did he offer Sacrifice for the Salvation of
the dead. But then most honorably above all other, when he suffered him self
to be spoiled of life for the glory of Christ and the Salvation of all men. Did
Paul suffer death for the Salvation of all men? is this your reason and your
manner of speech Osorius? do ye use to preach to your flock after this sort in
Syluaine, as your books do preach abroad to the world? to wit that men shall
believe that Paul did dye for the Salvation of all men? Shall we judge yt you
were sober, or well in your wits, when you wrate this? did ever man besides
you write after this manner? or did ever man bearyng the face of a Divine speak
this? or would any reasonable man ever utter any such rudenes? Awake for shame,
and gather your wits once again unto you, if you can: For if Paul did dye
for the Salvation of the dead (as you say) what else do you leave for Christ to
do more? shall he also be in the beadroll amongst those All, for whose health
and Salvation Paul most honorably dyed a most notable death? wherein do you
not hear Paul him self cryeng out against you with open mouth? 1 Co^. 1.^
Was Paul Crucified for you? were you Baptized in the name of Paul? And
again. What is Paul? what is Apollo? but Ministers by whom you believed. etc.
And again. He that pla^teth, and he that waters, is nothing. But God that
does give the increase. etc. After the same sense we read in S. Peter: There is
none other name given unto men under heaven, wherein they must be saved. And
how then by the satisfactory offeringes of Paul, and many others (as you say)
is aid obtained for them that be dead? how is the safety of all men, and the
state of the Church preserved thereby?

To make this matter good and Justifiable, S. Paul him self is forced maugre
his beard to become witness against him self, being charged with his one
words, spoken once or twice in his Epistle written to the Corinthes: as when
he says. 1. Cor. 15.
I do dye daily through the rejoicing that I have of you in Christ Jesus our
Lord. etc. And again writing to the Collo. Colos. 1.
Now I do Rejoice (says he) over my afflictions for you, and I do fill up
that which wants in the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body
which is the Church. etc. Out of these words of Paul well spoken, not well
understood, and wickedly wrested, it is a wonder to see, what horrible
doctrine and monstrous blasphemies, these false Apostles do infer, and
thrust in place. For whereas the Apostles meaning does note only the
confirmation of doctrine, and the afflictions and agonyes that he endured for
the enlargyng of the Faith of Christ only: The place of Paul to to the
Colloss. misunderstoode of the papists.
the same do these praters most horribly mistourne, and force to the
satisfaction for Sins, yea to the very price of our Redemption, not without
manifest Sacrilege against? the blood of Christ: As though the Death and
Passion of the only Son of God Jesus Christ, could not otherwise suffice to
the absolute accomplishment of the whole action of our Redemption, The only
merits of Christ suffice not with the papists.
unless meritorious afflictions of Saints were annexed besides, which being
mingled together with the blood of Christ, should counterpeise in equal
ballaunce, the just and true proportion of the Judgment of God, and with full
measure (as it were) fill up that ever flowyng founteyne, which does purge,
and wash clean away the Sins and filthe of the quick and the deadd. Which
mingle mangle they call by the name of the Treasure of the Church: The
treasure of the Church.
which of all the rest is most vain and foolish. And this Treasure of the
Church, they dare not commit to the custody of Christ only, nor to every of
the Ministers, nor yet to lay men, nor to Priests, not to poor Prelates, not
to Abbottes or Priours, not to Prouostes and Wardens of Colleges, nor to
simple Preachers as they call the^: but to Bishops only, and amongst them
also chiefly, to the high and superexcellent Bishop the Pope: which is of all
the rest most absurd. And yet least you shall think that these be not their
own proper Assertions, we will hear what holy Saynct Bonauenture, and such
like doctors of the same School do speak of their own mouth. For on this
wise do those profounde Deuynes frame their Arguments out of the words of
holy Scripture.

Because according to the Law (say they) he that does marry his Brothers wise,
Ruth 4. Out of S. Bonauentu. Lib. 4. Did. 10. Quest. 3
to raise up seed to his brother that is dead, ought to enjoy the possession
of his brothers goods that appertain to the education of the Children: Ruth.
4. Therefore the dispensation of this treasure of the Church belongs to the
Bishops only, which be the husbands of the Church and have power to beget
sons and daughters, that is to say, perfect and imperfect: and amongst all
these principally the high Bishop, which is husband and governor of the whole
Church universal. Ha, Ha, gentle Reader have you not heard a mynyon marriage,
worthy for a Popes puppett, grounded upon the very vnpenetrable Rock of ye
profundity of all Scriptures? by which ye may first perceive that Christ was
once the husband of this spowse: Now because he departed this life, and dyed
without issue of his body lawfully begotten: his next brethren the Bishops do
succeed him, who marrying their Brothers wife, may raise up issue to their
Brother upon her, and may begett Children perfect and imperfect: And because
all this shall not want creditt, they do prove it by the authority of the
scripture, to wit in the 4. Chapter of Ruth, and other testimonies of the
Law. But by the way, whereas we find that by the same law it was lawful for
one husband to have many wives, or concubines, I do not yet remember any such
liberty given by the law, that one wife should be married to many husbands:
Wherein truly they do describe a very hard and miserable estate and condition
of the Church, if one wife shall be constrained to be buxonne and bonaire to so
many husbands, as there be Bishops in Christendom. But let us harken yet
what follows more. For he proceeds on this manner. And therefore all
Bishops (says be) that have issue, S. Bonaue^ture in the foresaid Distinct.
may grant pardones, but especially above all other our most holy Father the
Bishop of Rome: as to whom belongs the dispensation of the whole spiritual
treasory, because he has the charge of all the whole Church, and of all her
Children: whereupon all be his Children, and he is the Father of all. etc. Thus
much does preach unto us our holy Saint Bonauenture. Behold here (gentle
Reader) the sum of this most excellent mystical interpretation of the Schole
doctrine: where in bethink advisedly with your self, how many foul and
horrible errors and blasphemies are scatrered abroad by this pestilent dog,
and reckon them upon your fingers, if you will whiles I set the^ down in
order unto you.

First an utter disability, and a worn out Emptymes in the blood of Christ,
Blasphemy.
and his most comfortable death is here set down: wherein is manifest
blasphemy.

Then follows an Eclipse of Christ's passion. Profane Sacrilege.
That is to say, whatsoever wants in his passion to the full satisfaction of
our Redemption, must be supplied and recompensed with the afflictions of
Martirs and Saints.

Heresy.
Next upon this minglemangle of the merytes of Christ and his Martirs, they
gather together a certain treasury of most precious and abundant
Satisfaction: which they call the Treasure of the Church.

Error.
Now whereas out of this treasury all Remission and pardon of Sins is dawen
forth: then yet must not all be Stewards and distributers of this great riches,
nor any other then the Bishops, and the chief Bishop of all other the Pope
of Rome, which is of all other a most pestiferous error.

Fraud.
Moreover as is most meet: out of this Romish Budgett, and dispensation of
Romish treasure, are begotten Bulls and Pardons, which is a most horrible
fraud and liegerdemayne.

Lastly out of these Pardons is framed at the length the skalding house of
Purgatory: A stale jest.
by this argument forsooth: Because otherwise these pardons and prayers of the
Church, and merits of Saints should not be worth a Rush, unless the souls
of the faithful did frye and broyle in this skalding house of Purgatory, for
ease of whom these qualificatio^s are proved by the Church.

I have reckened up orderly and briefly the chief of all their errors,
monstrous horrible enough I think, which being directly against, manifestly
repugnaunt, and contrary to the true meaning and natural sense of the
scripture, will not require any long answer in the confutation of them.

The Refutation.
First, where as they do affirm, that the death of Christ is not of sufficient
efficacy and power to accomplish the misterye and price of our redemption,
unless a supply of Saints afflictions be annexed to make up the full
measure: herein they do either moustruously lie, Col. cap. 2.
or else it is false that Saint Paul does affirm, that we are all made
absolutely perfect and complete in Christ Jesus: for as much as it is vndoughted
true, that the thing that is most perfect and fully absolute, can want nothing
to fill up the measure of perfect perfection. And so also is ye saying of
Saint Paul to the Hebrews in each respect as false: where it is said that
Christ did by one only oblation consummate, Heb. 10.
or make perfect them that be sanctified. Surely if one only oblation do
fully accomplish all the parts of our satisfaction, then all other oblatio^s
whatsoever, be not only not profitable, but wicked also and execrable.
Moreover whereas that Typical Lamb in the old law did represent unto us the
perfect pattern and Image of the true and immaculate Lamb, which was slain
from the beginning of the world, what should be the cause that the redemption
(which is of the blood of the son of God) should in any respect not be as
fully perfect unto us? as was that deliverance of the people full and
absolute, that went before but in a Type or representation?

And whereas they dare be so shamelesly Impudent, as to make a mingle ma^gle of
the merits and afflictions of Sayncts, with the passion and blood of Jesus
Christ: I do wonder that they are not ashamed hereof: howbeit I can not deny,
but that the death of his Saynctes is precious in the sight of the Lord: Psalm.
115.
yet is not this to be taken so, as though the price of their death were of as
great value as that it ought, or can be able to counteruayle the wrath of God
by any means: Neither are they therefore sayncts because they do dye and suffer
persequution: but because they that do suffer persequution be holy, therefore
is their death called precious in the sight of the Lord. And the cause why they
are Saints, and be called Saints, comes not of any virtue of their death,
but of the only power and efficacye of the death of the son of God, The
merits of Saints are nothing worth but the merits of Christ. August. upon
the Gospel of Ihon the 84. Treatise.
in who^ they do believe, which dignity they do receive by their own faith
only, and not for any their afflictions sake: so yt now to be Saints is not
of any merit of their own, but of the merit of the only son Jesus Christ,
who is only righteous, and does make others righteous as Augustine does both
wisely and learnedly testify: Christ (says he) was that one and only man
which could both have the flesh of man, and could also not have any Sin.
Even that only he and alone, which is himself just, and does instifie others,
the man Jesus Christ. And therefore (says he) we can not be compared with
Christ, although we suffer Martyrdom for his sake even to the sheading of our
blood. And immediately after, making a comparison betwixt the afflictions of
Christ, and the afflictions of the godly Martyrs. Christ (says he) had no need
of any our help to work our salvation: but we cann do nothing at all without
him, he gave himself unto us his branches, a lively vine: and we without him
can not have so much as any breath to preserve life withal. Finally although
brethren do suffer death for brethren, yet is not the blood of any Martyr shedd
for the remission of his brothers offenses, which thing Christ did in his own
person for us. Neither did he by this example as by any special pattern
direct us to immitate him, but only that for this example we should become
thankful and rejoice in him etc.

3. So that by this testimony of S. Augustine now I do suppose no man does
dought how he ought to determine of the other three, namely: the Treasory of
the Church, Pardons, and Purgatory. Aug. in the same place.
For if it be true that the same Augustine does say, that the most holy ones of
all others are not able to cure the wounds of their brethren, being themselves
daily, and incessaunt beggars in their daily prayers for remission of their
own Sins. What shall become then I pray you of the merits of Saints?

4. But if the merits of all holy Martyrs and Apostles be nothing auayleable:
with what reason then can this gaye treasory of the Church be mayntayned, of
whose Iewelles they brag so gloriously? or what shall become of that office of
Stewardship and dispensation of Pardons?

5 Moreover, if those ragged skrappes of pelting Pardons, be thrown out to the
dounghill, I need not draw forth any long discourse to tell thee gentle
Reader, what shall become of that rydiculous Relic, and babble of Purgatory:
For as much as the matter it self being so easily discernable, will quickly
enduce thee to perceive, that this fable, which these catholic Fathers have
forged of Purgatory, does no more emporte any truth or lykelyhood of truth,
then this lie and peevish pracing of Pardons does differr from manifest
falsehood, and foxlye fraud, then which toye never crept into the Church any
one trinckett more ridiculous, or worthy less credit. All which
notwithstanding, our Portingall Rhetorician must yet proceed forward, and
shoulder out his puppett Purgatory with all the strength that he can, and
demands a question: Osor. page 203.
Whether there may be any time for Christians to abstain lawfully from Carity
whose chief and principal point of Religion does consist in Caryty? If you
speak of Dearth Osorius, It is true that you speak, that the principal
groundworke of all your Religion is Dearth. For she makes most on your side:
And hereof comes it, The dearth of Osorius Church.
yt all ecclesiastical matters are sold so dearly with you: yea the Churches
themselves, Byshopprickes, Prouostshippes, Priestehoodes, Myters, Palles,
Consecrations, Immunityes, Privileges, Dispensations, Indulgences,
Monasteryes, Temples, Altars, Colleges. Amongst all which, the highest degree
of Papacy it self what a price it bears, and what a Dearth has growenouer
all these things, is skarse credible to be believed, or able to be expressed
with pen or tongue. But you mean Charity, a word deryued from out the grace,
love, and mercy of God, I do answer you, that in all your Religion is either
so no Charity at all, or surely so little, as that all things with you are full
of skarsitye and dearth. But our Osorius Tullianisme, does not distinguish
Caritatem Dearth, from Charitatem Love by any special difference. And
therefore let us hear the question that he propounds himself of this his
Caritas. dearth

What? Osor. page 203.
can there be any, exercise of caritas imagined greter then this wherein we do
pray with most earnest prayers unto God, for the salvation of our Brethren? No
surely I think: And therefore for the great affection and love that I do
bear unto you, I do pray most humbly and heartily unto God for your sauety:
that pardoning this your lewdnes of writing, he may vouchsafe to enlighten that
ouerdarckened blindenes of your drowsy senses and new fashion the same into a
more found knowldge and understanding of the truth of his Gospel. Now do you
perceive the desire and love that we have of your safety Osorius albeit you be
not come to Purgatory as yet: It is reason therefore yt we likewise understand
ye Carity of your Charity.

We do pray unto God (say you) with earnest intercessions and prayers most
purely powered forth for the quick and the dead, Osor. page 202.
and for the sauety of our Brethren. I do behold a very godly and comfortable
imagination of yours, conceived in the behalf of the dead, and do praise the
same. But when do ye this good Sir? In your daily supplications and meetings?
I think not so. But at that time especially (say you) that is chosen out to be
most mere to work the most holy work of all, to wit, at that time which we
do choose to pacify the wrath of God: not with the blood offringes of footed
Beasts, but with the body and blood of Christ. what a bald devise is this of
the man? how variable is the inconstancye of his doctrine? For if (as you said
a little erst) Christ only do not perform the full price of our redemption,
The only oblation of Christ does not satisfy the papists
but that Paul and many others do daily offer most holy Sacrifices for the
dead, that is to say, for the salvation of the dead: with what confidence dare
you now presume to pacifye the wrath of God, with the only body and blood of
Christ, excludyng the Sacrifices and offringes of all other? or how often must
the body of Christ be offered, to pacify the wrath of God?

The wrath of God is pacified with the blood of Christ.
If our first Father Ada^ was able by one only offense to destroy and cast away
the whole offspring of posterity: Is not Christ in all respects as able by one
only oblation of his body and blood, to make amends of the same which Adam
foredidd, and brought to naught? The Sacrifices of Papists are without blood
and do want the blood of Christ.
And with what reason will you persuade us, that you take upon you to reconcile
the favor of God by the blood of Christ, who profess that your Sacrifice is
not a bloudly Sacrifice? Moreover, whereas the Son of God did satisfye for
all things, with his precious blood shedd upon the Cross, as well the things
in heaven, as the things upon the earth, what one thing then has he left to
be satisfied by you? Ergo, the Sacrifices of the papists do not pacify the
wrath of God.
Or if there remain any thing as yet of Gods Judgment unreconciled, and not
thoroughly cleansed, even to the uttermost, and most absolute fullnes, how has
he then by one only oblation made perfect for ever, all them that be
sanctified? how did it seem good unto the Father, that all fulness should
dwell in the Son? Collos. 1.
how were all things said to be at an end and finished, whiles Christ did hang
upon the Cross? Hebr. 10.
with what face dare Paul teach us that all Enimity was blotted out by
Christ's death on the Cross, Luke. 23.
and all hatred wipte away by his flesh, Ephesians. 2.
if Gods Majesty, must be as yet reconciled by your offringes and Sacrifices?
He that brake down the wall that was betwixt us and God, was not the same able
to overthrow rotten Walls of your painted Purgatory? he that did utterly
remove the wrath of his Father, could not the same he extinguish and quite put
out the flames of Purgatory without Saints merits, and Popish Pardons? Nay
rather what need any Pardons at all procured, or imagined out of the treasure
of the Church, if you Catholic shauelinges do take upon you to reconcyle the
Majesty of God, by your daily offering of Christ's body and blood.?

I will recyte here not a fable, but a true history of Germany out of Wolgangus
Musculus. An Hystory of Germany out of Wolfgang. Musculus his common places.
which happened at Haganoy in the year of our Lord 1517. to wit, the same
year: wherein M. Luther began to Inueigh against the Popes Bulls. There was
a wife of a certain Shoemaker, who a little before she dyed for a certain
number of Crowns purchased a Bull from the Pope: whereby she did assure her
self of free deliverance out of Purgatory. Within a whiles after this woman
being dead, the Husband having intelligence of the Bull, performed the
obsequies and funerals of his wife orderly and decently, as beseemed an honest
Husband to do: not regarding in the mean space Masses, Dyrges, Trentalls, and
other trincketts of the like Mockeries, usually exercised in the Church after
the old solemn manner, for the redeeming of souls departed out of this life.
The parish Priest being not a little grieved with the matter, began to marvel,
and to take in ill part the contempt of Religion, and to complain of the
unkind behauior and impiety of the Husband toward his wife, and at the last
framing a libell of the matter, accuses the Shoemaker for an heretic. To be
brief: The Shoemaker was arested by a Serieant, the matter was pleaded before
the Mayor of the City. The Shoemaker for his defense pleaded, that the cause
why he did not purchase Supplications and Masses, according to the old
accustomed fashion, for the health of his wives soul, proceeded not of any
contempt that he hadd against any of the solemn ceremonies of the Church, but
because he was assured that his wives soul was already saved, and in heaven,
he thought good to abate such extraordynary and unnecessary charges: and
withal taking the Popes Bull out of his bosom, desires the Mayor that it
might be openly readd. The Mayor does deliver the Bull to the parish Priest to
read. The Priest seeing ye Popes Bull stood still amazed at the first, and a
good whiles refused to read it: at the last being constrained by the Mayor, he
didd read it over: as soon as the Bull was read over, both the Mayor and the
parish Priest being thoroughly ashamed, held their peace. The Shoemaker was
earnest to procee to Judgment upon the aucthoritye of the Apostolic Release,
to make it appear what they judged now of the soul of his wife: whether she
were now in heaven, or in Purgatory. If she be in Purgatory, then the Bull
does lie: but if she be flowen up into heaven according as the Pope
commanded her: then was there no cause why he should hyre any hireling
shaueling to say Masses or Dyrges, for his wives soul. The Mayor and the
Priest having nothing to say to the contrary, nor daring to condemn the Popes
Pardone, acquitted the shoemaker of the action by a Nonesuite.

Masses and Sacrifices.
BUt I return to Osorius again, who, if hadd been Commissary in this case, I
know not what answer he would have made to this shoemaker: But this is out of
all question, that this Purgatory, whereabout these Catholics keep such a
stir, can by no means be of any force and power, but that either the Popes
Pardons, or these your Sacrifices of Satisfactory Masses. The Mass and Popes
pardons are contrary each to others.
Shall be by that means doughted of, and come into great peril to be utterly
discredited. For if yonr Stationes of Rome (the Pardons of all and every of the
which upon a just account made) do Surmount to the number of tenn hundred
thousand years, The sum of the Romish stations does surmount the number of
1000000. years.
and again if the Pilgrims that come to Rome, to see the only heads of
Peter and Paul, do obtain pardon of their sins for xij. thousaund years:
or if the fullness of the Romish See be of such estimation in the sight of God,
as you boast upon it, yt it is able to translate whatsoever souls it lists
suddenly without touch of breath out of Purgatory into heaven, yea and that
without any help of Purgatory at all: to what purpose then does this Sacrifice
of yours serve, wherewith you do undertake (as you say) to pacifye the
majesty of God for the sins of the dead? If there be no means else to
reconcile his favor, but by this daily Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ, of what virtue then shall your popish Pardons be? wherefore either must
your Bulls of very necessity break their necks, if your satisfactory Masses
stand still at the stake: or if your bulls be fatt and lusty, you must needs
confess that the jolly bragges and bigg looks of your satisfactory Masses
will be down dagger.

Furthermore how will that your infallible Assertion agree either with the rule
of the holy scripture, or with the determinations of your own Schoolmen? For
whereas your great Doctors do call this oblation an vnblooddy sacrifice. which
you name the oblatio^ of the body and blood of Christ either they must lie, or
else Osorius must needs say untruly. If the Schoolmen say true that it is an
vnblooddy sacrifice. I do demand them, by what reason it is ministered for the
washing away and cleansing of the sins of the quick and the dead? when as it
appears by the most manifest testimony of the scripture that there can be no
remission of sins without effusion of blood. Heb. 9.
Moreover if this vnblooddy sacrifice be such an effectual and sovereign
Balsamum for the curing of the festered wounds of the quick: for what soars
then avails your Sacramental plaster of penance? For if sins be washed
away clean before you go to Mass: to what use shall this necessity of
Sacrifice and confession be employed? Do ye not yet conceive plainly fine
man? into how many monstrous and frameshapen filthy deformities, this your
frivolous and apish reason would entangle us? which neither accord scarcely
betwixt themselves, and withal do much less resemble any countenance or show
of countenance with the holy Scripture?

You affirm that you do take upon you to reconcile the favor of God by the
body and blood of Christ: But why do you so loase our labor? For all this
matter that you now take in hand, is quite dispatched, and accomplished long
sithence. All the coast is clear here already: the reconcilement is concluded
upon: the old rotten wall is broken down: the obligations be all cancelled,
so that you need not to beat your brains any more about making any Releases:
Gods memory is not so obliuio^s, that it can so soon forgett this covenant
that he made with the late sacrifice of his Son except you rubb up his
remembrance with your daily sacrifice: Neither is this atonement purchased of
so slender force that we need to be afraid of any such breach of covenant, as
can not be continued without your delicate daily dayntyes. What shall I say of
the nature of the sacrifice it self? which (though you would the contrary
never so feign) neither ought, nor can be handled with any man's hands, besides
him only, who being clear from all spott of sin, did deserve to be heard
for his obedience sake, and who alone (as Augustine writes) is the only
priest and the sacrifice: Aug. contra aduers. leg. and Prophet. lib. 1. Cap.
18. Again upon the 64. Psalm.
the offerer, and the offering it self: And what faith is there so great in
you or what obedience to godwardes? or rather what shameless impudency in the
sight of men, wherewith you dare presume to handle this so honorable a
sacrifice for sins being of all parts so polluted, stynking, and filthy
sinners your selves? But I meddle no more with your unshamefastness: I
demand touching the matter it self, what reason or argument you can make for
any your necessary undertaking this Sacrifice? and I desire to be answered of
you herein.

Forsooth (say you) because God is wrathful against sinners and because
sins do daily boil up and buddle from without us, therefore a daily
Sacrifice is very requisite for the obtaining of daily pardon. But this pardon
is obtained by our own faith in Christ, yea without all your Sacrifices: or
else the verity of Gods word it self does lie surely: and Christ also does
deceive us, as appears by the promise made unto Paul, Acts. 86.
that they should receive forgiveness of their sins through faith that is in
Christ Jesus. etc. How say you to this? shall we now abandon our faith, that we
may establishe your unbloody sacrifice? for otherwise how can you join the
perseueraunce of the one, with the maintenance of them both? If faith do
obtain remission of sins, what need we then your Sacrifice? on the other
side, if sins cannot otherwise be washed away, but by the sprinckling of this
Sacrifice, then is faith altogether unprofitable. But you will say, the very
same Christ in whom we do believe is resiaunt in that holy Altar: Does he lie
their groueling or looking vppward? what say you Osorius? But go to what is
this to the Sacrifice? for if faith fastened in Christ wheresoever he be, do
obtain all our suites at his hands, what further need we of him to be
sacrificed again, or of your priesthood? Because when as by our ministry (say
you) the son is offered up unto the father, he can not choose but be
favorable unto us, and with his mercy forthwith embrace us: And therefore this
Sacrifice is undertaken of us not in vain, whereby we do pacify the majesty
of God: whose justice without this Sacrifice could not otherwise but be very
grievously angry and heavily affected against our sins: But we are otherwise
taught by the scripture of God: Romans 5.
which does plainly affirm that we being justified by faith have peace with
God. Romans 5. To what purpose then need we any reconciliation, where assured
peace is proclaimed already? But God is angry with our sins, This is true:
But this anger is alayed by faith and repentance, without all your oblations.
But if you think that an advocate must be procured hereunto: we are taught by
John that this Advocate is now already in heaven, and not in the earth. 1.
John. 2.
And he is (says John) the propitiation for our sins. 1. John. 2.

But when he is offered in the earth: the wrath of God cannot choose but be
reconciled with so acceptable a Sacrifice: Nay rather be ye well advised
hereof, least whiles you take upon you to pacify the wrath of God by
Sacrifice, you defile your selves by ye same means with most horrible
Idolatry: and so provoke the wrath of the Lord much more sharply against you
to your utter destruction, which how much is to be feared on your behalfes, I
need not to certify your wisdom with many words: Certes what you have
hitherto done, the matter does evidently declare it self. What time the
Turkish power began to prevail against the Christians.
For sithence the first erecting and frequenting of this sacrifice amongst you
if nothing else teach us, how you have pacified the wrath of God with this
sacrifice, we may learn well enough by the continual outrage of the Turk,
which beginning very near about that blessed time, not much after the Popedom
of Innocent the 3. it exceeds all creditt to be spoken, with how wonderful
success it has prevailed all this time ever sithence. And withal how many
monstrous heaps of miseries and calamities have burst out together with that
sacrifice yea daily raunge also vnreclaimeable, all good and godly men do right
well perceive, and be heartily sorry for the same. Satan roareth greedy of the
pray: Impiety surroundeth every where: the world does delight and sport it
self at our manifold miseries and mischieues: The fruits of Masses and the
popish Sacrifice.
and the old profane paganism does ware daily I know not how mighty and
incorrigible: almost nothing is sound through all Christendom: all things be
rent and torn in pieces: skarse is any Peace upon the whole face of the earth:
or any peaceable state of life. The Christians lie snorting in security: The
Jews wax every day more stiffnecked being molested and agreezed at no one
disorder so great, The popish Religion an offense and stumblyng block to the
jews.
as at your Sacrifices, Breadworshipp, Idolatryes, Pictures, and Images, which
they do plainly perceive to be manifestly repugnaunt against the Law of God.
And whiles you shrine your selves like Gods on the earth in purple and Gold,
the poor beggarly Church of Christ (which did once flourish and triumph
throughout all nations and tounges) is now pent up, and thrust together into
so narrow a straight, that it is ready to pyne away with anguish and grief,
which your Lordshippes receiving from the old ancient Fathers in very good
liking, lustye, and strong, is by your means now become carrayne lean, full
of sickness, and like an old kebbe full of wrinckles. In so much that if
these outragies proceed as they begin, you will be found shortly to leave us
never a Church at all, unless the majesty of God be otherwise reconciled to be
merciful to our despeired estates, then by your Idolatrous Sacrifice.

First whatsouer the Gospel of Christ hadd sometime obtained in Asia and in
Africa, you have utterly loft altogether: Over and besides this also, you have
lost Thracia, and all Greece: of late years Hungarye and both the Regions of
Pannonye: what shall we say to this? that the Venetians were not able to
preserve Cipres for all their Masses and Sacrifices? The Venetians lost Cypres
for all their Masses.
So puissaunt and so many voyages have been addressed, so many armies leuyed
against ye Turkish power, by Emperors, Kings, Christian Princes and Captains,
and most of all, by the procurements and practizes of the Romish Popes: Yet I
suppose, that all the mean whiles wanted no Masses and unbloody Sacrifices
through all their Pauylions and Tents: if at least these Sacrifices could have
prevailed any thing to the appeasing of goods indignation: And that I reckon
not up in the mean time Civil broils, daily raunging amiddes the very
bowels of the Church, Slaughters, Wars, Pestilences, Outragies, Vproares,
Schisms, Murders, Persequutions, Malice, and hartburningnes: What kind of
mischief has ever pestered any Common wealth, wherewith the tranquillity of
Christian Peace is not shaken at this present, yea spoiled and mangled, more
with cruel Combatts and tumultes at home, then with any Forrayne invasions or
attemptes? All which calamities seeming none other but special tokens of gods
grievous wrath waxen whotte against us, how happens that they are not
quallified by reconciling Gods favor with that unbloody Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ, which is daily exequuted by so many hands of Sacrificing
shauelinges, for an atonement to be made of Gods displeasure against sin?
But you will impute the fault of all these Calamities to the disolute lives,
and lycentiousnes of the lay people. Be it as you say: yet the matter
rebowndeth back again from whence it came. For if God being offended with the
wickedness of the people, could not be pacified by you, in so great continuance
of time hitherto: to what use then avails the power and virtue of that
reconciliatory Sacrifice betwixt God and us?

But I am of a far contrary judgment to you herein Osorius: whereas the
Turk preuayleth: whereas such an infinite heap of mischieues do ouerwhelme
us at home, and from abroad on every side: The tyranny of the Turk is not to
be imputed to any thing more then to the Popish Masses.
Whereas we have so long endured the unappeasable wrath of Gods vengeance: I
do believe verily that it comes to pass for none other cause more, then for
the very same Sacrifice, wherewith you do to stiffly persuade your selves that
you do turn away his heavy displeasure. For the dead (say you) and for such
as be departed out of this life, Finally for the health and safetye of all
Christian Realms you do make a Sacrifice most holy and most honorable of all
other Sacrifices: Osori. page 203.
the virtue whereof of you can neither express with tongue, nor comprehend
within imagination or thought: and do stoughtly maintain, that the same ought
to be accounted for the most holy, and principal groundworke of all Religion.
I do perceive you: and I do commend your Catholic industry, but your
Religion surely I can praise by no means. For what needed Christ to have
susfredd death, if the unbloody Sacrifice of his blood may satisfy for the
safety of all Christendom without shedding of any blood? if it can not, with
what Religion is this Sacrifice performed of you? nay rather how much
monstrous Idolatry do you uphold, and bolster out with this one Sacrifice of
yours? Not so (say you) but we make intercessions to Christ which suffered his
passion for us, to pacify the wrath of God, in the behalf of all Christian
Nations. Three notable lies in one sentence 1 First, that which you do assume
of the body and blood of Christ, is false. For Christ departing from hence, did
not leave behind him his body and blood, Christ departing hence did not leave
behind him his body and blood but a Mystery thereof only, and that also to
eat and not to Sacrifice.
but delivered unto us a mystery of his body and blood only. 2 Moreover the
same whereof you treat so much touching your Sacrificing, is as foolish and
vain. For neither was that Mystery delivered unto us to that end, that it
should be Sacryficed by thandes of the Priests: but that all the faithful in
general without exception, should be partakers thereof, and feed upon the
same: Eat you all (says Christ) of this: He does not say: Sacrifice this ye
Priests: And I think, to eat, and to drink, is not all one to say: as to
Sacrifice. 3 Finally this also is as vain and ridiculous: which you do more
then drowsily dream upon: that this Eating should be instituted for the health
of all Christian Realms, and for the relief of the quick and the dead. For it
was left amongst us for a Remembrance of the Lords passion only, and so
left, not that we should seek for forgeuenes of Sins out of the same: but
that these outward signs delivered unto us to Eat, might putt us in
remembrance of that everlasting remission of sins. which Christ should
purchase for us, by the shedding of his precious blood. And for this cause, he
does call it the (upp in his blood, which shall be shedd for many (says he)
into the remission of sins, not transitory remission I suppose Osorius but
into everlasting forgeuenes of sins: For other wise if it be a forgeuenes
Temporal, how will that saying of Jeremy be true? And I will make with them an
everlasting covenant: that I may not remember their sins any more. If it be
an everlasting Release: what need we then any further Sacrifices? or what
shall be said of yt your holiness of Religion, which does make that thing
transitory to us, that God has vouchsafed for us to be unremovable, and to
continue beyond all ages?


Arguments against the Sacrifice of the Altar.
To be brief, that we may now knitt up the matter by that, that has been
spoken before: Behold here in few words the truth and substance of this
Sacrament, Justified with most true and approved Arguments. Whereunto if you
will answer in your next letters to the Queens Majesty, at your convenient
leisure, you shall do us a great pleasure.

1. The Lord departing from hence, did carry away with him out of the earth the
substance of his body. Arguments against the sacrifice of the Altar.


Ergo. He did not leave the same substance behind him.

2. Christ did deliver unto us a Mystery of his body only.

Ergo. He did not deliver his very natural body,

3. Christ did institute a Mystery of his body to be eaten only.

Ergo. Not to be sacrificed.

In the remembrance of forgeuenes of sins only.

Ergo. Not a Sacrifice of cleansing and forgeuing of Sins.

4 Salvation and remission of Sins is promised to them only that believe in
Christ.

Ergo not to them that do sacrifice Christ.

5 Remission of Sins is not given without shedding of blood. Heb. 9:

In the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass there is no effusion of blood.

Ergo. In the Sacrifice of the Mass is no Remission of sins.

6. Salvation and free Remission of Sins does consist of the promise, through
faith.

The Sacrifice of the Mass is not free, but meritorious, nor consists of
faith, but of merit Meritorious.

Ergo. The Sacrifice of the Mass is ineffectual to Salvation, and to the
Reconciling of God.

7. There is no Material cause of forgeuenes of Sins, but the only shedding
of Christ's blood, and no formal cause but faith.

The unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass is neither faith, neither has in it any
effusion of blood.

Ergo, in the Sacrifice of the Mass there is neither Material nor Formal
cause of Remission of Sins.

8. The Sacrifices that do not cease to be offered for Sins, do not satisfy
for Sins: Heb. 10. The oblatio^s of the Law can never make the receauers
thereof perfect, for if they could, they would never have ceased to be offered.
etc.

The Sacrifices of the Altar do not cease to be offered.

(...)
does name it, Dionis. Clemens constitu. apost. lib. 6. cap. 30. Ambros. de
virg. lib. 2.
a Sacramental ministration. In Clement it is called a representation of the
kingly body of Christ. Others do call it a sign of a true Sacrifice:
sometimes it is called the Sacrifice of prayer and thankesgeuyng, by a certain
mystical figure of speaking. As in a certain place Ambrose does call our
Souls Altares. Where writing of virgins: I dare boldly affirm (says he)
that your Souls are Altares: In the which Christ is daily offered for the
redemption of the body: Not because our Souls be Altares: or that ye flesh of
Christ is naturally or materially offered of us: but these sayings are to be
taken in the same sense, as many other like sayings of the old writers are to
be understood. As where Jerome writes on this wise: That which was borne of
the Virgin, is daily borne unto us: Christ is Crucified unto us daily. etc.
Jerome upon the psalm. 86.97.
After the same manner also does Augustine speak: Then is Christ daily slain
to every of us, when we believe in him that he was slain. Aug. quest no^i and
veter. testa. lib. 2.
And the same Augustine in an other place upon the words of the Lord. Christ
does rise again daily unto thee. Aug. upon the words of Christ after S. Luke
Christ. upon the Acts 2. hom.
And in his 10. book De Ciuit ate Dei, Cap. 5. God is not delighted in the
Sacrifices of slain beasts, but of a slain heart. Even as Chrysostom
speaks likewise. In the holy mysteries the death of Christ is executed.
Besides this also as Gregory de Consecrat. Did. 2. Christ does dye again in
this mystery. etc. Gregory de consecra. did. 2. quid sit.
And yet is there no man so senseless to say, that Christ is borne every day,
or is Crucified, and ryseth again oftentimes: or that his death is executed in
the mysteries according to ye very substance thereof. But these be figurative,
and improper kinds of speeches, wherein is celebrated a certain mystical
execution of those things for a Remembrance: so that ye things them selves be
not present properly, which were long sithence finished, but are
representations by certain applyable resemblau^ces of things signified only:
whereby our faith may as it were from hand to hand, be admonished by the
application of these outward signs, what was accomplished before spiritually
for us, in that most excellent Sacrifice of Christ.

Eue^ as the Nation of the Hebrews were sometime fedd with the visible Manna,
and as our bodies are at this present strenghthened with daily food of
nourishyng sustenaunce, which would otherwise perish through want: Semblably
because there can be no salvation for our forlorn nature, besides ye blood of
Christ: Christ is therefore worthily called, the bread of our life, and the
food of ye world: whereby the bodies are not fed for a few years, but ye
souls are nourished to everlasting life: And for this cause Christ taking an
occasion of their communication which were co^ferryng together of Manna, By
what reason Christ is called the bread of life.
and the eating of his flesh not unaptly alluding to that heavenly banquett in
Moses (which did refresh the hunger of the body for a time) did call him self
bread in deed, and spoke the same also truly: And why truly? because he is
truly and in deed the bread and food of life, not only of this tra^sitory
and temporal life, but of everlasting life: not this life only, which we do
now enjoy in this world: but which we shall live much more truly in the world
to come. And for this cause purposing even then to suffer death for us, he did
note unto us his body and blood under the names of bread and wine. This is my
body (says he) This is the cup of my blood: Not because that bread and that
cup were changed into his body, and his blood naturally, substauncially, and
in deed: but because he could not before his death represent unto us, the
force and efficacy of that everlasting and spiritual Sacrifice, by any more
apt similitude, or application of any other likeness, which might continually
preserve the remembrance of him in our hearts after his death. And therefore
gave us in commandment, that we should celebrate the same perpetually, and
receive those eleme^tes for an everlasting memorial of that Sacrifice: and not
to be sacrificed for the expiation of Sins. Take (says he) Eat ye all of
this. In which words he does call upon not ye Priests only: but inuiteth all
the faithful ingenerall without exception as it were to a general banquett,
alluryng all men to follow his example herein. Which thing we do diligently and
carefully observe at this present, according to his prescript commandment,
and our dutyfull obedience not in corners, mumblyng up private Masses, but in
our public Congregatio^s and assemblyes. We do eat: we do not Sacrifice: we
do drink: we do not purge by Sacrifice. A dooble feeding in the Sacrament.
Moreover we do not eat with our teeth only, but much more effectually with
our hearts: not the body: but with the body: that so we be nourished both ways.
With our bodies we do receive the outward elements in deed, in a thankful
memorial of the Lords body offered: But with our faith and hearts we do receive
and embrace, How the body of Christ is received in the Supper, and how the
bread is received.
not the visible signs and elements only, but the truth of the body and blood
of Christ, and the whole virtue and efficacy of the same Sacrament.

And this is the order of our Communions Osorius. In the which we do neither
eat ye Sacrame^tall bread without Christ, nor Christ without the Sacramental
bread. For we do not rende these in pieces after your guise: but we do join
both together, the one with ye other, though we receive them not both after one
manner. That which the soul does feed upon, is not bread, but Christ: How
bread and the body are both received in the Communion.
That which is received into the mouth, and passes down into the bowels is
not the natural and real body of Christ, but bread. And yet in respect of the
signifieng mystery, it is not bread, nor do we eat it for bread, but for the
body of Christ: And therefore this mystery does reteigne in deed ye name of
the body, but in substance the nature of bread, and not of the body. For what
man has been ever of so Sauadge a nature, as could not perceive that man's
flesh is no convenient food for man's body? what Nation has been ever so
cruel and barbarous, as to be served at his table with man's blood, were it
never so delicately roasted and spiced? And what shall we say? that Scripture
it self does not permit this by any means, that men shall feed upon men's
flesh and blood: Gene. 9. Gene. 9.
And in an other place, you shall not feed upon the flesh of all beasts, as
well foul as four footed cattle: Leuit. 7. Leuit. 7.
And again. No soul emo^gest you nor of the Strangers that do soiourne
amongst you shall eat blood: Leuit. 17.
If the will of God were such, that it might not be lawful for his people to
feed upon the blood of beasts: how much rather do ye suppose yt we are
restrained by the same commandment from eating of ma^s flesh? Moreover
whereas Christ him self does confess that he was sent down into the earth
for that end, that he should dissolve no ioate of all that the law commanded,
but should accomplish every title thereof to the uttermost, by what reason
could he give an oblation of his body and blood at his Supper for a Sacrifice,
Leuit. 6. Christ could not give his body for an oblation in his Supper without
the breach of the Law.
to be eaten and dronken without breach of the commandment of that law,
which is expressed in the 6. Chap. of Leuit. in these words? The oblation that
is given for sin (says he) the blood whereof is brought into the Tabernacle
of witness, to make satisfaction in the Sanctuarye shall not be eaten, but be
burnt and consumed with friar. etc.

But here I suppose mine opposed adversary will seek after a knott in a
Bullrush as the Proverb is: Whereas Christ was able to do all things by the
assent and word of his omnipotency: And whereas the same Christ also did
affirm the same to be his body and blood, then must one of these two be
grau^nted of very necessitye: that either we must discreditt Christ his words,
and abase the omnipotency of God, or else we must needs establishe a true
oblation of the body and blood of Christ in the Supper. If all the sayings of
Christ howsoever uttered, and spoken by the Lord, must be done and performed in
the self same order and effectualnesse that he spoke them, and if all things
must be drawn to the killing letter: you have then woonn the Spurs. But then
what shall become of that spirit and life of ye Letter, where unto the
commandment of the Gospel does require us to apply, John. 6? John. 6. August.
de doctrine. Christi.
whereunto shall Augustines rule serve? which willing us to leave the Letter,
does force us to a deeper consideration, as often as an absurdity can not
avoided, without a necessary Allegory, if you be of this mind that we ought to
be driven from such like Allegorical, and figurative speeches of like
significatio^s. But what is this else, then to noozell up a Grammarian, not a
Divine? And by this means withal into how many senseless absurdityes shall
you force us, horrible and abominable to be spoken with toungue? We do in a
certain place hear the Lord speaking plainly and sensibly enough. I have said
you are Gods, and are all the Sons of the highest: Psalm. 81. John. 10.
If you regard the words only, what can be spoken more plainly. I have said
(says he.) If the outward sense of the Letter do force such an inviolable
creditt: what remains, but that we say, ye men must forthwt dege^der from
natural me^ into Gods? Again where we hear Peter in an other place called by
the name of Satan Math. 16. which words of Christ if we will interpret after
this manner, Math. 16.
we must needs conclude hereupon, that the Pope of Rome is not the Successor
of Peter, but of Satan. Whereby I suppose your Diuinitye is well enough
certified, how much it skilleth to attend and give ear unto, not only what is
read in the bare letter of the holy scriptures, but also to mark diligently
the sense, and meaning of the Scripture. In Gene. We hear the Lord speaking,
as is before mentioned: Let us make light, and light was made. If after the
same manner Christ had spoken over the bread: the matter had been out of all
question. Now whosoever affirms that some one thing is an other thing, does not
forthwith command the same thing to be made that other thing which he notes.
It is one thing to make, and an other thing to speak and pronounce. Whereof
the one is a change of substaunces, the other is a change of names only. But
Christ now taking here the bread and the cupp in his hands, does not command
that they shonld be made his body and blood, but does dignify the bread and
cupp which he took in his hands, by the name of his body only: not changing
the nature (as Theodoret reports) nor casting away the substance of bread
and wine as Gelasius affirms: but honoring the visible signs by the name,
and caling it his body and blood: Theodoret Dialo. 2.2 Col. de Sacramen. lib.
4. Cap. 4.
whereby he might more lively express to our senses the virtue and efficacy of
his death and passion ensuing.

For it comes to pass I know not how, that as often as we are minded to
express the excellency of any notable matter, we do not accustom our selves
altogether to the natural proprieties of speeches, but apply sometimes
improper and borrowed speeches to make the matter seem more Emphaticall, which
thing is usually frequented, not in sacred Scriptures only, but very often and
much also in the continual practizes of human actions and civil societye:
Such as have usually called Money the very Synowes of wars: such as have
named Scipio the sword of the Romans, he that said that Quintus Maximus was
the shield of the Romans: It is not to be doughted, Tobi 5.10.
but by these figurative speeches, they did mean to express more then the
words did emport. The Parents of Tobias, when they named their Son the
staff of their age, did they forthwith change their son into a staff of
wood? Ephe. 6.
or did they understand him rather to be their comfort of their life, under the
lykenes of a staff to lean unto? Paul commands us to take the sword of the
spirit: which he does call the word of God. In like manner when Christ
commands us to receive into out mouths that, which he named to be his body:
why do we not as truly and in deed, transubstantiate the sword of God into a
material sword, as the Eucharist into the natural flesh of Christ? If we
shall speak after the proper phrase of speech, it appears plainly, yt the
same death of our Lord, (which he dyed for our sakes) did purchase for our
souls everlasting sauetye and fulness of life. And it is not to be doughted, by
yt the Lord himself at his maundy before he suffered (foreseeing what was
coming upon him) did long before certyfy his disciples thereof by some
significant token. But to thend his words should be more deeply engraven into
their hearts, he vouchsafed to enstruct them with some similitude of sensible
things, rather then with words: by demonstration, rather then by speculation:
setting before their eyes not only a denomination of bread, and wine alone,
but also a visible example of a material eating: to enstruct thereby not our
minds only, vut to endure our senses to perseueraunce much more effectually.
And hereof both the cause, and the original of the Sacrament begann to spring
at the first. Do ye this (says he) in remembrance of me. Go to then, let us
advisedly consider what our Lord did in that Supper, and what the Apostles
likewise, and what we also ought to do: Christ took bread in his hands: he
brake the same bread: which bread being broken he offered, not to his Father,
but to his disciples, not for a Sacrifice, but for a Remembrance: not to
satisfy for Sins: (which could not be accomplished without shedding of blood)
but in Remembrance only of that blood which was to be shedd: Do ye this
(says he) in Remembrance of me. And this was the whole order of Christ his
action at that Supper. what did the Apostles? they received the Sacrament of
the body delivered unto them: when they had taken it, they did eat it: eating
it in a thankful remembrance of their Redeemer, they gave thanks. Now if we
following their example herein, do not do the like, accuse us: if we do the
same accordingly: A description of the Popish manner of Sacrificing.
tell us (( Diogines) what is it whereat you snarle? Now again for your
parts, what you Catholics do in corners, either vouchsafe to declare your
self Osorius or harken a little, whiles I do express it.

First the Priest does take the bread set down upon a stony Altar, taking it,
does consecrate it, the bread being consecrated, he does himself worshipp
first: afterward he lifts it up above his head as high as he can betwixt
his hands, as it were betwixt two thieves to the gaze, to be worshipped of
others: and withal offering the same bread to God the Father, in stead of a
Mediator makes intercession betwixt the Son, and the Father, beseeching the
Father that he would vouchsafe benignely to accept these oblations of ye body
and blood of his own son. And this does the Priest forsooth, as well for the
quick, as for the poor prisoners in Purgatory. Having offered ye Son on this
wise, ye Priest does reteigne him thus offered unto him self: does deliver him
to no body: but breaks him to him self into three small pieces, if I be not
deceived: two parts whereof he places under his hands one over an other,
after the manner of a cross: the third he drowneth down in ye Challice: O
wondrous and unspeakable mystery of the Pope. These things being on this wise
ordered, this Christemaker taking up at the last, this host divided so into
three pieces, two parts he deuoureth up, and the third he suppeth out of the
Challice: in such wise nevertheless as that not so much as a croome of this
supper or apish Interlude rather cann come to the peoples share: who must be
contented to have their eyes only fedd (as it were in plays and Enterludes)
whiles this whipstart alone have played all the parts of the Pageaunt: Ite
Missa est.
and at the last throwing out a blessing from out the bottom of this Chalice,
commands his gazers every one to depart whither they will.

For as much as those things are daily and every where practiced by you, and
with big looks supported to ye hard hedge, may I be so bold to learn of you,
by what right? by what title of antitiquitie? by what ground of Scripture? or
by what example at the last ye be able to defend this your deuouryng of
flesh, and breadworshypp? The popish breadworshyp.
by any example of Christ? or his Apostles? but where did Christ ever institute
in the Supper a Sacrifice of his body? where did he consecrate bread into his
body? or where did he transform bread into his flesh? where did he lift up
any host unto his Father, How much the popish Mass does differ from the
Supper of Christ and the usage of the Apostles.
with outstretched arms toward heaven to pacify his Father? or where did he
make a show thereof to the people to be gazed upon? what did the Apostles?
where did they ever worshypp the bread that they did eat in the Supper, or in
their Communio^s? where did they ever inuyte others to any Adoration of this
Sacrament, and not rather to the eating thereof only? where did they Sacrifice
it for the quick and the deadd? where did they ever carry abroad the Eucharist
in Procession and open assemblies? or where did they reserve it for stoare?
where did they ever defraude the lay people of one part of the Sacrament?

Briefly, The profanyng and Idolatrous transforming of the Lords, Supper
emo^gest the papists
how all the proceedinges of this your iugglyng Interlude does varry from the
first Institution of the Apostles, how it has not any partakyng or
acquaintance with the Communion of Christ, nor any resemblaunce or affinity
with his holy Supper, Let whole Christendom be Judge herein: Let every man
that list compare examples with examples, new with old, present with times
past: what does all this whatsoever you do, resemble else, then like a certain
skippyng and trippyng gesture of some Stagelike Comedy rather, the^ a Supper of
the Lord? wherein first you changed the Sacrament into a Sacrifice: you have
altered the Table into an Altar: transposed mysteries into Masses, and
translated eating into Adoration, participation into Religion: banquetyng, into
gazing and tootyng. The substance of bread you have with a plain Poetical
Metamorphosis tra^substanciated into the substance of flesh: finally you have
brought the matter to this pass, that there is no form of a Supper, no nor
so much as the name of a Supper remainyng. For what is he that will ever name
that to be a Supper, where neither bread nor drink, nor any kind of meat
besides ma^s flesh and blood only, is set before the guestes to feed upon?
which is horrible for any man to eat that will either follow the rule of
nature, or the prescript commandment of the Scriptures.

What then? will you abandone Christ (say you) from us out of the Eucharist
altogether? The solutio^ of Hosius Objection.
and will you leave no more but bare Signs only in this most holy Sacrament?
For such is the question that Hosius makes in a certain place: and the self
same now does Osorius thrust out against the Lutheranes. Whose accusation
because I purpose to refute, behold ye good Catholic me^ that which I must
speak both truly and necessaryly. First this quarrel touches the Lutheranes
very little. For others I do answer on this wise. That this does not exclude
Christ out of the Eucharist: but you do banish Christ out of heaven altogether:
whiles by the same rule you force the nature and substance of his body into so
narrow streightes, as it were thruchte into a Geometrical chynker: wherein
what do you else, then hale him out of heaven? For one and the self same bodily
nature in one and the self same body, can not be here, and there, at one time.
In deed you confess it can not be by nature, The Solution of the objection.
but it may be be (say you) by miracle. But cursed be that miracle, whereby the
true humanity of our Christ is denied, and whereby our co^ioyning together
with him is broken a sunder. For what partakyng shall be of our natures with his
body? or what agreeable proportion of body betwixt us, If we be severed each from
other, in the whole property and substance of nature? But Augustine a
reasonable Catholic Divine enough, I suppose, will not consent unto this that
the Divinity of Christ ought so to be affirmed, Osor in his 3. book. Page 183.
is that his humanity shall by any means be defaced. Therefore that railing of
Osorius agaynt us, as though we did dispoyle the holy banquet of Christ's
Divinity is some drowsy dream of some dronckard: for who did ever seclude
the Divinity of Christ from this mystical Supper?

So is also the cauilation of Hosius in each respect as slanderous, where he
charge us, yt we sequester ye body of Christ wholly from the Eucharist. Which
is also as untrue. For albeit we do affirm that the body of Christ is
naturally, in his own property in heaven, we do not so exclude him from the
holy mysteries, as that we would not have him present therein at all: but
consideration must be had in what manner he is present. He that does acknowledge
a true presence of Christ after a Sacramental manner, and under a mystical
coueryng, does not abanddon Christ out of the Sacrament: but he that reiectyng
the mystery, does acknowledge no presence, but such as must be believed to be
present naturally, and in deed: the same if he abide by his words, must
needs overthrow all the substance of a Sacrament of very necessity. For
whereas they do assign the whole material part of the Sacrament to consiste
in this, that the flesh of Christ included within those mysteries must appear
discernable to the beholders, not in his proper and natural form, but in an
other shape it is a frivolous devise boulted out of the forgeshoppe of
Lumbarde. Which by this evident demonstration of Augustine is easily
overthrown.

All Sacraments do represent a necessary likeness of the same things, An
Argument against transubsta^tiation.
whereof they be Sacraments.

The outward forms of bread and wine do by no manner of likeness, represent
any agreablenesse with the body of Christ.

Ergo, No material part of a Sacrament can be applyable to those outward
forms of bread and wine.

And yet this notwithstanding we do confess, that Christ is present
nevertheless in his mysteries. But it is one thing for Christ to be present in
a mystery, and an other thing to be present naturally, and enclosed as it were
within a certain place. It is one thing to bear the name of a thing, whereof
it is a remembrance: and an other thing to be the very same thing whereof it
takes denommatio^. It is one thing to have a likeness, and an other thing to
be in the very same substance. Neither is it a good Argument, that is fetched
from the word or letter, to the substance. Where in the one, the very matter
of a Sacrament is to be seen: in the other, the truth of the substance is
discerned. A Fallax a secundum quid ad simplicitur.
Wherein is concluded a fallax A secundum quid ad simpliciter.

In a Comedy or Interlude he yt comes forth upon ye Stage cladd in Kingly
Roabes and crowned with ye Diadem of a King, the same is not by and by ye King
in deed whose person he does represe^t. And yet is there no cause to ye
contrary, but during ye time of the Interlude he may be after a certain sort,
called a King: to wit, after ye same manner, as Signs and similitudes of
things, do many times obtain to be called by the name, and title of the very
things whereof they be representations. Therefore for as much as the action of
this sacred Communion is of this nature, as the which does no less minister
the body of Christ, to be received by faith, then the bread, to be eaten by the
mouth: these men therefore do not seclude Christ from this sacred banquet, as
you see, How the body of Christ is present and not present in the supper.
but you and your Catholics rather: whiles you do sequester the Allegory from
the words of Christ, refusing all manner Type of resemblaunce and likeness,
and whiles you do rende a sunder the spirit (which does quicke^) from the
letter that does kill: whiles you banishe quite away all bread out of the
Sacrament: whiles you tear abroad the subject from the accidents: Whiles ye
make a miserable myngle mangle and hochepott of the things that are severed by
nature, How the Papists do remove Christ from the mistical Supper.
and again dissolve the things that are naturally joined together. Whiles
with most abominable Idollworshyp you do most filthyly defile the most pure,
and chaste Church of Christ, to the intolerable discomfort and sorrow of all
godly hearts: you have brought this to pass by your crafty co^ueyau^ce, that
the people now can neither partake of any bread in the holy supper of Christ,
no nor Christ himself, but in steed of Christ must receive an Idol: in place
of bread certain Imaginatiue Signs and Metaphysicall Antyckes (I know not
what) of forms and shapes ha^gyng in the air, and to speak the truth at a
word, can be partakers of nothing at all: for as much as neither the body of
Christ can by any means be upon the earth without the Sacrament, and you will
acknowledge no such Sacrament of the body to be in the Church after any such
sort, whenas you exhibit only to the gaze the body it self not to be
signified by representation, but in very presence to be sensibly embraced, and
beholden with men's eyes.

And thus much hitherto of the material point of this your Sacrifice: of the
which I think, that either never any thing may be uttered sufficiently against
you, or else that we have now uttered enough in that behalf. It remains now,
that forasmuch as this place ministers occasion to discourse somewhat upon
this controversy, that we pursue (as it were by tracing the track of the^) all
the chiefest bullwarkes of your reasons (I mean not yours Osorius) which are
not worth a Portingall fig: but the squibbes of your coapemates, wherewith
they think the creditt of their error safely fortified: or with the smoke
whereof rather they do dazell the eyes of the simple people, even in ye same
order as they have been produced: least that any thing may seem to have
escaped us, wherein Osorius may cavil, that we have not either guarded our
defense sufficiently, or not undermined and skattered their arguments into
powder substantially.

The Reasons of the Adversaries wherewith they maynteyne their Altars and
Sacrifices so Iustelye.
The Sacrifices, Objection.
of the old law did prefigure the sacrifice of the new Law, and of a better
Testament.

Ergo, The Church has her daily and eternal sacrifice.

Whereas the Adversaries do affirm that the Sacrifices of the old Law did
represent a figure of a better sacrifice, Answer.
herein they do err nothing at all. Again, that the Church has her daily
Sacrifice, we do also confess. But whereas they say, that their Sacrifice of
the Mass is that Sacrifice, this is most false and foolish. The Sacrifice of
Abell, Noah, Abraham, the Pascall Lamb, the Lamb without sports: the read
heyfer. etc. did prefigure an other, and a more excellent Testament in deed:
But all these shadows were concluded, and ended in one only oblation, which
being slain for us once upon the cross, has a certain everlasting
effectualnesse pacifiyng, and reconciling. And therefore that Apish Sophisme is
cut of by the Rumpe. To wit.

The old Sacrifices do represent a figure of a new sacrifice. The cutted
Sophisme of the Papists.


Ergo, The Mass is that Sacrifice of the new Testament, etc.

The Sacrifices of the old Testament were not all of one sort for some were
(...) which we call propitiatory. Again some were (...) which the Latinistes
do call gratulatory. To the same our Sacrifices be correspondent: but of a
far more special perfection. For their Propitiatory Sacrifices did signifye
Christ slain for the sins of the people. Their Gratulatory Sacrifices did
testify and e^presse tokens and significations of grateful thankefullnesse of
minds. Of which sort are many Sacrifices discerneable amongst us. The
preaching of the Gospel, and the acceptable oblation of the Gentiles. Romans 15.
Romans 15.13
The lively Sacrifice of our bodies. Romans 13. The collections of the faithful
for their brethren. Phill. 4. Hebr. 13. Philipp. 4. Heb. 13.
The Sacrifice of praise, and the calves of lips: in the same Chapter.
Mortifiyng of the flesh, Alms, Thankesgeuing, The memorial and thankful
confession of the benefits of Christ, which is likewise frequented in the
action of the Lords Supper.

An other argument.
An other Arugment of the adversaries
The outward Priesthood does require an outward Sacrifice.

Christ did institute an outward Priesthood in the new Testament.

Ergo, Christ did institute a new Sacrifice in the new Testament.

Answer
In deed the Church is invested with her Priesthood and her Sacrifice in the new
Testament, as well as it was in the old Testament. But we do say that all that
Priesthood, together with the Sacrifice that is offered for sins, is
altogether resiaunt and accomplished in our one and only Christ, the son of
the living God. Whereupon we do acknowledge one only Priest, and one only
oblation, One Priest many Ministers.
not Priests and Apostles, nor the Apostles Successors, but Christ, and him
only our chief and high Priest. And this high Priest of ours did institute a
Ministry in his Church, but not a Priesthood: I do mean such a Priesthood,
which does necessarily require a satisfactory Sacrifice, as it was in the old
Law. For this only Bushoppe having abolished the old priestehoodd, and
abandoned the old Sacrifices does reign an everlasting Priest, and gave
himself a Sacrifice once, and even one Sacrifice for all: The only priest of
the new Testament.
so that from henceforth is no need at all of any Priest or satisfactory
Sacrifice for sins for ever. In the mean space (as I said before) he left
behind him a Ministry established in his Church: not such a Ministry as
should offer up any more Sacrifice for the redemption of sins: but such a
one, as should only apply ye preaching of ye word, and the due administration
of the Sacraments, namely, Baptism and the celebrating of the Lords supper.
The merits of christ are applied by faith not by sacrifice.
So yt the very Action and Ministry of the Minister does avail nothing to the
dividing of Christ's Merits abroad through merit meritorious: but that every
man may apply himself, and become capable of those Merits of Christ, by the
force of his own proper faith. And this Application or use of the Lords
supper is called a Memorial of the passion of Christ: as the which does depend
not upon the merit of him that works, nor upon merit meritorious, but upon
the faithful receiving of the godly by faith only.

An Argument out of Malachy.
Malachy. Cap. 1. An Argument out of Malachy Cap. 1.
In every place is sacrificed and offered unto me a pure offering. Because my
name is great amongst the Gentiles, says the Lord God of Hoastes. In this
saying of Malachy three things (as they say) are to be considered. The
dissolution of the Synagogue. The dissolution of the Leuiticall sacrifices, and
the institution of a new sacrifice. The Sacrifice of the new Testament and the
two proper ties thereof.
In which new sacrifice is a double property. 1. that it come in place of the
leuiticall sacrifices. 2. that it be offered in all places. Which properties
cann not be appliable any where, but to the Mass only. For first they do not
agree with the spiritual sacrifices of the Christians, wherewith God is
worshipped with the inward affections of the soul: because all these
sacrifices be general unto us, as well as they were in the law of nature, and
the law of Moses. Then also they cann not agree with the Leuiticall sacrifices
which were not executed every where, but were limited to one place only. No
more may they have any partaking with the sacrifice of the Cross, which was
accomplished once, and in one place only. It remains therefore that this
prophetical sacrifice of Malachy, must signify the unbloody sacrifice of the
Mass, according to the Testimonies of the Ecclesiastical writers, Irene,
Augustine, Jerome, Damascene. etc.

The same Argument in a form Logical,
In the new testament such a sacrifice must remain as may be daily and
perpetual, and celebrated in every place, as appears by the words of
Malachy.

There can be no such kind of Sacrifice else, but the sacrifice of the Mass:
proved by the Reasons before mentioned.

Ergo, The sacrifice of the Mass is that perpetual sacrifice whereof Malachy
does prophecy, and which can not be dissolved.

Answer.
The words of the Prophet do so thoroughly expound the meaning of the Prophett,
as that they need none other interpretation. A pure offering (says Malachy) is
offered unto my name because my name, Malach. 1.
is great amongst the Gentiles. The Prophet does plainly prophecy of the
Church, which is to be gathered together from out amongst the Gentiles, of the
enlarging of the Gospel, The place of Malachy expounded.
of faith, of the knowledge of God, of calling upon his name, of confessing his
name, and giving of thanks. And this pure and acceptable offering of the
Gentiles by how far it is outstretched and proclaimed over all the world, so
much the more evidently it does disclose the meaning of the Prophet. The
Sacrifices of the Synagogue and of the Leuiticall worshipping which were
ministered with outward Ceremonies be abolished, to the end that spiritual
Sacrifices (wherein God does take greater pleasure) should supplye their place,
who as he is himself a spirit, does delight to be worshipped in spirit and
truth. And because this heavenly and celestial kind of worshipping must be
proclaimed every where over all the face of the earth, therefore the Lord does
foreshew by the mouth of the Prophet, that it shall come to pass, that the
great name of god should wax mighty in all places and should be generally
worshipped with worthy sacrifices and true honor. And by what means can this
saying uphold this outward applicatory Sacrifices of ye Mass as they call it?
And yet if they will needs have it so: what shall this be else, the^ to desce^d
from flesh to flesh? and to make a change of the old Iewishnes with a new
Iewishnes? S. Paul does testify plainly of this Prophetical Sacrifice Romans
15. That the Gentiles may glorify God for his mercy, Romans 15.
as it is written. For this cause will I praise thee amongst the Gentiles.
etc. Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles. Psalm. 18.
Psalm. 117. And there shall spring a branch out of the root of less, Psalm.
127.
in him shall the Gentiles trust. Esaias. 11. That the offeringes of the Gentiles
(says Paul) might be acceptable.

Esaias. 11. Romans 15.
Of the same Sacrifice, let us now hear what Epiphanius and other writers do
write in their Commentaries upon these words of Malachy. Epipha. lib. 3. Sermon.
79. Tertulli. against Marcion 4. book.
Sacrificing the Gospel (says Epiphanius) over all the face of the earth.
Again. Tertullian against Marcion in his 4. book. I have no pleasure in you,
because from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same my name is
glorified, and in all places a Sacrifice is offered unto my name, yea and that a
pure Sacrifice, what kind of Sacrifice? he does not say the Sacrifice of the
Altar, but pure prayer, powered forth of a clear conscience. etc. And in his
third book he does him self express what kind of Sacrifice, this is. Namely
the proclamation of glory, thankesgeuing, and praise, and Psalm. etc. The same
Tertullian also Contra Iudaeos. Fol. 4. Tertul. contra I^daeos, fol. 4.
Wherefore the^ does the spirit Prophecy afterward by the Prophets, that it
shall come to pass, that over all the earth, and in all places, sacrifices
should be offered unto God, as he spoke by the mouth of Malachy, I will not
accept the sacrifice of your hands? doubtless because the sound of the
preaching of the Apostles should be heard over all the world. Because God must
be worshipped not with earthly sacrifices, but with spiritual, we read this,
where it is written. A contrite heart is a sacrifice unto God. And in an other
place. Offer unto God the sacrifice of praise and pay thy vows to the
highest. After this manner therefore are the spiritual sacrifices of praise
noted: such an acceptable sacrifice to God is a contrite heart known to be.
etc. Moreover if you will learn what kind of sacrifice of the Church this
must be. Let us hear the words of the same Tertullian to Scapula. Tertulli.
to Scapula.
And therefore we do offer sacrifice for the good preservation of the Emperor,
but we do sacrifice unto our God and his: but how? even as God has commanded
us, namely: with pure prayers. Thus much out of Tertullian. Irene is his fourth
book against the heresies of Valentine and other like unto him, Irene in his
4. book. Cap. 32.
cityng this place of Malachy: does say yt by these words he made a most
manifest demonstration, that ye first people did cease to sacrifice unto God,
but in all places a sacrifice is offered unto God, yea and that a pure
sacrifice. But his name shall be glorified amongst the Gentiles. And in the 33.
Chap. John in his Revelation (says he) does call the prayer of the Saints by
the name of Incense unto the Lord. And in his 34. Chap. expoundyng the same
place of Malachy. And therefore he will have us offerre an offryng at the altar
without intermission. The same Irene. ca. 33.
This Altar therefore is in the heavens, for unto that Altar must our prayers
and oblations be directed, and to that Temple. etc. What shall we say to
Augustine? Aug. contra aduers. leg. and Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 20
Who writing upon ye same place, does affirm ye Incense there is taken for the
prayers of the faithful. And immediately annexyng thereunto: When he said, I
will not accept the Calves of thine house: Offer unto God the sacrifice of
praise. The same God by the mouth of this foretelling the thing that should
come to pass as though it were done already, does say. From the rising of the
sun to the going down of the same my name is glorified amongst the Gentiles,
and in every place Incense is offered to my name, and a pure oblation. etc. You
see therefore Osorius by the testimony of Augu. what kind of pure sacrifice
this is in Malachy, namely: That Praise and Thankesgeuing is the continual,
and daily sacrifice of the Christians: but especially when we do represent the
death of Christ, wherewith he redeemed us, and the co^ioynyng of his mystical
body, by the partakyng of the holy Communion of the bread and wine.

Eusebius de monstr. in his first book.
Of ye same mind also is Eusebius, who does interpret this sacrifice of
Malachy (...). Which is as much to say Ince^se of prayer. What shall I say of
Jerome? Jerome upon the Prophet Malach. Cap. 1 Ioh. Damascen. de orthodoxa fide
Lib. 4. Cap. 14.
Whose Exposition upon the same place of ye Prophet does not vary from the
Exposition of Tertullian, affirming that the prayers of the faithful must be
offered unto the Lord, not in one only province of Jury, but in all places.
etc. Damascene is yet behind, whose authority albeit does give no great
credit to the cause, as being (to say nothing else) a writer of no great
antiquity, yet even in this same place, where by this unbloody Sacrifice, he
notes yt body and blood of Christ, he spoke plainly of ye Supper of the Lord:
but makes no mention at all of the Mass, nor of the Sacrifice of the Mass.

Now I will answer to the Argument: Wherein to admit the Mayor: yet is ye
Minor surely most false: which they do divide into branches on this wise.
First (say they) this daily sacrifice that Malachy does prophecy of, can have
no agreablenes with the Leuiticall sacrifices, which are worn out of use long
sithence: neither do I deny this, what then? Neither could the Prophet here
prophecy of the sacrifice of Melchizedech, which was prefigured long before.
You say very well. No more can it be understood of those spiritual
sacrifices of the faithful which are offered in mind, and in spirit: Go
forth now. So neither can they be ascribed to the righteousness of works, which
the Prophet Esaias does reject, being defiled as it were a menstruous cloth.
Esaias. 64.
I do hear you. Lastly, whereas the sacrifice of the Cross was accomplished
in one place only at Jerusalem: The unmeasurableness of this sacrifice, which
is enclosed within no bounds of place can not be referred unto that sacrifice.
Well, conclude now at the length. It remains therefore, that the words of
the Prophecy be construed to have relation to the sacrifice of the popish
mass: in the which christ him self being a most pure and most clean
sacrifice of it self is offered unto God emongst the Gentiles, in all places,
yea even now in the time of the new Testament, without end.

I do answer: where the Prophet does name it a pure Sacrifice, therein he
seems to will nothing else, but that abolishing all the Legal Sacrifices,
which were offered by smoke, by smellyng savor, and blood, he did signify
certain other new reasonable Sacrifices, and unbloody, as Eusebius calls
them: namely spiritual and mystical Lyturgies of the Church, and inward
Sacrifices of the faithful: which albeit do seem of the^ selves unclean and
menstruous, yet being purged and made clean by the blood of Christ, are
accounted reasonable and acceptable in the sight of GOD: to wit, by that
reason, as all things are said to be clean to them that be clean: Act. 10.
And that which God has made clean, ought no man to account unclean. In the
which sense, the faithful are commanded to lift up pure hands in prayer,
in S. Paul. Whereupon Eusebius does say, that we do kindle the Insence of
prayer, and does call the same, 1. Tim. 2. Eusebius. demo^st. Eua^g lib. 1. cap. 6.
a pure sacrifice, which we do execute, not with blood and goare, but with pure
actions.

Moreover where the Prophet does add. In every place: as these words prevail
nothing for the credit of the Mass, so does it extenuate our Religion of the
Sacrifice of the Cross nothing at all. For albeit Christ the most sweet
Savior did suffer his Passion no more but once, and in one place only, at
Jerusalem, this withstandeth nothing at all, but that the efficacy dignity, and
memorial of this Sacrifice received by faith, may over spread and be
frequented in all places, and times. Whereupon we do hear Chrysostom
discoursing very plainly. Neither did it therefore repent God of the Priesthood
(says he) because the sacrifice, which he did offer upon the Cross does so
remain acceptable in the good pleasure of God, and permanent in endless
power, that the same oblation should be less effectual now in the sight of
his Father, then it was the very same day, Chrisost. to the Heb. Homil. 17.
wherein water and blood gushed from out his wounded heart, and the wou^des
remainyng discernable always in the body, should exact the price of man's
redemption. etc.

Which if were truly spoken by Chrysostom, what need any more ^tteration of
Sacrifices upon altars for the salvation of souls? especially sithe^ce
according to the general and public consent of ye Doctors, there is none
other Sacrifice for sins but this one only oblation upon the Cross, neither
is any other Sacrifice acknowledged of ye Church, but ye only which consists
of the memorial and thankful remembrance of that Sacrifice upon the cross.
Innumerable testimonies might be vouched out of the Doctors agreeing altogether
in this sense and meaning. Eusebius demonst. lib. cap. 10.
But I do see that thauthorityes to Justify this cause do amount to an
infinite number. This is an old and a true saying of Eusebius. That he gave to
us a remembrance to offer to God continually in steed of Sacrifice.

What shall we say of Lombard: who does affirm that this priestly Sacrifice is
nothing else then a memorial and Representation of that true oblatio^ offered
upon the Cross. Nazianzen.
From which sweet agreeable consonancye of Authors Nazianzen does nothing
differ, calling the exemplar of great Misteryes the Sacrifice of praise.
Justinius Martyr in Dialo. cum Triphone.
What say you to Iustine Martyr? Esaias does not promise (says he) a restoring
again of bloody Sacrifices, but true and spiritual oblations of praises and
thankesgeuing. etc. And Augustine: Augustine contra aduers. leg. and prophe.
Christ did deliver a similitude of that Sacrifice to be celebrated in
Remembrance of his passion.

And the same Augustine in an other Place. August. in lib. quest. 61.
Christ did geaue a representation of that Sacrifice to be celebrated in the
Church for a memorial of his passion.

August. co^tra Faust. 20. cap. 21.
And again: The flesh and blood of this sacrifice after the ascension of Christ
is celebrated by a sacrament Memorial.

To be short, if the controversy shall be decyded by the Testimony of Doctors:
ye general consent of all the learned Antiquitye does agree and concur in
this question: namely that never any one of them would establish any other
Sacrifice for sins, besides that one only Sacrifice, which Christ alone at
one time only, once and in one place, did enseale, and Ratify with his own
precious body, and blood upon the Altar of the Cross. Of which Sacrifice
albeit the thing it self (being once already performed) be past, and ye time
thereof determined: yet does the power and effectuallnesse thereof remain
immovable, sure, and vndeterminable beyond all ages: And the daily celebration
thereof is reteigned in all places of Christendom for an everlasting
remembrance: and for that cause it is oftentimes called by the name of that
Sacrifice, whereof it does represent a memorial: not because our sins do
need any other Sacrifice from henceforth: but that our faith being daily
exercized in these outward helps, may be continually enured to know what
benefits it has received of her Savior, and how much likewise it is indebted
unto him.

Not much unlike to the people of Israel, who by the blood of the Passover
were delivered from the Tyranny of Pharaoe. A comparison betwixt the passover
and Christ.
In deed they were delivered once: yet nevertheless the Pascall Lamb was
slain every year, for a remembrance of their deliverance: wherein was
neither any passage of Angel seen, nor deliverance of the people. In like
manner, for as much as we also be made so free from any guilte of Sin and
bondage of death, by the one only Sacrifice of the Lords passion: as that
there is no need now of any Sacrifice from henceforth for the full redemption
of Sins: to us now is this most blessed Supper and Eucharist instituted for a
perpetual memorial of that inestimable benefitt: which albeit have no power,
nor effectuallnesse of ye oblation, which it does represent, yet is it
dignified with the name of that Sacrifice, in respect of the honorable
representation of the thing represented. And thus much hitherto touching
Malachy. Now let us see what moates these Sophisters do knitt together
touching Melchizedech. An Argument out of the Trident Council.


It behooved that the figure of Melchizedech should be fulfilled in the true
Priesthood of Christ.

Melchizedech did offer bread and wine unto God, which was a figure of the body
and blood of Christ under the forms of bread and wine.

Ergo, Christ did offer at his last supper his body and blood, unto God the
Father under the forms of bread and wine.

As touching the necessary agreeableness of the things and the Types mentioned
in the Mayor, we do agree together. Answer.
For it is vndoughted true that Augustine teaches in his 10. book De Ciuitate
Dei. the 5. Chap. Aug. de ciuitat. dei. lib. 10. cap. 5
That the things of the old Testament be representations of the things of the
new Testament. But all that which is assumed in the Minor concerning the
Sacrifice, is of all parts false: both in respect of Christ, and in respect of
Melchizedech. For as much as neither of the^ did ever institute any Sacrifice
for sins in bread: what then, will you say? did not Melchizedech represent ye
Type of Christ our Savior? there is nothing more true. But we must consider
wherein, and by what means this agreeablenes may be corresponde^t: In the
Priesthood (I suppose) and not in the Sacrifice. For comparison is made of a
Priest with a Priest: not of a Sacrifice with a Sacrifice. Thou art an
everlasting Priest (says he) after the order of Melchizedech? By what reason
Melchizedech did represe^t the Type of Christ.
which in mine opinion is in three respects. First in the participation of
kingly name: For they were both called kings of Justice and peace. 2. by
reason of the Priestly kindred: whereas both were Priests without knowing any
Parentage of whom they came.3. according to the perpetuity of priesthood,
because the priesthood in the^ both was without beginning and without ending:
unto whom in ye Priesthood was never assigned Successor, or predecessor. The
plain explanation whereof does appear in no place more evidently, then in the
very Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews. Which making a collection of many
branches, in comparing the Priesthood of Melchisedech together with the
Priesthood of Christ, yet in all the same makes no mention at all of any
Sacrifice of bread and wine.

But they take exception, and say: forasmuch as Melchisedech was a Priest, by
what reason could he be a Priest without a Sacrifice? And who does exclude
Melchisedech being a Priest, from his Sacrifice? But there is none other
Sacrifice of his extant (say they) in the holy scriptures, but in the bread and
the wine which were offered as ornaments of his Priesthood. A deep reason, as
though he, that so many thousand years ago was a Priest without all beginning
of time: did not at any time during this whole intercourse of time, offerr any
Sacrifice unto God besides this one Sacrifice only. Which being an
unreasonable absurdity, yet not to contend long upon this point, I would feign
be resolved of these Catholics in one question: When Melchisedech did offer
bread and wine, whether he did Sacrifice for Sins yea or no? Melchizedech is
denied to offer bread and wine for a Sacrifice.
I do marvel what answer they will make hereunto. If they say nay: how then
did he prefigure the Type of Christ? if they say yea. I ask again, whether
the Sacrifices that are ordained for the clensing of sins, must be done unto
God, or unto men? If he did Sacrifice to Abraham, a good fellowship tell us
what had Abraham to do with our sins? Moreover, I would learn this also:
for as much as there cann no expiation of sins consist in Sacrifices without
shedding of blood: and whereas in all this preparation of Melchisedech was no
bloodshed at all, what force and efficacy of expiation could there be in that
Sacrifice? or how could it be accounted a Sacrifice at all? Forsooth (say you)
because these things offered did prefigure a certain resemblaunce of this to
come. But what resemblaunce might be there, where no likeness could be
appliable? If in the Sacrifice of Melchizedech was nothing seen but bread and
wine only: what is this to the purpose to establish the Satisfactory Sacrifice
of the Mass wherein is left no croome of bread, nor drop of wine?

But Melchizedech is called the Type of our Savior. That is true in deed: But
the Type is past, and the veritye supplyeth the place. Let us make a
comparison betwixt the sampler and ye truth. A comparion betwixt Melchizedech
and Christ.
Melchizedech did bring bread and wine into the Army, which he did offerr to
Abraham, and not unto God: neither did he bring bread and wine to be gazed
upon, nor to be worshipped, not to release offenses: but he delivered it to
Abraham, to refresh him, and his Soldiers, after their long and paynefull
Journey. The same which Melchizedech did in the Army, Christ has performed in
his supper: who taking the bread and the cupp in his hands did not offer there
his body unto his Father, but did distribute the bread and wine peecemeale, in
the name of his body, and he commanded them to eat: where is there yet any
Institution, or any signification of a Sacryfice? I do behold in Melchizedech
a figure: but I acknowledge the veritye in Christ: I do conceive also a
participation made of bread and wine by them both: yet all this while I see no
Sacrifice. Both of them offered bread and wine to nourish: namely Melchizedech
unto the Patriarche, and to his soldiers, and not unto God: Christ to his
disciples, not to ye Father, but unto men: after the usual manner of men that
use mutually to present each other with gifts. Besides this also the
Patriarche with his people, and Christ with his disciples were altogethers
pertakers of that which was given.

Go to now: and in what sense may all this be applied to the holy sacrifice of
the Mass? No lykenes betwixt the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Melchizedech.
Surely if you derive the reason of your sacrifice from Melchizedech, he
brought forth nothing but bare bread and wine: but you retain neither bread
nor wine: and in all the rest make no man partaker of your action. But one man
alone deuoureth up all the Supper and yet not the supper, for he makes a
sacrifice of the Supper rather: the bread he changes into the body: being
changed, he vaunceth it on high to be tooted upon: being gazed upon thoroughly,
he does sacrifice it for the quick and the dead. Truly I believe neither
Melchizedech in his actio^, nor Christ in his supper did any such thing at any
time, no more can you make that justifiable that you do now by any approved
testimony of the scripture, or lawful example of antiquitye. Melchizedech a
king and a Priest
But here will some one urge again: what? did not Melchizedech offer bread and
wine then? I do not deny it: was he not a Priest? Yes surely, and a king also.
For he was both the king of Salem, and the Priest of the most high God. But he
was not therefore a Priest, because he did offer bread and wine: Nor did he
give bread and wine being a King, because he would make a sacrifice thereof: No
more did he offer his presents unto God, but unto Abraham: neither yet of any
priestly duty but of a kingly magnificence: moreover he did not only give
gifts which was the point of a princely heart: but he blessed them also: which
was part of a priestly function. For Priests are wont to bless men sometime:
but they do never accustom themselves to offer sacrifice to men.

The words of the History are plain and well known. Therefore let us
return to the very springhead and original (according to the ^ounsell of
Cyprian) if it may please you. After the old Translation the words be thus.
The place of Melchizedech his offering is expounded.
Melchizedech King of Salem bringing forth bread and wine (for he was the
Priest of the highest) did bless him. etc. Gene. 14.
Although here be not so much as a word of Sacrificing. Yet in this
translation is no little difference from the very original: whereas changing
the copulative Hebrew syllable for (...) it reads (...). But Moses
expresses this sentence after an other sort, for he does use not the word of
Sacrificing, but has [ Hozia] which word what it signifies according to ye
very natural proprietye, I refer me to ye judgment of the learned. After
the same manner also does the chaldean expositor interpret the same. Josephus.
libro. 1. Antiquitat.
And Josephus an especial witness hereof does expound it after the same
sense. For Melchizedech (says he) did Banquet the soldiers of Abraham:
suffering them to lack nothing necessary for their sustenau^ce, and withal
invited Abraham to be a Guest of his own Table. Wherein the courtesy of the
King is commended that disdained not to make Abraham a Guest of his own Table.
Whereupon you see that it is most false which they do assume in the Minor
touching the oblation of Melchizedech, who being both a Pryest, and a Type of
Christ, is not called therefore a Pryest nevertheless in the history, because
he brought forth bread and wine as is declared before.

But against this, is there a strong countermure raised, Cap. 10. The
Tryde^tine Council. Sess. 6. Can. 3.
namely the Authority of ye Tridentine council, with a very horrible curse
annexed thundering out after this sort. Whosoever shall say that the Mass is
only a sacrifyce of praise and thankesgeuing, or a bare memorial of the
Sacrifice performed upon the Cross, and not a propitiatory sacrifice: or that
it avails to the Receiver only, and ought not to be offered for the quick
and the dead, for sins, for punishments satisfactions and other necessityes,
let him be holde^ accursed.

If he shall be holden accursed, whosoever shall so say: Answer.
surely the very same have all the ancient Deuines before mentioned spoken
and affirmed. All the Doctors especially of the primitive Church have both said
so and taught so: neither did the whole Greek Church almost teach otherwise,
not exempting out of the same beadroll all the Apostles of Christ, no nor
Christ himself: unless perhaps the Tridentine Lordinges will esteem
themselves to be of greater creditt, and authority then Christ and the
Apostles, that so it may be lawful for them to coin a newfa^gled Gospel,
wherewt Christ and his Apostles were never acquainted. First what the opinion
of the doctors is herein has been expressly set down before. Surely Christ
himself and the Apostle Paul do require nothing else in this celebratio^ but
only a memorial, and an expressing and showing forth of the Lords death: nor
does seem to determine upon any other end of this Sacrament, then a
remembrance with a thankesgeuing. Luke 22.
This do ye (says Christ) in remembrance of me. And Paul delivering to the
Corinthians the same which he received of the Lord does command them to show
forth the Lords death whenever they do celebrate this Supper until he come
again. 1. Cor. 11.
Now I beseech thee gentle reader, do thou hear any thing else in these
words of Christ and his Apostle, then the showing forth of the Lords death
only? And what else will the Tridentine council exact of us? Forsooth, that we
shall again and again offer ye son of God for a sacrifice to God the
Father, for the remission of sins world without end: a sacrifice (I say) not
sacramental only, but very propitiatorye, which may help and be profitable
not for the receiver only, but may procure salvation for ye quick and the
dead also, and wh thought to be offered of very necessity for the ease of
punishments, of satisfactions, and of all other miseries, and afflictions of
this present life. But by what authority do they prove this? where do they
find this? of Christ? of his Apostles? or of any prescript word of Gods
gospel? No truly, I am not of yt mind. But why do I demand this of the^, what
warrant they have by the word of God? Let it suffice me rather to admonish
the^ to beware, lest through the self same Sacrifice wherewith they judge
themselves able to satisfy for their own and other men's punishments and
sins without all warrant of Gods word, yea rather most wickedly requgnaunt to
the express word of God, they procure and heap upon themselves lust damnation
for this their shameless and horrible Idolatrye: which they shall never be
able to redeem with all their massings and Iuggling Sacrifices.

It might seem that we had alleged sufficiently for this matter, and euicted
the controversy thoroughly, if we were not pestered with such brawlers that did
not delight rather to contend and strive for their own victory, then for the
glory of Christ, or with such as would be satisfied with any authority of
scriptures, in ye discovery of ye truth of ye question. But they being now
pressed down, and quyte overthrown with the multitude of testimonies out of
the sacred scripture, flee to the testimonies of men. Tetullia. in Apologetico.
As though Divinity (as Tertullian says) ought to be valued by the devises of
men? or that the touchstone should be tried by the gold, and the gold not by
the touchstone: or that the course of ye Son should be apportioned after the
will of John Clockekeeper, and John Clockekeeper not ruled rather by the course
of the Sun. And on this wise now our catholics bend their force with
Testimonies and Consent.

The Catholic Church has always hitherto from the age of the Apostles
ratified those obseruaunces and this doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass:
Arguments of the adversaries by witnesses and consent of Doctors
which it would never have done, unless this doctrine had been agreeable with
the word of God.

Ergo, They are worthy to be accursed whosoever will spurn against this
Catholic doctrine.

And because they may seem to speak this not without some good ground: they
have scraped together a few shreddes out of Ancient Fathers namely: Cyprian,
Hesychius, Jerome, Ambrose, Irene, Oecumenicus, wherewith they may bolster up
not their credytt, but their false packyng shuffled in among, to delude the
simple people withal.

Out of Cyprian is vouched first this sentence in an Epistle of his. Objection
out of Cyprian Lib. 2
For why rather (says he) the priest of the high God, then our Lord Jesus
Christ, who did offer a sacrifice unto God the Father, and did offer the self
same that Melchizedech did, namely bread and wine, to wit, his body and blood.
etc. And immediately after: As therefore it is said in Genesis that the
representatio^ of the sacrifice did go before by Melchizedech consisting of
bread and wine, which thing the Lord performing and accomplishing did offer the
bread and the cupp mingled with wine: and he that it fullness it self, has
fulfilled the verity of the prefigured representation. Whereupon grows this
Argument.

We are commanded to do the same that Christ did.

Christ did at his supper offer the Sacrifyce of his body and blood.

Ergo, We also ought to do the same, if we believe Cyprian.

Answer to Cypria^s words.
I do acknowledge the words of Cyprian: I do allow the authority: neither do
I sist out over narrowly, how he does agree herein with the truth of the
hebrew letter because he says that Melchizedech did offer bread and wine, and
that upon this offering his Pryesthood was grounded, because he did offer bread
and wine. As though Melchizedech were not a Pryest before he offered bread and
wine. Neither do I presume to take upon me to answer herein as Augustine did
answer Crescentius. August. against Crescentius.
I am not bound to the authority of this Epistle, because I do not account the
Epistles of Cyprian as canonical, but I do measure the^ by the Canonical
scriptures: And whatsoever I find in him agreeable with the authority of Gods
word, I do allow of it, and commend him therefore: but whatsoever is contrary
to Gods word, I do by his patience refuse it. etc. And therefore let those
sayings of Cyprian be true and autentick for me. Go to then: and what
advantage hereof may be gathered for the ratyfiyng of the popish sacrifice,
wherein they do say that they do offer the son of God really for a
propitiatory sacrifice, which is auayleable not to the Receauer only, but to
the quick and dead also? We are commanded (says he) to do the same that
Christ did at his last supper. But he did not offer sacrifice for himself at
his last supper as I suppose. And how then does the Pryest do the same thing
that Christ did? yet nevertheless he did offer at his supper his own body and
blood. Heb. 11.
Did he offer it for sins yea or nay? If you say yea. The Apostle will deny
it, who did acknowledge none other sacrifice of Christ but only one, and does
likewise affirm that Christ was offered once only to purge and wype away the
sins of many. If you say nay, how then do the Priests the self same, who
do sacrifyce for sins, as they say? But I return again to Cyprian. Christ
(says he) accomplishing in effect and truth that which went before in a
shadow, did offer his own body and blood. This is true in deed. But where did
he offer it? at his supper? surely so say the Papists. But Cypria^ does not
say so. For whereas he speaks of bread and wine mixed together, what he
means thereby he does imediately declare in the same Epistle very plainly,
and does interpret himself openly: that it may appear that this was not done
at the time of his supper: but does confess that the same was performed at the
passion and death of our Lord, which was foreshewed and prefigured before, And
again a whiles after, he shall wash (says he) his garment in wine, and his
vesture in the blood of the grape. Now when it is named the blood of the grape,
what else is declared then the wine of the cupp of the blood of the Lord? And
thus much Cyprian, Cyprian in the same Epistle.
not meaning the supper surely, but the cross of Christ: which does appear
evidently by this, that he annexeth forthwith in the same place, denying that
we are able to drink the blood of Christ unless Christ had been trodden and
pressed in the wine press first, and had dronken of the Cupp before, of which
Cupp he should have tasted first to the believers. Which speech of Cyprian
forasmuch as can not be aptly applied to any other thing then to the sacrifyce
of the Cross: it may easily appear hereby what answer ought to be framed to
the Argument.

The same which Christ did, must be imitated of us. In the 2. book the 3.
Epistle.


Christ did offer at his supper his body and his blood according to the
Testimony of Cyprian.

But this is false. For Cyprian throughout all that whole Epistle, did never
affirm that Christ did offer his body and blood at his supper, but upon the
Cross. If an Argument must needs be framed from out the words of Cyprian, we
shall argue much more probably on this wise.

The same that Christ did offer we must offer also:

Christ did offer the same that Melchizedech did.

Ergo, We must offer the same that Melchizedech did.

But Melchizedech did offer bread and wine, according as Cyprian does witness,

Ergo, We also must offer bread and wine.

Is there any syllable here that may help the Papists cause, or utterly
overthrow it rather?

Here is an other boane to pycke upon raked out of Jerome, An Object. out of
Ierom. out of his Epistle written to Marcellus.
where he says, Melchizedech in the Type of Christ did offer bread and wine:
and did dedycate a Christian Mystery in the blood and body of our savior. etc.

Answer.
This knott also is clean cut away with the very same two-edged Axe, for I am
not ignorant that the Ecclesiastical writers do make comparison now and then
betwixt the presents of Melchizedech which he gave to Abraham, and the
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross: to wit, that one figuratively, this
other truly and in veryty. Be it now as they say. Yet is this no good proof
notwithstanding to justify, that the Priest does forth with offer the Son of
GOD in the mystical Supper really to God the Father in full remyssion of
sins: And yet here also do not all the holy Doctors agree amongst
themselves in all points: whereas some do compare the oblation of Melchyzedech
with the Sacrifice of the Cross: Again other do compare it with the
Celebrating of the holy communion: yea and do make it equivalent therewyth.
Some do neither agree with themselves, applying the Allegory now this way, now
that way, and many times both ways. An Allegorical Argument does conclude no
truth.
Finally though they should be uniform in their Allegory, yet how true that
Argument is that is derived from an Allegory, according to that saying which is
commonly freque^ted in schools which does affirm that an Allegorical
Argument concludes no truth: I referr me to the Logicians.

The Objection out of Augustine quest. vete. and no. Testa. quest. 109.
Of no greater valydyty is that Argument likewise which they rake out of
Augustines words. For on this wise is Augustine cited: Melchizedech (says he)
did deliver to Abraham first as to the Father of the faithful the Eucharist of
the body and blood of Christ. etc.

Answer to the Objection.
To grant this unto them as for confessed, which nevertheless rests yet
unproven: That Melchizedech did represent the Euchariste in a type, and under a
veyle of likeness: yet whereas he offered nothing but bread and wine: this is
not a good argument to prove, that the Pryest which does celebrate the Mass,
shall by and by offer upon the Altar unto God the Father, the very same
substance of his son for sins, which suffered on the Cross. Neither is
this form of argument allowable in Schools.

Melchizedech did represent the Eucharist in a figure.

Ergo, The flesh of the son of God is really offered for the quick and the
dead in the Mass or Communion.

But let us proceed to the remnaunt of our Adversaries Fragmentes.

There is also thrust in place a saying of Hesychius who writing upon
Leuiticus: An objection out of Hesychi. writing upon Leuiti. lib. 1 cap. 4.
but as going before (says he) he did offer up himself in the Apostles
supper: Which they do know who be partakers of the efficacy of the mysteries.
etc.

Nothing withstandeth, but that Christ may be said after a certain sort to
offer himself to the Father in his last supper, Answer out of August. in the
23. Epistle.
eue^ by ye same figurative speech: wherein ye Lamb is said to be slain from
the beginning of the world. Or as it is said in the old Testament, that
oblation is offered by Sacrifices: in which phrase of speech, the same
Hesychius in an other place, in the same Chap. does call Christ an Altar: and
Christ being incarnate in the Uirgines womb, to be a sodde^ Sacrifice: not in
actual veritye, and in natural truth of ye thing in deed: but in power and
virtue of a Mystery. Whereupon let us hear what answer August. does make
not unaptly to these figurative speeches of Hesychius. was not Christ once
offered in himself (says he:) And yet he is offered to the people not only at
every solemn feast of Easter, but every day also: Neither does he lie, that
being demanded shall answer that he was Sacrificed: For if Sacraments hadd
not a certain likeness of the things, whereof they be Sacraments, they
should not be Sacraments at all. Thus much Augustine, whose authority if be
not of sufficient creditt: Let us annexe thereunto the Sentence of Lombard.
For thus speaks he. After this (says he) question is demanded, whether the
action of the Priest, may be called a Sacrifice properly? or an oblation? And
whether Christ be daily offered? or whether he be offered once only? whereunto
may be answered briefly: That the thing that is offered, and consecrated by
the Priest, is called a Sacrifice and an oblatio^: Out of the Master of the
Sentences 4. book. 12, distinct.
because it is a memorial and a representatio^ of the true sacrifice, and an
oblatio^ offered upon the Altar of the Cross. For Christ did suffer death upon
the Cross once, and was there offered in himself: But he is daily offered in
the sacrament: because in the same sacrament a memorial is made of the same
thing; that was once offered. etc. And because we may not seem to want
witnesses: let us couple hereunto the common Gloss differing nothing at all
from the Master of the sentences: which enterlacing a commentary upon the
place of Augustine, where Christ is said to be Sacrificed: De consecrat.
Distinct. 2. he does expound the words of the distinction on this wise. Glossa
Comment. de Consecrat. Distinct. 2. Semel.
Christ is sacrificed: That is to say: the sacrifice of Christ (says he) is
represented, and a memorial is made of his passion. etc. Now Sir how do these
hang together with the decrees of the Tridentine ghostly Fathers? who are not
satisfied to call the Mass by the name of Sacramental Sacrifice, wherein a
memorial and a representation may be made of the Lords Sacrifice unless it
be accounted also a Satisfactory, and Propitiatory sacrifice, beyond all
consideration and truth of Scripture, and besides all custom of the ancient
Fathers.

But I return again to Hesychius: who says, that Christ did Sacrifice
himself at his supper: which saying I do admit. But Augustine does plainly
disclose what manner of Sacrifice that was: De consecratione distinct. 2. The
very Sacrifice (says he) which is made with the Priests hands is called the
Passion of Christ, his death, his crucifying, not in the truth of the thing in
deed, but in a signifyeng mystery. etc. And again. When the host is broken,
and the blood powered into the mouths of the faithful what is signified
thereby else then the offering of the body of Christ, upon the cross. etc.
Therefore such as be of sound judgments will say, that to deduct true and
unreprovable propositions from the words that are spoken figuratyuely and
after a certain sort, is a shyft of subtle sophisters, and not a point of sober
Diuynes.

An Objection out of Iren. Lib. 4. Cap. 32.
After this ensues a place out of Irene very much and many times canuassed by
our Adversaries. And he took (says he) that which is of the substance of
bread, and gave thanks saying. This is my body. And the cup likewise which
is of the creature, of wine that is usual with us, he did confess to be his
blood, and did teach a new oblation of a new Testament, which the Church
receiving from the Apostles, does offer unto God through the whole world, of
the which amongst the twelve prophets. Malachy did prophecy on this wise. I
have no pleasure in you says the Lord God of hosts and I will not accept an
offering of your hands. etc.

The place of Irene whereupon they beat their brains so busily, An Answer
to the place of Irene.
is chopped in here at this present according as the old proverb says: as good
never a whitt as never the better: as just as Germans lips. For whereas
proof ought to have been made, that the same boyd of Christ which was once
hanged on ye Cross and thrust through the side upon the Cross, is offered
daily in the Mass, really and substantially in an unbloody Sacrifice, for the
redemption of sins (for hereunto tends their invincible Maxim) they slipp
away from thence now, and are come to show, that we are bound to offer unto God
ye first fruits of all his creatures by ye commau^deme^t of God: least we may
seem vntha^kefull and ungrateful. For besides this, ye words of Irene
emporte nothing. Now to grant them all this, that Christ took bread, and the
cupp of the Creature of wine that is usual with us, and did call the same his
blood, what will all this prevail to defend them in this lurking hoale? for
the question here is not, whether we onght to make an oblation to God of the
first fruits of all his creatures: nor whether Christ gave his commandment
to his Apostles, which they did convey over by tradicion to the Posteritye
afterward: neither is any question made here whether Christ, after he had
taken bread, and the cupp, did say that it was his body and his blood: but
whether the bread which the Priest does offer in his Mass, be really and
substantially, and in truth of nature, the body of Christ which himself has
appointed and ordained to be offered in his Church, by thapostles, and their
successors, as Priests of the new Testament, for a daily expiation of sins.
This foul absurdity, whereas we and the whole consent of the Scripture do
utterly deny, you ought to have delivered clear from inconvenience: which as
yet you have not done out of Irene. Although he do make mention of a new
oblation of a new Testament, yet this does not argue notwithstanding, that
either Christ should be supposed to offer him self at his last supper: or that
the Priest should be imagined to make a daily Sacrifice in his Mass for
sins, with the self same body, wherein he suffered his Passion once upon the
Cross for ye sins of the world. In deed Irene does term it by the name of
an oblation: And it is true: so is it also many times called of many of the
ancient Fathers. Neither do we mislyke the word: nor yet do abridge the
ecclesiastical writers from liberty to frequent their Metaphors, and
hyperbolicall speeches as lyketh them best. Howbeit the Scripture does not
acknowledge any such words: Nevertheless since it pleases them to accustom
themselves with such speeches, let them use this name of oblation a gods name,
and call this an oblation which we do call the Eucharist: we contend not about
words: it is the matter it self that we stand upon. The ancient Fathers,
because they see a Communion instituted in rembraunce of the Lords Sacrifice,
do call it by the name of a Sacrifice: by the same reason, whereby they do
usually ascribe unto signs the names and effects of the things signified.

These Catholics on the contrary side do cry out and exclame, that he is an
Heretic that will dare to say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is a bare
memorial of the Sacrifice of Christ, accomplished upon the Cross. Neither
think this to be sufficient that it be reputed as a memorial, but besides
this bare memorial, they proceed yet to his outrage, that they endowe it also
with the very power and effectuallnesse of the Lords Sacrifice: The Sacrifice
of the Mass expiatory and propitiatory Tridenti. Council Sess. 6. cap. 3.
so that whereas the passion of Christ is the only meritorious cause of our
redemption: yet will they shamefully attribute the whole efficacye and
operation of that inestimable benefitt, to the Mass: and in that respect they
dare presumptuously command it to be called a sacrifice, not a Sacramental,
or a memorial sacrifice, but an Expiatory and Propietatory sacrifice (that I
may be so bold to speak their own terms) And allthough they do not deny:
that all our whole perfection does proceed from ye only oblatio^ of Christ,
Yet because this perfection is not made so absolutely perfect by the virtue and
grace of Baptism, but that after our regeneration by grace, we slip and fail
many times into many offensive bypathes in this transitorye life, they do
affirm that this Sacrifice of the Church was provided for a medicine to solue
all those soars, Out of Steven Gardener and other.
and amperinges out of ye flesh: and as a restoratiue not only to them that
receive it, but very medictable for ye quick and for the dead also: as though
forsooth the merits of Christ's blood could not heal our wou^des, without
this minglemangle of these Satisfactory druggs

How trymly this iugglyng doctrine does agree with ye natural and proportioned
squarier of ye Scriptures, let others Judge as they list, I for my part, that
do now and then exercise my time in the conference and readyng of Scriptures,
and ancient writers, do verily judge: that these notorious Maxims can not by
any means be of any importance, except we pluck up our faith by the
roots, and banish clean away the very sinowes and marrow of the sacred
Scriptures. For whereas the whole doctrine of Christ's Gospel has established
all the treasure and riches of Gods promises, yea Christ him self wholly,
withal his deseruyngs, in faith only, what shall remain the^ for this
Sacrifice, but that it represent unto us a memory and remembrance of the
Lords death only? and for this cause takes the denomination of an oblation
by the testimony of Irene and others. The holy and sacred monumentes of
ancient Doctors be full of Testimonies, which do plainly declare, that the
Euchariste is not an oblation properly: but is called an Oblation in respect,
that it is a memorial of Christ's oblation performed once upon the Cross.
Furthermore as concerning the application: that it is ministered not by any
other outward Instrument, them by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and
the dispensation of his Sacraments, and that the benefitt thereof is received
by none other mean, then by force of faith only.

Now therefore let us first hear Irene as it were expou^dyng him self.
Irenaeus lib. 4. Cap. 32.
We do offer unto God (says he) the first fruits of his creatures with
thankesgeuing: He declares that out of those first fruits of Gods creatures,
ye substance thereof was taken, which was consecrated into the body and blood
of Christ. And in this respect he does call ye whole action of ye Minister, an
oblation. And again amongst other things treatyng of the oblation of the new
Testament: Irenaeus Cap. 33.
he wills us also to offer a gift at the Altar continually and daily.
Therefore (says he) there is an Altar in heaven, and thither must our prayers
and oblations be directed. etc. First, if the Church do offer unto God a gift
of his own creature: I suppose now that ye Catholic children will not
affirm that the Chruch does offer the Son of God then. Moreover if our Altar
be in heaven, as Irene did truly say, to what purpose shall these Altares stand
in the Church? whenas we are taught to direct the Sacrifices of our
supplicatio^s to the Altar, not these stony Altares in the Churches, but to
that heavenly Altar that is in heaven?

Ambrose treating upon virgins.
Moreover what shall we say to Ambrose? who treatyng of Uirginitie, was not
afraid to call the Uirgines hearts, by the name of Altares, in the which
Christ was daily offered.

Chrisost. in psalm 95.
And hereunto accords the Judgment of Chrysostom. The gift of the Gospel
(says he) does ascend on high without blood, without smoke, without an Altar,
and without other the like. etc.

Chrisost. in psalm. 26.
So also Jerome: Every faithful person has an Altar within him self which is
faith.

August. de tempore. ser. 125.
Augustine likewise: The Sacrifice of the new Testament is, when we do offer
clean and pure Altares of our hearts in the presence of Gods majesty.

The second counsel of Nyce.
And the second Council of Nyce: We Christians do scarsely know what is an
Altar, and what is an oblation.

Eusebius. demonst. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Agreeable to the Testimonies before recited is the notable and plain Testimony
of Eusebius: We do sacrifice (says he) and do receive a remembrance of that
sacrifice, celebratyng the mysteries according to the ordinance delivered by
him self, and rendering thanks unto God for our safety. And again: We do
erect unto him an Altar of unbloody and reasonable sacrifices according to new
mysteries. Furthermore he does forthwith express what kind of new Mysteries
they be: Christ did offer (says he) a wonderful sacrifice for the safety of
us all. That is to say, he gave us a memorial to offer to God, commaundyng us
to offer a memorial for a sacrifice. etc.

Cyrill us ad Reginas.
What shall I say of Cyrill. Who does call the prayers and melodious singing of
faith full souls praising God continually, unbloody sacrifices.

Cyrill against Julian. lib. 10.
And the same Cyrill writing against Julian: We (says he) forsaking the gross
sacrifice of the Jews have a commandment, that we shall make a simple,
spiritual, and a pearcyng sacrifice: And therefore we do offer unto God for a
sweet smelling savor all kinds of godlynes, faith, hope, and charity. etc.

If this controversy may be decided with the greatest part of voices, who
would require more witnesses? if with authority? who will demand more
ancient and more learned? if by express evidence of words: what is he so
void of Reason, that ca^ not plainly conceive by the premises, that there is
no one thing more untrue, then that which these braynesicke men have by a most
false and unsavory invention Imagined, concerning the application and
propiciation of this Sacrifice? for the utter overthrow of which doctrine, what
will more fittly serve the opportunity now offered, what ca^ be applied more
aptly for this present, and more agreeable to Reason, then to kill them with
their own swords, and to catch them in their own pittfall? for whereas the
chiefest substance of a Sacrifice (especially such a Sacrifice as is offered
for Sins) consists in slayeng of a body, and sheadyng of blood: I would
therefore learn of them, by what reason the denomination of a Sacrifice may be
properly applyable to their Popish Mass, whereas neither any slaughter of a
body, or any sheadyng of blood is discernable? But there is represented (say
they) a memorial of sheadyng of blood. I do grant it. The holy Euchariste
therefore does not express any actual killyng of the body, or actual
sheddyng of blood in truth and in deed, but represents it by a memorial
only. The Eucharist does not forgive sins but does represe^t the memory of a
true forgiveness.
Which because can not be denied, we say, that hereof it comes to pass:
whereas Remission of Sins is not otherwise obtained then by killyng of some
body, and sheadyng of blood, that for this cause therefore the Euchariste which
executes no actual sheadyng of blood, but represents only a memorial
thereof, can not of it self give forgiveness of Sins, but only represent
unto us a memorial of the true Remission of Sins, by way of Representation
only. And what accoumpt shall me^ make now I pray you of that dreadful Decree
of the Tridentine Fathers, who have hundred out such flashes of horrible
lightenyng, whereby they do scorche clean into powder, Sinod. Trident. sessi.
6. cant. 3.
with their cursed Bull, all them whosoever dare utter half a word so much, to
say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a bare commemoration of that
Sacrifice, finished upon the Cross, and not a propiciatory Sacrifice rather?

I draw now somewhat near to the very Cano^ of the Mass: Out of the Canon of
the Mass.
whereunto as these godly Catholics do stick most earnestly, and do settle
in the same the chief prore and pewpe (as the Proverb is) and shooteanker of
their whole Idolatrous Sacrifice: So do they also in the same ship bulge
them selves most of all, and with their own cable ouerhale them selves into an
unrecoverable gulf. The Tenor of which Canon is this. Command these gifts
to be carried by the hands of thy holy Angels unto thine high Altar, etc.
What? Can not Christ sit on ye right hand of his Father, unless he be posted
over by the Priest, to be transported by Angels unto the high Altar? whenas
he has been in actual possession of the highest heavens long sithence, not
helped thereunto by any person, and sits on the right hand of his Father,
far surmou^tyng in power, even the most excellent ministry of Priests and
Aungelles? It follows in the same Cano^: Through whom thou do always
create, sanctify, and bless all these good gifts. What is this that I do
hear? must Christ be created? blessed? and sanctified again?

I have passed my bounds somewhat further perhaps in prosecutyng this
controversy, then the proportion of this our Apology would well admit: But
hereunto was I forced, partly by ye perverseness of Osorius, partly by allurement
of necessary persuasion: for as much as I perceived yt there is no one thing
throughout all the doctrine of this pha^tasticall Religion, wherein our
Catholics do sweat and turmoyle them selves more greedely, and raunge at
riotte more perillously. And therefore I thought it not amysse to rippe abroad
the whole matter, even from the very roots of the foundation, and so to
encounter the frantic attemptes, and engynes of our adversaries. Wherein if I
have not satisfied all men's expectation, yet I trust that I have reasonably
brought to pass by this simple discourse, that the Reader may easily conceive,
how peevish a plattforme this glorious Peacocke has forged for his peltyng
Purgatory, and mumblyng maskyng Sacrifice, vauntyng them to be matters of such
importance, Osort. page 199. 202. 204.
as which the Apostles did deliver over by mouth, and which their Disciples did
deliver over to the posterity, and which the greatest consent of ancient
Antiquity with most Religious obseruau^ce has retained, and approved so many
hundred years, with the general Faith and allowau^ce of the universal
Church, without any disagreement. But on the contrary part: as touching the
Lutheranes, they are confuted with the authorities of the ancient Fathers, and
confounded with the general consent of the whole Church, who^ Osorius with his
copemates have utterly discou^tenaunced and discomfited with unvanquishable
Arguments, vncomptrollable testimonies, unreprovable examples, and convinced
them of horrible impiety and wickedness. etc. In good sooth these be lofty,
glorious, and magnificall speeches, but besides the bare sou^de of words, no
matter at all: which words if must of necessity flee into the Castle of
creditt, because they be naked words only without feathers, surely you are
well furnished with a very ready policy of persuasion Osorius, and with a
special practice for the speedy conquest of the cause. But by this very same
devise of yours, what a singular plattforme have you laid forth for others to
find out the way to persuade as matter of truth, whatsoever they list to
blast out in bare words? For what is more easy then to pretend in word, and
in speech those two words only Church, and Antiquity, if men will be contented
to have their mouths choked with such boanes? If the world be come to this
pass, that whosoever ca^ with finest floorish of words lavish abroad in the
Church whatsoever him lists, the same shall obtain greatest creditt and
estimation of his speeches, without yeloyng any reason or demonstration of the
things, which he utters, in good sooth then have you spoken enough Osorius,
and cracked the creditt of all the poor Lutherans utterly, as you say. But if
in decidyng of controversies, truth must be tried, not with bare speeches, but
with substantial matter, certes either you must get a better visor for your
glorious persuation, or else in my judgment you were better hold your peace
altogether. The Apostles ordinances.
You do oppress us in a glorious braggery of speech, with the speeches of the
Apostles, and with the traditions of the Apostles disciples: And yet out of all
the Apostles writings can not any man hitherto force from you, no not by
violence, one title so much, which will avail any ioate to ye creditt of those
your Assertions, but will rather deface them and discover your packing. Upon
the neck of them, you do force upon us also the authority of ancient Fathers,
Authority of Fathers.
and the general consent of the universal Church, clear from all manner of
variablenes and disagreeing. What a jest is this? As though there were any one
of those ancient Fathers ever borne as yet, that ever uttered one syllable so
much of purging the sins of the faithful, after they were once departed this
life: or of the Popes Pardons: of the Propiciatory Sacrifice of the Mass: of
Transubstantiation, of Merit Meritorious, of Merit of Co^gruum and Condignum,
or that ever durst presume to make the Sacrifice of the Altar comparable with
the Sacrifice of the Cross: or durst affirm that Christ himself was really
in the consecrated host, with all the dimentions and liniaments of the same
body, which suffered death upon the Cross: or would ever ascribe to a pelting
Priest full power to Merit, and offerr Sacrifice for the quick and the dead.
Now if ever you have chanced upon any such Doctrine in the writings of the
ancient Fathers, gentle Sir Bishop, why do yoe not vouch the same boldly,
whereby you may seem to have confuted us, not with babbling, but with truth,
and substance of matter? But if you have not so done as yet, nor seem ever
able to do it: where is then that general consent and agreement of the whole
Church? Where be these Records and Monuments of ancient Antiquitye, and of all
foreages? Where be those invincible Arguments? Where be those irreproueable
Testimonies, and undeceivable examples, whereupon you crake so lustely?
perhaps you will empart them unto us in your next books at your better
leisure. For hitherto as yet you have hadd no leisure to muster yt your brave
guarison that you bear your self so stought upon, and to lead them into the
field, being otherwise surcharged with far more weighty affairs.

And now to deteigne thee no longer(gentle Reader) thou have heard heretofore
how this Portiugall has powered forth his prattling Rhetoric for the
upholding of his Purgatory, his Uowes, his Supplications, and Prayers for the
safety of the dead, and also of that most holy oblation of all other, the
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ offered for the reconcileme^t of Gods
wrath and displeasure. There remains behind the knitting up of all this
gear: Wherein purposing to make an end of his whole discourse, he rusheth upon
Haddon with all the bent of his Eloquence.

Dare you be so bold (says he) to call this holiness of Religion, Osor. page
209.
this ardent endeavor of Love, this comfortable oblation offered, not for us
alone, but for our brethren also, wherewith we are knitt together in an
everlasting amitye, to be defacinges and disgracements of Religion? A very
heinous offense verily to call a Boat by the name of a Boat, and a Mattock by
the name of a Mattock. But here was one sharde left open which must needs be
slopt up with some brambles and Briars. Is not this foolishnes? Is not this
unshamefastness? Is not this Madness? For if Osorius Eloquence were not furnished
with these flashing flames, surely it would be very cold. But how more
commendable, yea how much more seemly and sittingly for his personage, in my
conceit, should he have done, if surceasing these outrageous exclamations,
which prevail not to the creditt of his cause the value of a pin, he hadd
discreetly, and with sober reasons debated the matter first, and examined
thoroughly whether Haddon hadd spoken truth, or falsehood. If he have uttered
the truth, then is Osorius friendly dealt withal: If he have spoken any
untruethes: there be scriptures, there be arguments, meet and couenable
Reasons, wherewith Osorius might easily both defend the truth of his Religion,
and preserve it from to be impeached by others. Spightfull reproching,
Skornefull taunting, Cotqueanelyke railing, Rascallyke raging, and Barbarous
exclaming, further not the defense of his cause. If Osorius be so fully
settled, and so thoroughly wedded to his Church, that no persuasion will seduce
him to think, that his Church may straye by any means from the right course,
and that in all his Religion is no wrinkle or spott, that may be amended,
surely he is herein very much deceived.

Conferr who so list the whole face and shape of the Popes Religion, to wit,
his adoration, his Sacraments, his Masses, his breadworshipp, his
Imageworshipp, his Sacrifices, his Application, his Transubstantiation, his
Releasing of sins, his Merits, his Ceremonies, his Pardons, and six hundredth
like papisticall tru^peries, with the pure, and clear founteines of the sacred
Scriptures, with the Institution Evangelical, and the express rule of the
doctrine Apostolic: and he shall easily perceive, that Haddon did use an over
myld manner of speech, when he called the^ disgracements: Disgracementes of
Religion.
Some other man perhaps would have blazed abroad these dreggs with some
grosser terms. Truly if the Apostle Paul hadd heard these profound opinions,
and these deep devises of the Romish Religion, and hadd seen their decrees,
their Cannons, their Clogges of Ceremonies, and snares of consciences, I he
lived now and beheld these observations of days, Months, and times, these
vows, and restraintes of me^, forbidding Marriage, denying the lawful use of
meats, which are now daily frequented in the Church: would any man dought
whether he would call these disgracements of Religion, or the Doctrines of
Devils rather? 1. Tim. 4.
But because we have spoken hereof sufficiently before: It shall be less
needful to take this dounghill abroad any more.

But Osorius goes forward, and because Haddo^ shall not escape s^^tfree for
naming his pontifical pilfe to be disgracements of Religion, Osorius acquiteth
him with ye like beadroll of ye Lutherans corruptions in a long raggemarow of
words: that so comparing both parts one with an other, to wit, Luthers
nakedness and beggary, with the majesty and glory of the Catholics, he may make
them to grow into the greater obloquy and hatred. It remains therefore that
we give ear a whiles unto the gallaunt bravery and loftines of Osorius
Eloquence: Osori. page 203.
To aba^don dutiful obedience to the Magistrate, to disturb the ancient
ordinances of the Church, to defyle the virginity of sacred Nuns, to
dispoyle the Chaste of their continencye, to raze out all endeavor of godlynes
and humanitye, to robb and ransack holy Churches, to murder holy Fathers, to
spoil some, and to oppress others with infinite afflictions, to throw others
out into miserable exile, to express ungodly malice and deadly hate against
the Relics of Saints, to be outragiously insolent in this unmeasurable
destruction and overthrow of all holy Religion, is this a point of honesty? of
Modesty? or worthy to be advanced with immortal commendation and praise?
Truly I do not suppose so. But whereunto tend all these at ye last? forsooth
to make you know what he means hereby. And therefore mark now gentle Reader
ye other part of his collation.

But to be subject to lawful Authority established by the commandment and
ordinance of Christ, Osorius page 203.
to preserve the bands of Unity and concord, to esteem highly of the uniting
together of Gods Justice and mercy, to reverence the monuments of notable
holiness, to make that most Sacred and most heavenly Sacrifice for the quick,
for the dead, finally for the preservation of all Christian Commonweals, the
Majesty and virtue whereof we are neither able to express with tongue, nor
comprehend in thought and imagination: shall this be accounted shameful
infamy, and an intolerable haynousnesse? And yet you blush nothing at all: to
call these disgracements of Religion. etc.

August. co^tra lib. 2. cap. 14.
To answer these great speeches at a word: First as touching those slanderous
crimes which you throw out against us as being Rebellious to ye lawful
Magistrate, what else shall I answer to this your Insolency, then ye same
which Augustine did Answer sometime to Petilianus? If I should speak as much
of such as you are (says Augustine:) I am sure, you would require me to make
proof of the words that I should speak. The self same do I now require and
look for at your hands Osorius, which so lustely rail against us at this
present. Whereas you exclayme that we do renounce dutiful obedience, do
disquiet ancient orders, do betray Chastitye, overthrow all mindefulnes, and
endeavor of virtue and godlynes, do raze down Temples of Religion, do kill
and do spoil godly personages. If I should now demand of you in the voice of
Augustine, how you be able to prove, that all the foresaid crimes and
innumerable such like (which your rau^ging pen has raged against us) may be
duly fathered upon us, how would you prove it? Again how will you deny that
your selves are not duly to be charged therewith? what answer will you make?
for hitherto as you have spoken much, so have you proved nothing. Unless you
be of this opinion, that your bare speeches must be taken for sufficient
proofs. If you think so: what rests else, but that we requite you with the
same, that you reproach us withal: August. in the same place.
or else we desire you to rehearse so much again in our behalues: and then is
our proof sufficient enough (as Augustine says) if such kinds of proves be
allowable.

If I should deal with you on this wise Osori. What would remain of your
accusation? But I do not handle you so now. For I frame mine answer
otherwise, and in flatt denial, make our purgation from all that you have
raked together against us. You say that we refuse lawful Authority. The
Authority of the Pope is denied to be lawful.
But I on the contrary part do affirm that this Authority which you name to
be lawful: is neither any Authority at all, neither lawful by any means.
Nay rather what if this Authority, whereof you brag so much, be so far
from being lawful, that it is most manifestly proved by the express words of
the Scriptures to be the kingdom of Antichrist? The kingdom of Antichrist.
What then Osorius? will you in despite of our beardes make us subject to such
a Tyranny, from whence the manifest word of the holy Ghost does command to
cut of our selves, upon peril of the loss of our souls, not only in the
old Testament, but in the new also, as is declared before?

You add further that we do disturb the ancient order of the Church, and
dispoyle the continent of their Chastity.

But I do deny that this order of yours is ancient, which I have Justified to
be true before aboundau^tly enough with many and sound Testimonies. Moreover
as touching your chaste Uirgines I know not what to say. Surely if Cloisters and
Dorters could as well have made Uirgines, as they could cover their
incontinency, it were not all amiss that you say: And yet it may be that in
Portingall be many holy Nuns, such as you preach of: who did never tread
their shoes awry. But without all question to speak of our little England,
whenas the neastes of these pretty sparowes were scattered abroad, how these
neastes were found then not altogether so cleanly, as was supposed, I had
rather were notified by public Records and Registers thereof, wherein they be
decyphred at large, the^ to be proclaimed by any my writyngs. Many Records
whereof be at this present in my custody, which if I would utter, would easily
bewray, that in these close Cloisters of coacted chastity, were more open
bellied Nuns, the^ chaste and continent Uirgines, besides many other matters
yt the common people every where does report of their own knowledge, whereof I
will now say no more, under pain of Confession. This one thing will I speak:
such as have persuaded vnuoluntary Uirgines from this coacted single life, to
enter into honorable wedlock without all compulsion, do not defile Uirgines,
as I suppose, nor dispoyle the chaste of their co^tinency: but rather provide
more circumspectly for their honesty. And to say the truth, this complainte of
defilyng Uirgines can be applyable so justly to none, as to some of your own
Catholics, not all of the best Geldynges perhaps.

Now that which follows, touching the memory of virtue and Justice abolished,
and endeavor of godlynes banished by these Lutheranes. The cauillatio^ of
Osori. of the Memory of virtue abolished.
I ca^ not well conceive what Osori. does mean hereby. For in as much as the
consideration of all righteousness and godlynes is comprehended in the law of
God chiefly, I do Appeal here to the secrett Judgments of all the godly, how
far the Lutheranes be estrau^ged from all thought of ouerthrowyng this law of
the Lord.

You say that they have razed and ransackt Churches. A cauillation of Razyng of
Church.
But what Churches they were you do not tell us: for consideration is not
always to be had of all Churches alike. Some Churches do serve for godly and
necessary uses: Some are erected to mainteyne Idolatry and superstition: God
has his peculiar Churches. So has the Devil also his Chappelles. The
Gentiles had sometimes their Temples for their dumme Gods. There be Selles
also and Monckeries at this day for their mumblyng Gods. Neither be the
Turks destitute of their Tabernacles. And therefore to raze down any
particular Church whatsoever for any special cause is not altogether so
heinous. Mark a most valiant Martyr of God did on a time throw down ye
Temple of Diana in Arethusiu^: and in place thereof did dedicate a Church unto
Christ. Eue^ so have many godly Princes done in many places within Rome it
self, as Co^stantinus and others: yet does not any man condemn them for it.
In times past amongst so huge a multitude of the Iewishe Nation was no more
but one Temple only: God did allow but one Altar: And yet this Temple being
raised and builded by his own appointement and commandment, neither was him
self agreeued to have utterly defaced, leauyng no one stoane upon an other for
the abuses frequented therein: nor does any man complain of the same. To be
short, what an infinite multitude of Temples and Religions were there scattered
over all the face of the earth long sithe^ce, among ye heathen, of the which
not so much as any ruins be to be found any where? I speak not this as
co^paryng Monckes and Friars with Heathen and Paynymes: or their holy Churches
with the Temples of the Gentiles: but because I may make evident, That in
razing and pluckyng down of Churches, it is not enough because Osorius makes
complaint of the same, unless he make it known first, That these Temples were
Temples of true Religion, and not Tabernacles of superstition, and Idolatry.
Which he has not proved as yet, nor ever will be able to Justify.

But we do kill some holy men, some we do spoil and tourmoyle with infinite
afflictions: others we force out into exile. etc. What holy men he means in
this place I know not: But if they be the same whom I do conjecture to be, who
by the public authority and laws of this Realm, were executed for high
Treason in the reign of king Henry the eight: to condemn us as blameworthy,
for due execution of the Laws of our Land: and to call that their Traiterous
treachery by the name of Holiness (I mean their renouncyng due obedience to
their liege Lord, contrary to the manifest determination of Gods Scripture, and
contrary to all Religiousnes) herein surely Osorius does offer us no small
injury. I call not their crime in question here. But this is most assured: That
neither More nor Roffensis, nor the Charterhouse Monckes, were so rude or
unlettered, but that they knew sufficiently, what was the duty of Subjects
to their Princes. Especially whenas they might have learned out of Chrysostom,
by the testimony of the Apostle. Chrisost. ad Romans 23.
Although thou be an Apostle (says he) although thou be an Evangelist, though
thou be a Prophet, or whatsoever thou be, it behooves that all persons be
subject to the higher powers: For this dutyfull subjection does not abate any
point of godly Religion. The same also does Gregory declare not in one place
alone. Gregor. Epist. 64. lib. 3.
Christ (says he) did give authority to the Emperor to be Lord, not only
over the Nobility, but over Priests also. Wherefore in that you accuse us of
our misdemeanour against those persons: To answer briefly, what better
answer shall I make unto you, then the same that Augustine did answer unto
Petiliane, in a cause not much unlike unto this. Whereas you live (says he)
most like unto Thieves, you brag that ye dye like Martyrs. Aug.contralite.
petilia. lib. 2. cap. 33.


Romish Relics.
BUt amongst all other, Osorius piety can not digest by any means as a thing
altogether intolerable: That these Lutheranes do express such an ungodly
malice and deadly hate against the Relics of holy men (as he says) and are
so outragiously insolent in the destruction of holy Religion.

In this one portion of accusation, I do perceive two several crimes compyled
together, whereof the one does concern the hatred of godliness, the other the
contempt and vnreuerent handlyng of Relics. First therefore touching that
hatred: verily you behave your self herin (Osor) as one that may seem to have
expressed his mind courageously and lustely enough (to speak Ciceroes words)
For he that has once passed over and beyond all the bounds of modesty, had
need to become notably shameless, that so he may never after blush to
mainteyne a lie in any matter whatsoever, even to the hardhedg, as they say. It
remains now, that I speak of ye Relics: Of Relics.
Howbeit here needs no great matter of Refutation, namely since Osorius,
alleges nothing but the bare name of naked Relics: though in deed he err
somewhat also in the word (Relics) it self. For if he would have assigned a
true and proper denomination of those Relics, he ought not have named them
Relics, but delusions and liegerdemaine rather: not the memorialles of holy
me^, but crafty conueyaunces of hypocritical hellhoundes, devised not to pyke
out the eyes of Crows, but to pyke out the eyes and hearts of Christians.
Wherein I do marvel truly, that Osorius does speak so little of the matter,
who regardyng these Relics so reverently, yet does not notify by one word so
much, either what Relics they be, or where they be, or else what Saints
Relics he does mean: which because he has ouerskypt either for fear,
because he dares not utter them, or for ignorance, because he can not: we
will not be squeymish to supply his want of duty herein. Howbeit though I do
not reckon over all the Relics in an exact and perfect account: yet will I
disclose a good quantity of them: whereby the Reader may the better know the
qualities of them, and what crafty co^ueyau^ces this ungodly Prelate does brute
abroad for Relics of godly and holy personages.

And first of all to begin at the very birth of our Lord Christ, what shall
we say of the Maunger? The Maunger wherein Christ was laid.
which is showed at Rome in the Cathedral Church of Mary Mayor, notwithout
penny crooching? Is there any man of so gross a dullness, that may not
plainly perceive, that this Maunger is not the same Maunger, wherein Christ
was laid when he was borne: but rather a lymetwygg laid by Hypocrytes to get
money withal?

The Mounckes of Charrouia do vaunt that they have the foreskinne of Christ:
The foreskin of Christ.
that is to say, the small filme of skin which was cut away from Christ when
he was Circumcised, and this they know to be the self same, by certain small
drops of blood, which do fall from it now and the^: which albeit carrye no
lykelyhood of truth, yet this might be either believed, or imagined by us to
be a truth after a sort, because it is certain yt Christ had but one
foreskinne, if the same foreskinne were not showed openly for an especial
truth at Rome in the Cathedral Church of S. John Laterane.

No less monstrous is it, that at Rome in the Church of Saint James, the
Altar is to be seen whereupon Christ was said when he was circumcised in the
Temple. The Altar whereupon Christ was Circumcised.
As though in that Church where Christ was Circumcised, were many Altars as
there be in the Romish Churches.

The swathling cloutes and Cradel of Christ.
And yet were not this very much to be wondered at, but that also in the
Cathedral Church of Peter and Paul at Rome, is showed the linen cloth
wherein the babe Christ was bedded: a Ragg whereof is reported to be at S.
Saviors in Spain also: besides this lynnen cloth, there is also in the same
Cathedral Church at Rome, the very Cradle wherein he was rockt, and the
peticoate which his mother Mary did knitt for him, and yet we read in the
Gospel, that the Maunger was the only cradle that the Child had.

As mere a mockery also is this, that in an other place of the same City, the
Pillar whereunto Christ did lean, when he disputed in the Temple, The Pillar
where unto Christ did lean when he disputed in the temple.
is brought forth to be looked upon: brought unto Rome (as they say) together
with eleven other pillars out of Salomo^s Temple, which if be true, was done
doubtless after the Popedom of Gregory. For it is evidently known by his
own writings, that in his time was no such Bables at Rome.

There be Monasteries which make a show of ye water pottes in the which Christ
did turn water into wine: Water pots
At Aurelia also they do brag that they have the very wine that was turned
out of water, which is said to be the wine of the master of the feast. Every
year once it is offered to be licked with the tongue to them that will give
money for the same, out of the topp of a spoone: alleging that it is the very
wine that our Lord did will the Master of the feast to drink of at the
marriage: what a fitter place for exclamation were hear, O shameless
Impudency? O wittlesse folly? O gross mockeryes?

At Rome in a place which they call Sancta Sanctorum, they do show forth the
shoes of Christ. The Shoes.
But what shoes did Christ wear then, whenas Mary Magdalen did power forth
sweet ointment upon his bare feet I think, and wyped them with the hears of
her head, as he sat in the house of Simon at Dinner.

It is skarse credible that any dropp of Christ's blood which was altogether
powered forth upon the ground, is remaynyng at this present. And yet that
natural blood of Christ is showed more then in an hundred places. The Relics
of Christ's blood.
There is a solemn Pilgrimage made to a few drops thereof at Rochell in
Poytiers in France: which as they say, Nichodemus did gather up, and reserve
in his gloaue. At Mantua also great gobletts full be to be seen. At Byblion
in Auuergne in France it is brought forth to be seen clear renning in a
Crystal glass: In an other little town near adjoining, ye same blood is
showed clotted together. At Rome it is poured forth in broad platters full in
ye church of Saint Eustathius, but in the same City at Saynct John of Laterane
it is found mixed with water, even as it gushed out of his side. In England in
the Abbay of hayles was solemn pylgrimage made, and great worshipp given to
that which the Mou^cks did bring forth in a clear Crystal glass in steed of
Christ's blood to be gazed upon of the pylgrimes, where if Osorius had come on
Pylgrimage, what would he have done? I dought not but he would have worshypped
it very religiously. But if he had done so, he should in steed of the Relics
of holy blood, have surely worshypped the blood of a Ducke.

The Table whereupon Christ made his last supper, stands at Rome in the
Church of John of Laterane. The Tables whereas Christ made his last supper.
There is in a Church called Saint Savior in Spain a crust of the bread also
that he brake at his last supper. The bread of the supper.
The knyfe wherewith the Paschall Lamb was cut in pieces, The knife that
stuck the pascall Lamb.
is at Tryers in Germany.

The cupp wherein Christ gave the Sacrament of his blood, is to be seen near
unto Lions in France, in the Church of Maria Insulana. The same Cup also is
in Switzerland in a certain Mounckery of Austine Friars. The Cupp.


The platter
The platter wherein the pascall Lamb was put, is at Rome, at Genes, and at
Orleaunce. That is to say three manifest lies about one poor platter. And yet
these raynebeaten Ruffians be not ashamed to delude the world with such kind
of Mockeryes. Neither is Osorius ashamed to become as shameless a patron for
those open guegawes, But let us proceed to the rest of those lying Relics.

The Towell wherewith Christ did wype the disciples feet, The towell wherewith
Christ did wash his disciples feet.
is to be seen at Rome at Saint John's of Laterane: The same also is at Air in
Germanye: It is showed likewise all at one time in S. Cornelies Church.

A crust of the broken bread wherewith five thousand people were fedd in the
desert is worshypped at Rome at S. Maria noua. Broken bread.
An other little crust thereof is worshipped at Saint Saviors in Spain, which
I think flew directly out of the Baskettes into Spain. But this is but a
Trysle to preserve barley bread there, if they did not also show at the same
Saint Saviors a brau^ch of palm which Christ did bear in his hands on
palme-sonday, when he came unto Jerusalem. Amongst the which most holy
Relics is reserved a clodd of earth which they do affirm, was under
Christ's feet when he raised Lazarus from death to life.

Many sundry reports are made amongst the writers of the Ecclesiastical
history concerning the Cross. The Relics of the Cross.
The first that found it out is said to be Queen Helene, who did send a piece
thereof to the Emperor her son: an other part very curiously enclosed in a
Chest of Gold she delivered to the Bishop of Jerusalem to be preserved. If it
be true that this Cross was divided betwixt the Emperor and the Bishop: Then
must ye other Reports made touching the Relyques of the same Cross needs be
fables: especially since there is skarce any so little a City wherein some gobbet
of that Cross is not reside^t. First and chiefly at Paris in the holy
chapel, at Poytew, and at Rome, where a whole Crucifixe of a mean stature
made of the same Cross, is to be seen. Go to: what will Osorius say to me
here? For whereas we are certeynly assured by the hystory of the Gospel, that
the Cross whereupon Christ suffered, was no greater the^ yt it might he
carried upon one man's shoulder, now it is grown to so unmeasureable a quantity
in greatness, in breadth, and in length, that if all chyppes and gobbets
thereof, that are skattered throughout the whole world, were gathered together,
I am well assured yt a great Carrick would be skarce able to bear them all.
Moreover who may believe the devise of the Cityzens of Poytew, that the skrapp
of the Cross remaining amongst them was stolen from Helene, by a certain
maid, and by her conveyed unto them, after that she had run away from her
Princess, and wandering abroad lame and halt, chanced to come at the last upon
their coast? And I marvel if there be no fragme^t of the same Cross in
Portingall: the truth whereof I commit to Osorius, one of the Inquisitors of
Portingall to find out. This one thing would I feign learn what Osorius would
do, If Osorius had ye very true Cross it self within his own Byshoppricke:
I suppose he would worshipp it: and why so? forsooth because it did hear the
body of Christ. That is well. I ask further, what if the Ass also that did
bear Christ, were in Osorius chamber? what would he do? I think he would
feed it with hey. May I be so bold to ask one question more? What yet at the
least if Osorius had the ears of that Ass in his custody? I suppose he would
hang them to his Myter for bables, for Relics I would say. But I come again
to the Cross: which because should not come without a companion. The people of
Toulouse do boast that they have the Title also that was set written over the
Cross. The Title of the Cross.
But the Romanistes do deny it, and bragg it out lustely, that they can show
this Title in the Temple of Saint Cross. To appease this contention for their
creditt sake, I would wish that Osorius should be Umpire betwixt them.

The old historyes do varry very much about the Nails: Theodoret does report,
that Helene did command that one of them should be putt in her Sons Helmett:
ye other two she commanded to be made into a Bitt of a Bridle for an horse
mouth. Ambrosius differing from this but a little, does say that one Nail was
fixed upon the Diadem of Constantine, and the bitte of a Bridle made of the
second, and the third reserved to the use of Helene her self. Some writers
affirm that the third was thrown into the Sea. Now let the Christian Reader
conceive by these, what may be judged of all those skrappes and Rags of
Relics, by the Religious usage of these Catholics.

The Myllanoyes do bragg that they have the Nail whereof the Bitte of the
Bridle was made, The Nails of the Cross.
but the inhabitau^tes of Carpentias in Narbone gaynesay that, and do challenge
the same to be in their custody: There is an other in Rome in Saint Helenes
Church. There is yet an other in the same City in the Church of Saint Cross.
There is one at Seen in Tuskane, an other art Venice. There be two of them in
Germany, the one at Coleine in the Church of the three Maryes, the other at
Triers. There is one at Paris in the holy Chapel, there is an other in the
same City amongst the Carmelyte Friars, an other in the Minster of S. Denis.
An other remaining with them of Burges. An other in Sheresabbey. An other at
Draquigne. And yet Osorius does believe that men be so blockish and senseless
at this present, to be faced out with such gross trumperies of Mouckish
Mockages in stead of true Relyques.

The Spear head.
At Rome is to be seen one Spearehead, an other at Paris in the Holy Chapel:
a third amongst the Cantons in Sheresabbeye: a fourth at Sylua near unto
Bordeaux in Gascoigne.

The crown of Thorns.
A thyrdendeale of the Crown of Thorns is showed at Paris in the Holy Chapel
there. At Rome be three thorns in S. Crosses Church. One portion of that
Crown is in the Church of S. Eustathe. At Senes I can not tell how many
Thorns: at Vincentia no more but one Thorn. At Burges five: At Besanson in S.
John's Church be three Thorns: as many more at Mount le Roy. Some there be at
S. Saviors in Spaigne. There be two in S. James at Compostella: in Switzerland
three. At Tolouse, at Mascoue, at Charroune in Poytou, at Clear, at S. Flower,
at S. Maximin in Province: likewise in the Abbey of Salle at Noyon in France
in S. Martines Church. Every of those places have several Thorns.

Men tell for a trothe that one Coat of Christ without a seame is at Argenteiul:
Which is a Uilladge near unto Paris. Christ's coat without a seame The
Vernycle of Veronica.
There is an other of the same without a Seame at Tryers: and it is reported
that there is also one at S. Saviors in Spaigne.

The Vernycle wherewt Christ's face was wyped is showed in S. Peter's Church at
Rome. Our Ladies kerchief that was wrapped about the privy members of Christ
hangyng upon the the Cross (as they say) is to be seen in S. John's Church of
Laterane: The same Vernycle is reported to be at Carcasonne with the Augustine
Friars: besides an other whole ha^dkerchief being in a certain Nunnery at Rome,
commanded by the Pope not to be showed for any solemn Relic.

There be six Cities at the least which do brag that they have the wynding
sheet wherein Christ was wrapte in his Sepulcher: Christ wynding sheet
Namely, ye Cities Nyce, Air in Dutchla^d, Traicte, Besanson, Eadoen.
Lymosine in France. Likewise a certain City near adioynyng to Lorrayne
besides many other rags which being scattered abroad here and there, are
accou^pted for most holy Relics.

There be other parcelles apperteinyng to Christ's Passion behind yet, namely
the Reed, The Reed.
which was given to Christ in the house of Pylate in steed of a Scepter, is
openly showed in S. John's Church of Laterane at Rome. In the same City at S.
Crosses the Sponge is to be seen. The Spo^ge.
There be also some that blaze abroad to the people the xxx. pence for ye which
Christ was sold. The xxx. pence.
As though a field was not purchased for these pence, as appears by the
History of the Gospel which will condemn this Fable to be an arrogaunt lie.

The Grieces in Pilats Judgment hall.
Such an other ridiculous toye is there maintained at Rome touching the grieces
of Pilates Judgment Hall, which are in S. John's of Laterane: A like devise
also of the pillar whereunto Christ was bound when he was whipped, which is
set forth to the gaze in S. Praxedes Church.

The inhabitauntes of Brixia, do boast that they have in their custody the
Cross which appeared to Constantine in the air. The Cross which appeared to
Constantine in the air.
About the which I will not strive with them: only I do refer them to the
order of Curtonenses: who do affirm and that in good earnest, that the same
does remain with them. Let them brawle together about it, and let Osorius
pacify the quartell betwixt them at the length. For I do suppose the Cross,
which did appear to Constantine was not a material Cross, but a certain
representation of a Cross shadowed in the air, which never came down to the
earth, nor ever shall come down.

In the Church of Saint Laurence at Rome, the pryntes of Christ's steps
which he troade upon the earth when he met Peter foretellyng him that he
should suffer Martyrdom at Rome, The fotestepps of Christ upon the earth.
are evidently to be seen: An other step of ye same miracle is showed openly
at Poytew in ye Church of S. Radegonde. An other in Soysion in France, and a
third at Orleaunce.

Our Ladies hear.
Next unto the Son follows in order Mary the Mother of Christ. Who if had
not been wholly assumpted into heaven, would any man dought but that her Rames
would have been bragged upon emo^gest the whole rabble of Mockeries? Yet
notwithstanding many Relics of her Hear, and her Milk, did stick fast in the
earth, after she was assumpted. For men do visit her Hear at Rome in our
Ladies Church above Mynerue: so also do they the same hear at S. Saviors in
Spain, at Matscoue, Cluniacum, Nuceria, at S. Flower, at S. Iaqueries, and
many other places. But of her Milk where shall I begin to speak? Our Ladies
Milk.
Let this one thing suffice the Reader. If yt blessed nourse did give so much
Milk, as is set forth every where abroad to be seen in holy Religious houses,
in ye Temples of Monckes, Friars, and Nuns: surely there would have been
abundance enough to have sufficed all the Babes and sucklynges Bethleem, if
she would have given them suck as long as she lived. In the mean space I do
not recite all the places whereunto pilgrims do report to visit these
Relics of Milk: neither do I earnestly crave to know, how it may seem
credible, that so much Milk might be gathered from one seely Uirgine, and
preserved from corruption so many hundred years.

To make any further rehearsal of the rest of this Uirgines furniture were a
plain mockery, surely to reckon up all, were an infinite piece of work.
First touching her Smock: There is one at Carmutum, an other at Air in
Germany so wide and so large, yt it cou^teruaileth in greatness a Priests long
white surplice, which if be her true Smock in deed, Our Ladies smock.
surely she must needs be a woman of a monstrous body. Touching her
kerchiefes: Our Ladies kerchiefe.
whereof one is a Tryers in S. Maxims Church. An other is to be seen at Lysio
in Italy. As for her Kertell, which the inhabitauntes of Bonony do enjoy I
need not to speak more. Our Ladies kirtell.
And that she had more girdles then one appears hereby, Our Ladies girdle.
that the inhabitauntes of Pratt do brag upon one in their keepyng, an other
likewise is showed forth at Mou^tforte: her Slipper is at S. Iaqueries: Her
slipper.
her Shoe is reported to be at S. Flowers: Her Shoe.
she had also two Combs, Her Coambes.
whereof one hangs fast at Rome in S. Martines Churches, the other in the
Church of S. John's the great at Besanson. Neither do I marvel if our Ladies
weddyng Ryng be Religiously reserved emo^gest other holy most precious
Iewelles: The wedding Ring of our hady
I do rather marvel more, how they came by the possession of Iosephes hose,
namely being so little and so slender as will scarce fit a sucklyng Child or a
dwarf: surely there is no comparison to be made of proportion betwixt these
hoses and our Ladies Smock, as they do feign it to be. Besides Iosephes hose,
others have his Boanes in stoare, Iosephes hose and his boanes.
some his Slippers also. Which are to be seen at Tyers in S. Symo^s Abbey.

What shall I speak of Images? which are not all of one sort, nor yet of like
holiness. Monstrous pictures and Images.
Some are believed to be made by miracle: some fashioned by Angels. Some
others of the common sort. Many of them are notorious for some singular
virtue, and special prerogative: so that in some places they are of less
power, in some other again wonderfully miraculous. There be some supposed to
grow and decay in stature after the manner of me^: And there want not writers,
yt shame not in their Books to blow abroad, that the very Cross it self, was
growyng out of Trees by miracle, yea and this also in very good earnest, they
set forth for a miracle. Out of Alanus Copus, in his Dialogues.
So unmeasurable is the senseless blockyshnes of some. Emo^gest many pictures
of our Lady Luke the Evangelist is supposed to be the deuisour of four, the
proportion of yt which he is reported to have drawn out in Tables with his
own pencill, to wit, Mary that is called Inuiolata, the second Mary
presented to the view in the Church of Maria Noua, which they do say was
painted by Luke when he soiourned at Troas, and was afterward conveyed
thither by an Angel: The third is resiaunt at S. Maryes, which is called Ara
Coeli, graue^ to the same proportion and form as she seemed to be when she
stood by ye Cross. But the Augustine Friars do vau^t courageously, yt the
chiefest of all remains with them: namely the very same which Luke did painte
out for his own use, and reserved with great reverence. I do pass over many
Images in many places. In England not many years ago was an Image so
cunnyngly cou^terfait, that by a certain crafty sleighte it was made seemyng to
the beholders to turn the head, to move the lips, and to roll the eyes in
and out into every corner. The fraud thereof being espied, the Image was
brought to Paul's Cross in London, and burnt in a pyle of wood, in the reign
of Henry the viij. What then? was that godly and victorious King franctickly
madd, who did thus deliver his subjects, the seely flock of Christ, from such
ravenous Idolatry? or shall we accoumpt Osorius worse then madd, that so maddly
persuadeth him self that he may be a madd Proctour in so madd causes?

Now to proceed orderly: somewhat must be spoken of the Angels and Saints
and their notable Relics. Wherein I might seem to dasly perhaps: if the
matters them selves were not practiced by these counterfeit Catholics, so
plainly and sensibly yet, that all men may easily espy their lieger demaine:
and withal so Apishly and doltishly, that no man is able to refrain from open
laughter that does behold them. For what is he that will ever believe that the
sword and buckler wherewith Michael fought against the Devil, may be found
amongst mortal creatures? The dagger and the buckler of Michaell.
And yet are these showed by the inhabitaunts of Carcassone and Towers, in the
name of true and unfeigned Relics. The sword it self is altogether like unto
a little childs Dagger, and the Buckler no greater then a little brazen Bosse of
a Bridle.

But this of all other is most horribly impudent: That within three score
years or a little more, a certain old crafty Crowder laden thoroughly with the
Popes Bulls raunged the coasts, braggyng that he did carry with him the very
feathers of the holy Ghost, The feathers of the holy ghost.
as most precious Relics: whose profane blasphemy some meary conceipted men
espyeng out, opened the Caskett privily, and took out the feathers and putt
Coals in their place. The Coals of S. Laurence.
The next day ensuyng this pratyng Pardoner determinyng to make a show of his
miraculous feathers, after a long preamble of smoath words uttered to ye lay
people, findyng in his budgett a few coals in steed of feathers, with no less
shameless a shift tournyng his tale, began to preach unto them, that he had
forgotten his feathers in his lodgyng, and that these Coals were taken away
from under S. Laurence his gredyerne.

It is truly recorded in the sacred scriptures, yt John Baptyst was beheaded,
and his body buried in the ground by his Disciples: The Relics of John
Baptiste.
Theodoret adds further, that at Sebasta his boanes were taken out of his
sepulcher by Infidels and burnt, and that the Ashes of the same were skattered
abroad with the wind. Eusebius records farther that certain men of Jerusalem
came whiles the Infidels were defacing the dead corpse, and privily pyked up
some Rames thereof, and conveyed them afterward to Antyoch, which Athanasius
did enclose afterward within a wall. Sozomenus writes that Theodosius ye
Emperor, did translate his head to Constantinople. Diverse scrappes of John
Baptistes head in sundry places.
If all these Reports be true: I appeal now to the Readers Judgment in all
that our late Catholics have fabled of the Relics of that man. They of
Amyens, do vaunt that they have his visage with the wound that Herodiades made
in it with her knyfe. The very same part do the people of Saint Angel show
forth: The hinder part of the head from the forehead to the neck was sometime
to be seen in the Isle of Rhodes: but now it lies hidden I know not where.
The nape and poll of the head is at S. John of Nemoures, the brains at Noyon.
In the Church of S. John of Morein a piece of his skull is preserved: oue of
his Jaws is at Besanson in the Church of S. John the great, His Jaws.
the other at Paris in the Church of S. John of Laterane: the hinder part of
his ear remains at S. Flowers in Auuerne: A piece of his ear.
his forehead and his hear rests at S. Saviors in Spain: moreover at Noyon
a skalpe of his skull is showed with great Pomp: But how dare we believe all
these to be true now, forasmuch as at our mother Church of Rome in the Church
of Siluester is showed for an infallible truth to be believed, The whole headd
of Saint John at Rome.
the whole head of S. John nothing thereof wanting? Besides this, the people of
Seen do affirm that they have his arm: His Arm.
which does utterly overthrow the creditt of the Ancient historyes. The finger
of that holy man wherewith he poynted to Christ saying Behold the Lamb of God
is at Besanson in the Church of S. John the great: His Finger.
the same is also a Toulouse: an other at Lions, an other at Burges, one more
at Florence, and one also at S. John Adventures, near unto Mascoue. And yet
for this fhameshapen Relyques, to wit, for six fingers of one hand, Osorius
blusheth not to deal like a lusty proctor, as if it were for great holy
matters, and most assured. And although historyes do report, that his Ashes
were thrown abroad into the wind: His Ashes.
yet how he shameth nothing at all to profess, that some of those Ashes be at
Genes? and some at Rome in the Church of S. John of Laterane? what? will our
religious Reliquary defend these for true, being so manifestly false? his Shoe
is at Paris with the charterhouse Mounckes. His shoe.
But what if John Baptist did never were any shoe? His heary shyrt.
At Rome in S. John of Laterane is vaunted to the gaze, His Altar.
his shirt of hear, whereof mention is made in the Evangelist, which is also
as false, for the Gospel does make mention of Camels skins, and no word at
all of any shirt of hear. In the same Church is extaunt the Altar whereupon he
prayed in the wilderness, as though that age of the world did use many altars.
At Air, in Dutchland is the lynnen cloth that he kneeled upon when he was
beheadded. A lynnen Cloth.
At Auignon is the sword wherewith he was beheaded. The sword that behedded him.


The bodies of Peter and Paul.
Now in their right rank let the Relics of the Apostles be rehearsed. The
bodies of Peter and Paul are religiosly visited by Pylgrimes in the Minster of
Peter and Paul at Rome. The church of Laterane has both their heads, S.
Peter's chawbone with his beard is to be seen at Poytew. At Tryers many bones
of them both be extant. Peter's law.
At Argenton in Berry rests the shoulder of Paul. At the great Alter of
Geneua was there a portion of Peter's Brain sometime, Peter's brain.
which as long as lay somewhat close in ye box, was reuere^ced for a singular
Relic, but afterward being more narrowlye examined and vewed, was espied to
be a very pumeyse. To be short, what Churches were ever dedicated to these
Apostles, wherein were not some Relics of them to be found? At Saynct
Saviors in Spain is S. Peter's slypper very glorious and beautyfull like a
prelates pantable. Peter's sl^pper.
At Rome is to be seen Peter's chair of State, with all his pontyficall
vestimentes used at Mass, and the very Altar whereupon he said Mass. Peter's
Chair and his massing vestmentes.
Yet the citizens of Pyse do show the same Altar in their Suburbs, that lead
by the Sea side. The sword wherewith he cut of Malchus ear, is in the
possession of the Romans: Peter's sword.
his Crosiar remains at Paris in S. Stephens of Grees. The staff that he was
wont to walk withal, The staff wherewith he walked.
not only the citizens of Coleyne do challenge, but the Citizens of Tryers
also, proving themselves both to be open liars. The chain wherewith Peter was
bound, is in his own Church at Rome. The block whereupon he was beheaded is
to be seen in S. Anastasius Church at Rome. The block whereupon he was
beheaded.


The Citizens of Tholosse do believe that they do enjoy the bodies of six of
the Apostles, namely: the bodies of James the more, and James the less, of
Andrew, of Phillipp, of Simon and of Judas. Six bodies of the Apostles.
How true this Fable is like to be, may hereby easilye appear, for at Memphys
Andrew left one body behind, and has an other in stoare in Rome at S. Peter's
there, a shoulder at Grisogonus, a ribbe at S. Eustath, a shoulder at the holy
ghost, an other piece at S. Blase: and at Air one foot. Both the bodies of
Phillipp and James ye less remain with the holy Apostles at Rome, likewise the
bodies of Simon and Jude be restaunt in saint Peter's Church there: Mathias has
three bodies: one at Padue, an other at Rome, at saint Mary the greater, the
third at Tryers: at Salerne is the body of Matthew: And at Ortonne ye body of
Thomas. About Naples is ye body of Bartholomew. And yet is ye same showed whole
in S. Bartholomewes Church at Rome. The citizens of Pyse did either fable, or
else have his skin, and one of his hands: one finger of his remains at
Frenes. Like as Philippe is plentiful also in his Relics, one foot of whom
is said to be at Rome in the church of Peter and Paul: he has other Relics
likewise in other places, to wit at Rome in saint Barbaras church, and at
Tryers.

The cupp of S. John.
Two cities do claim the possession of S. John the Evangelists cupp, from out
the which he drank poison, to wit, Bonony one, and Rome an other in the
church of Laterane: to speak nothing in the mean space of his coat, of his
chain, and his chapel. But the pleasauntest Jest of all the rest is of the
collar, whereupon hang the twelve Apostles coambes. It is set forth in the
church of Maria Insulana near to Lions.

S. Anne the mother of our Lord has one body at Apt a city of province, an
other at Maria Insulana near unto Lions: Anne the Mother of our Lady.
Moreover one head of hers is kept in stoare at Tryers, an other remains at
Turene amongst the Friars Iuliackes, the third at Turing in saint Annes,
besides many other skrapps, which are to be seen more then in an hundred
places. I can not tell how many souls Lazarus has, sure I am he is believed to
have 3. bodies: one at Mer^els, an other at Anthu^, the third at Aualon. Three
bodies of Lazarus.
Mary Magdalen as she is not equal in degree with her brother, so has she
less substance: Mary Magdalen has two bodies
for she has but two bodies only: one at vesellis near unto Auserre: the
other that is of greater renown at S. maxim in Province, where also her head
is showed with superscription thereunto, Noli me tangere, to touch no more of
all the rest of all her boanes, hear, and other Relics skattered over all
the world.

S. Longius the blind knight with his spear.
Amongst the which may not S. Longius the blind knight be forgotten, who
thrust his spear into the Lords side although (...) be nothing else then a
greek word, signifiyng a lau^ceknight, yet they deal very liberally with this
saint, and have given him a special prerogative to have two bodies, one
whereof is at Mantone, the other at Mary Iusulana. Not much unlike the fable
that the citizens of Coleyne have forged of the three kings of Coleyne, whom
also they have christened with honorable names, to wit: Three kings of Colleine
Balthazar, Melchior and Gaspar.

Albeit there be many Relics of S. Denyse, yet his whole body is believed to
be but in two places only, at S. Denise in the suburbs of Paris one, and at
Rentzburgh in Dutchland the other. S. Denis two bodies.
And as there happened to arise a greater brawle betwixt those two places, to
wit, which of them should be Lords of the very body in deed: at length the
brawle was decyded at Rome, with this Bull: that whosoever should say, yt the
body of S. Denis was not at S. Denis in Paris should be stoaned to death. And
whosoever should deny ye same body to be at Rentzburgh, should be adjudged for
an heretic, as a rebel to the Apostolic see.

They have divided the body of S. Stephen on this wise, that at Rome the whole
body must be affirmed to be in S. Stephens Church, S. Stephens body.
his head at Orleaunce, His headd.
his boanes more then in two hundred places. His bones.
Of the stoanes wherewith this godly Martyr was stoaned to death (for these
also have they consecrated amongst the Relics) the Carmelites of Poytiers
not many years ago found one stoane which they are wont to apply to weomen
trauayling with Child, to ease them of their pains and burden. The Stones
wherewith he was Stoned to death.
But in the mean space that same stoane procured great anguish and grief of
mind to the Dominicke Friars, who accustoming to apply a ribbe of S. Margerett
to the same use, began to keep a foul broyle against the Carmelites, about
the same. But ye Carmelites standing hard to their tackle, recovered the
victory at the last.

It is taken for a certeintye, that the whole body of S. Laurence is in S.
Laurence Church: S. Laurence^ body.
his arm and his bones are shrined in a Church of Palisperne. His Arm.
The gredyern also whereupon he was fried must needs be a Relque, His gredierne.
a parcel whereof is showed forth at Palisperne. At S. Eustathius emo^gest
other Relics are very deintely kept, not only the coals wherewith he was
broyled, S. Laurence Coals.
but the Towell also wherewith the Angel did wipe his body. Hereunto is added
the coat with long sleeves of this holy Deaco^, His coat with long sleeves.
whereof the Church of S. Barbara in Rome does vaunte a possession: as though
that Deacons at that time were trimmed up with vestments as the papists be now.

Ambrose does report that in his time was found out the sepulcher of Geruase
and Protasius in Millaine. The bodies. of Geruase and Prota^us.
The same do Jerome, Augustine, and many others affirm: And therefore the
Millanoyes do of right claim the interest of those bodies: If this be true:
Then must this other be a very mockery, that at Brisack in Dutchland and at
Besanson in the parish of S. Peter's the same bodies are blazed abroad and
worshipped for notable Relics: besides many other gobbets skattered abroad
here and there in may Churches.

S. Sebastian multiplied into iiij. bodies.
In like manner Sebastian, cannonized for a Saint to cure the Pestilence is
multiplied into 4. bodies: whereof one is at Rome in S. Laurence Church: an
other at Soyson, the third at Piligne near Nantes, the fourth at Narbone where
it is said that he was borne. He has also 2. headds, one at S. Peter's Church
at Rome: the other at Toulouse with the Iacobines, but without brains
notwithstanding. For the Brain the Grayfryers of Angyers do bragg upon
stoughtly: who do enjoy oue of his arms also. An other of his arms is at
Toulouse in S. Seruine, an other at Cassod in Aruergne, an other at Mombrison
in the Forest. They have made Relics also of the Arrows wherewith he was
shot into the body. Whereof one is showed at Lambest in Province, an other in
Poytiers with the Augustine Friars: many others are flowen abroad to other
places.

The Citizens of Orleaunce were long at law with the Anthoma^s at Uienna about
the true body of S. Anthony. To these bodies is there a supply made of a Knee
which the Austines of Alby do possess. Many other of his Members are seen in
diverse sundry places, to wit, at Burges, at Masicoue, at Dyon at Chalons, at
Ourour, at Besanson etc.

Petronilla the daughter of Peter
S. Petronilla alias S. Parnell the daughter of Peter has one whole body at
Rome, as they say, in her own Fathers Church. Other Relics of her are laid
up a part by themselves in S. Barbaraes Church. Yet notwithstanding they do
hold fast an other body of her at Man's in the Iacobines covent: which is of
such virtue, that it cures all kind of Agues.

S. Susans two bodies.
At Rome is a Church called S. Susannes, wherein is to be seen one body of her.
An other body of her is supposed to be in Chalosse. Whereas the Uenetia^s do
bear themselves stought upon the whole body of S. Helen, S. Helene
yet her head leapt away from thence to Coleyne to the Church of Gerion. What
need I to speak much of Ursula and her mates, which they do affirm were
eleven thousand Uirgines, when as the Citizens of Coleyne do make a show of
whole Cartloades of their bones. Vrsula and the eleven thousand Virgins.


At Paytiers be two Churches which do strive together about the body of
Hillary, Two bodies of Hyllary.
to wit the black Mounkes of S. Hillary: and the Mounckes of the Selle, one
body of Honoratus is honorably kept at Orleaunce. Two bodies of Honoratus.
There is also an other in the Isle of Lyryne near unto Antipolis, at Toulouse
is there one body of S. Gyles, Gyles.
an other in a Town called S. Giles being in Aquitaine, there is a body of S.
William in an Abbay of Aquitaine which is named S. William the Wild. he has an
other body in the City of Holstatt and is called Errechen.

What shall I say of Simphorian who has bodies and bones in so many places?
Simphorianes many bodies.
and of S. Lupus whose bodies be at Altisiodore, S. Lupus.
at Sens, at Lions, and at Genes. S. Fereol also has two bodies, S. Ferreol.
one whole at Utica in Aquitaine, and an other nothing empeired at Bryod in
Auuerne.

Rome vaunteth upon the bones of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Church of
Marye over Minerue: The boanes of Abraham Isaac and Jacob.
In the Church of S. John of Lateran they boast that they possess the Arc of
the covenant, and the Rodd of Aaron: and yet the same Rodd is at Paris in the
holy Chapel there: and is to be seen also in S. Seuerines Church at
Burdeau^: so that ye same Rodd wh was once turned into a Serpent, is turned
now into three Rodds.

The multiplying of which Rodd seems not much unlike the Toath of Saint
Appolyne here with us in England, of the which a certain Abbot of Almesbury
named Andrew does make relation. For it chanced on a time that as Edward the^
king of England was grievously tormented with the toath ach, he commanded by
general proclamation, that all the teeth of S. Appolline that were reserved
for Relics within all the Churches of his Realm should be brought unto him:
there were such a multitude of one poor Relic of S. Appolline his teeth
Raked together, that two or three Toones were skarse able to receive them, when
they were thrown together on a heap.

I Have abused thy leisure perhaps (gentle Reader) longer then was
convenient, in reckonyng up this Raggemarow of rusty Relics: howbeit I have
not rehearsed the thousandth part of the like religious Rags: So far and so
wide has this pestilent canker crept over all the parts of Christendom, that
almost there is no Cathedral Church, Parish Church, Mounckery, Abbay,
Fryerhouse, Selle, Brotherhood or never so little a Chapel but is poisoned
with some contagion of this Serpigo. And I would to God that the like endeavor
were generally employed, that John Calvin performed in seeking out those
Relics whereof I have made me^tio^, and that a general view might be taken of
all the Relics remaining in all Christendom, in Monasteries, Selles,
Shrynes, Boxes, Caskets Glasses, and such like devises, that the world might be
made acquainted with them. It is incredible to be spoken what legerdemaine,
Iuggling, and peevish pelting, what monstrous lies, and crafty packing, what
horrible forgery and apish halting, would appear to be fostered by these
rakers of Relics, and fab^ing Fathers. But I will not deteigne thee (Reader)
in these tryfles any longer: Only this by the way I wish thee not so to
interprett my travail herein, as though I would that all reverence usually
ascribed to the true monuments, and true Relics of Martyrs, and other godly
personages should be utterly suppressed: such especially as is meet and
convenient for them. But hereof nevertheless must be had a double
consideration. First: That we defraud not Christ of his due honor and worshipp,
transferring the same over to Saints and their monuments. Next: That we vaunte
not to the gaze counterfeites for truethes, and falsehoods for verityes, and
abuse not the simplicity of the unlettered, under the visor of true Religion.
Which kind of fraud, as is of all other most execrable, so is there not any
one more daily frequented at this present by the rolled generation. Howbeit
this is no new grief of a year or two continuance, but is an old wound,
long lurking even amongst the boanes, and gnawing daily upon the Synowes of
all Christendom. Of the which Augustine complayneth grievously in his own time
in his book De Opere Monachorum, writing on this wise. August. in in his book
de opere Monachoru^ cap. 28.
He has skattered abroad so many hipocrites under the weed of Mounckes in
every place, gadding like Vagabounds about the Countries, sent to no certain
place, remaining no where, settled in no place, nor making abode any where.
Some carry about the Relics of Martyrs, if they be not rather the boanes of
other dead men: but they do all beg, they do all rake for money, all make
gaynefull marchaundise either of their cloaked holiness, or of their
deceiptfull needynes. etc. But of Relics has been sufficiently spoken now:
for the confutation of the which, what shall I need to say any more? sithence
to the sound witted Reader this may suffice, that I have made him an open show
only of these mockeryes and trumperies.

The controversies (which concern the strongest pillars of their Religion)
being on this wise dispatched: now that we be escaped out of these crabbed,
rowgh, and unsavory subtiltyes of disputation. I see no cause to the contrary,
but that I might make an end of this book, saving that there remain yet a
few dregs, in the cloasing up of Osorius cauillations, that are not lightly
to be passed over, though also they apperteigne not so necessarily to the
cause, as to require any special answer. Whereof I purpose nevertheless to
speak somewhat by Gods grace. And first touching his solemn protestation,
wherein he accurseth and denounces himself for a damned creature, if he have
written any thing in his book fayningly, and counterfetly or colorably. Let
us hear him speak in his own words. I do here protest before Jesus Christ
Judge of the quick and the dead, that if I do not write the truth which I do
determine upon, which I judge to be true, and which I do unfeignedly and
firmly believe to be the true and vndoughted Religion, that he will exclude me
from entrance within that heavenly City, and possession of that everlasting
glory, and not suffer me to enjoy his glory world without end. etc. Osor. page
204.


In which protestation I do easily believe you Osorius, though you hadd never
made so deep a Protestation. Neither do I suppose that you do dally with us
in these matters contrary to the very meaning of your mind, but utter in deed
the very bottom of your thought, according as you have cauilled in these
books. But this suffices not to have your phrase of writing agree outwardly
with your profession, unless your mind within differ not, nor be discrepaunt
from the right rule of truth. Neither does it matter so much, that you have
uttered in writing, according as ye fancy of your mind has carried you but you
ought rather to be well advised, that your heart be so instructed wtin as it may
conceive that which is wholesome and sound, and that your penn be not violently
whyrled at Randone, by the vain suggestions of your brainesicke headd, to
endite false matter instead of the truth. For herein consists the whole
substance of our controversy, not in the vtteraunce of things which are
conceived in mind: but in the discouerye of the meaning and sense of the
truth. Such as in times past did persequute the Gospel of Christ, and such as
at this present do seek the overthrow thereof (even whiles they do embrue
their bloody hands with goare of the Saints) being seduced by glauering
conceit of colorable error, did and do think to do good service herein to
God. Not much unlike unto them, of whom we hear mention made in S. Paul, and
whereof the number is infinite at this present: Which having zeal, but not
according to knowledge, do seem to err very much in the affection which they
seem to bear to godlynes, but wander altogether out of the way in their
choice: like as seems to have happened at this present to Osorius in
defending this cause of the Popes supremacy, of Purgatory, of the Sacrifice of
the Mass, of Pardons, of Relics, and worshipping, and of many other
Mysteries of the Romish counterfettes: wherein I do confess that he has
debated somewhat: and so debated, as himself does confess, not of any gredy
desire of flattering (as speaking the thing that ^he does know to be plausible
to his Catholics) but has written the very same doctrine, which he does
firmly believe to be true: which I do yield unto, that you have performed
accordingly. For as much as hitherto you have alleged nothing but
fantastical conceiptes of your own wandering imagination, and fryuolous
opinions of your own gyddy devise: Thoroughout all your books no spark of
Scripture, no sentence at all of ancient writers, besides bare names only is
vouched, able to give any creditt to your cause. And therefore you have said
well in deed, that your writing does agree with your meaning in all points:
but there is nothing more corrupt then that judgment of yours, nor any thing
more vain then your writing. And for the things themselves whereof you make
mention has been spoken sufficiently already: to wit, of the Popes
supremacy, of the Popes wars, of Purgatory, of Sacrifices, of Marketts of
Pardons, of the uncleanness of Priests, and of their filthy superstition.
Osor. page 204.
All which disgracementes of Religion from whence they issued out at the first,
although Haddon affirmed that you were not your self ignorant, albeit you
dissembled the contrary, yet surely of this you ought not to be unskillful
(except you list to be reputed an open counterfaite) that all those Trincketts,
which you thrust upon us under the cognizaunce of Religion, did savor nothing
of the foundation of Christ's Religion, of his Apostles, or of the Prophetts
doctrine, but have been devised by other men long sithence the coming of
Christ, and by covert creeping by little, and little into ye Church, are grow to
this unmeasurable Rabble. Which has been displayed abroad abundantly enough
before, as I Judge in these same books.

After all these ensues a common place of the filthy and wicked life of
Priests: Osor. page 205.
which being more notorious then can be covered, more filthy then can be
excused, Osorius is driven to this straight: that he can not deny, but many
things are amiss in the manners of Priests, and many things out of order
which require severe and sharp correction: howbeit he does so extenuate this
crime, as that he shameth not to confess, but that the greater part of these
Catholic shauelings do live most chastely, without all blemish of worthy
reproach. Of the rest he has good hope, yea and doughteth not thereof, upon the
confidence that he has of the good beginnings of the most holy Father the Pope
Pius the fifte. whose wonderful godlynes joined with marvelous zeal of true
Religion, clear and void from all ambition, greedynesse, and rash temerytye,
does geaue us especial comfort, that it will shortly come to pass, that the
disorders and dissolute misdemeanors of Superstition and Priests will attain
to a better reformation: But if happily this hope happen not to good success,
and though all things do run into further outrage, yea although also no man
minister medicine and remedy to this diseased Church: yet is not this
forthwith a good consequent, that good and godly ordinances shall for the
retchlesse treachery of some evil disposed persons, be utterly taken away. And
that human actions did never stand in so blessed an estate, as to be clear
from all matter worthy of reprehension, not only amongst Priests, and
Mou^ckes, but also through all the conversation of Christian congregatio^s. And
that it stands not therefore with Reason, for the negligence of a few
disordered Mounckes to root out the whole order of Mounckerye: and for the
wickedness of some Priests, therefore to subvert the whole dignitye of
Priesthood and authority of Byshopps: None otherwise then as if in the holy
state of Matrymony many things chance sundry times not all of the best, and
unseemly handled, yea and that wantonness grow even to brech of wedlock: yet is
it not reasonable that for this cause the whole bond and vow of mutual love
and lawful uniting should be cut asunder. Osorius page 206.
Semblably ought we to determine of the orders of Priests, and Mounckes.
Amongst whom though all things be not done orderly and decently, yet such
things are not by and by to be discontinued which were instituted for godly
purposes: nor follows not forthwith, if there be some festered members in the
common weal which must of necessitye be cut of, that for this cause the whole
state of the common weal shall be turned vpsidowne: but rather that the
ouergrowe^ weeds be plucked up, and such as be scattering branches be applied
to better order, and reduced to their first pattern: And that there is nothing
more perilous in Commonweals, then the often innovation of good and
commendable established ordinances and laws: which does commonly breed not
only a general contempt of wholesome statutes, but for the more part procure
an utter overthrow of the whole state according to the testimony of Aristotel:
Aristotel.
who did sometime openly withstand the decree of Hippodamus Milesius made for
the advancement of such as should devise good and profitable laws: Hippodamus
Milesius.
being of this opinion that laws should be comprised within measurable lymitts
and bounds, and that the well keeping of tolerable laws emported more
safetye then the innovation of new.

To Answer this large discourse briefly: Osorius could have alleged nothing
more commodious in ye defense of Luthers cause, and nothing more vehemently
against these newfangled Romans. For if Aristotel did worthily reprove
Hippodamus Milesius: Who being not contented with the present state of his own
Country, did practice an alteration of the state: What shall be said unto you,
who have so chopped and changed all things in the Church, that there is not left
therein one title so much of Apostolic antiquity, or au^cie^t Doctrine?
Therefore if all matters must be reduced to the first foundations, what one
thing can prevail more to further the Luthera^s desire? who in all their
writings and wishinges have never endeavored any thing more carefully, then
that a reformation might be had of ye Public abuses and corruptions of the
church, according to the first most godly institutions, to the utter
abolishing of all newfangled vpstartes wickedly supported. And those first
Institutions, I do call the very first foundations of the Apostolyque
doctrine, most godly grounded upon the holy ghost, and the Testament of
Christ. From the which how much your doctrine and Traditions do varry, I have
sufficiently discovered before. For whereas Christ is an infallible principle
and ground of the Apostolic doctrine, and whereas the chief pillars of the
Evangelical buildyng do stand principally upon this point, to preach unto us
everlasting life promised by the free gift of God, through faith in Jesus
Christ: even by this one mark may easily be discerned, of what value and
estimation the whole state of the Romish religion may be accounted: The
principles and chief grounds of the Popish doctrine.
which does not direct us to Christ, but to the Pope: not to the only son of
God, but to the sons of men: not to the worshipping of the living God, but to
the invocation of dead souls, and adoration of Relics: not unto faith, but
unto works: not unto free forgiveness, but unto Pardons: not unto grace, but
unto works: not unto the promises of God, but to men's satisfactions: not unto
heaven, but unto Purgatory: which does allure us, not to the spyrite, but unto
the hungry letter, to ceremonies, to written Traditions, and unwritten
verityes, to the bare naked elements of this world, to bodyly exercises, which
of their own nature do prenayle little or nothing at all. If this be not the
very natural power and state of all your Religion almost, confound me if you
can: but if you cannot with honesty deny it, where is then that glorious bragg
so often craked upon of the first principles of your Traditions? which how
gaylye are liked and blazed abroad by you, let other me^ like as they list.
Surely I am of this opinion, that there be no surer groundworkes of our
Religion, nor better laid, then such as the Apostles and Prophettes have
established: unto the which if you will but call us, we will yield gladly and
join with you. But you do mean some other principles and fou^dations I
suppose, not such as were builded up by the Apostles and Prophets, but such as
have been invented by Mounkes, Friars, and Noonnes: whose orders and
institutions you justify to be most holy and godly: and have determined with
your self, that all things which are swarued from thence, ought to be called
home again to the holiness of these sacred orders: howsoever some particular
Mounckes do abuse their profession, yet you do stoutly auerre, that the first
institution of the profession and foundation of their orders does persist as at
the first, and ought not by any means be dissolved. This is well. But what if
I be able to justify the contrary, to wit that the very first foundations of
those Mounckeryes (as they were erected by the first founders thereof) be
wicked, damnable, and to be detested of all christians? Now I beseech your sir
Bishop for the honor of your sacred Myter, if any man do direct you to any
other redeemer then unto Christ the son of God, or will allure you to seek
for any other redemption then in the most precious blood of Jesus Christ: Do
ye think such a fellow in any respect tolerable? I do not believe it. Go to
then, let us take a view now of the original causes and principles upon the
which were grounded the first foundations of Mounckeryes. I will speak only
of our own Mounckeries here in England, as much as I know by experience.

The cause of the first b^ildinges of Abbyes in England. Ethelbert King of Kent.
When the first foundations of Mounckeries began to be erected in this Realm,
which was in the time of a certain Mounck called Austine, whe^as Ethelbert
reigned king of kent in the year 605. We will declare even out of his own
letters patentes, the very cause that moved him chiefly to build an Abbay at
Dover for the order of Benedictines. And these be the very words of his own
charter. I Ethelbert established in the kingdom of my father, and enjoying the
crown and dignity of my father by the permission of God in peacible
tranquillity, emo^gest other churches that I have builded by the persuatio^ and
council of our holy father Austen, have erected from the very foundation, a
Church to the most blessed Prince of the Apostles S. Peter, and to S. Paul
Doctor of the Gentiles, and have endeavored to enriche the same with large
Revenues and lands: and have caused there to be assembled Mounckes which do
fear God. Therefore entending to amplify, and to enlarge the same Church to
the proportion of a just height, being in perfect mind and sownde judgment,
I have given unto the same church by the consent of Ealbalde my son, and
other my dear counselors, a Town called Cistelett for the redemption of my
soul, in hope to attain everlasting reward for the same. etc. I do not accuse
the well disposed king worthy of singular praise, but I do utterly condemn
Austen the Mouncke that wicked counselor and instrument of that doctrine:
Uerely, if redemption of souls be purchased by buylding of Abbyes, then dyed
Christ in vain, and the promise is made void, and of none effect: finally
what remains for us by this reason, but that we have as many redeemers as we
have Mouncks? You have heard of Ethelbert the father, now harken likewise of
Ealbalde his Son.

I Ealbalde placed in my Fathers kingdom, Ealbalde son of Ethelbert. Anno.
618.
followyng my Fathers steps, who of a valiau^t courage did build Churches of
God at the earnest entreaty of Father Austen, and enriched them with diverse
dignities: do freely and willyngly give and grant a certain part of my
kingdom called Northburne, to the behoof of the Monckes of the Monastery of
Peter and Paul at Dover in ye honor of almighty God and his holy Apostles,
and of S. Augustine, for the Redemption of my Fathers soul, mine own soul,
and my predecessors souls. etc.

I Ethelrede king of Mercia do grant this Charter for the redemption of my
soul, Ethelrede king of Mercia. Anno. 681. Berthewalde.
and to be prayed for, by the servants of God the Mou^ckes of Malmesbury. The
same Charter was confirmed by king Berthewalde for the Salvation of his soul
(as his Letters Pate^tes do declare) and for the Remission of the Sins that
he hadd committed.

What shall I speak of the rest? of Osricke king of Mercya? of Oswy king of
Northumberland? of Whitrede Cissa king of Southsex? Ethelrede Prince of Mercia.
Ina, Renulphe, Offa, Alurede, Athelstane, Edgar, William of Normandy, Henry the
first, Stephen, king John, and Edward? by whom whereas many Monasteries have
been erected even from the first foundations, and endowed with large
possessions and revenues, if we behold the original Charters of the first
founders: we shall find that they were erected for none other cause, For what
cause Monasteryes were ^rected at the first.
nor under any other Title, but for ye Redemption of souls: for salvation of
souls (and to use their own words) for the remedy, and remission of sins:
For mine own soul, and all my predecessors souls, for my fathers soul and
mothers soul: for the soul of my wife, and all Christian souls, for the
Remission of sins: for the prosperous estate of our kingdom, and the
subjects of our Realm: To the honor of the blessed Uirgine Mary, for reward
of eternal felicity. etc. For all these titles are extaunt in the ancient
Charters of the kings grauntes. Out of the Cronicle of Osberne upon the life
of Dun stane, and out of Malmes b. Roger Houede^ and others.
After the same manner did Elfride wife to ye Earl Ethelwolde, build an Abbay
at Malmesbury for the death of her husband, whereof she was her self a
Procurour, for the Remission of that wicked act: into the which afterward,
she made her self a perpetual Recluse for everlasting penance. Moreover king
Edgar which murdered the said Ethelwolde for the love of his wife, for
satisfaction of his offense, and for the preservation of his subjects, is
reported to have builded so many Abbayes, as there be weeks in the year.

King Edgar
With like outrage did Queen Alfrithe king Edgar his wife most cruelly murder
Edward ye Martyr her son in law: by means whereof she might place into the
kingdom her own son Egelrede. At the last repe^tyng her of her former
wickedness, did erect two Abbayes in satisfaction of her murder, to wit
Amesbury and Werwell, about the year of our Lord. 979.

King Athelstane, having slain his brother Egwyne, who^ he drowned tyra^nously
in the Sea, after the slaughter of his brother, did build two Abbayes namely
Mydleton, and Michelney, and enriched them with great revenues, for the
Redemption of his brothers soul, and forgeuenes of the murder.

Upon the same occasion, or not much unlike was Battle Abbay first founded:
which king William the Conqueror, after he hadd woo^ne the field and slain a
great multitude of notable Soldiers, did cause to be builded in the same
place, for the release of the souls and Sins of all such as were slain in
that battle.

I have thought good to set down a brief note of these: the like whereof I
could have rehearsed many more. All which albeit I had rypped abroad, would
have been sufficient Presidentes that they all had one manner of beginning, and
one cause of foundation, namely, none other then which might utterly deface the
glory of Christ, the assurance and trust of our Redemption, and withal the
whole Grace, and comfort of Christ's Gospel. O holy foundation of Monckish
Religion. O wonderful monumentes of marvelous holiness: O sweet and smoathe
Divine, that can so amyably persuade us to return to these principles and
foundations: wherein he seems in my Judgment to endeavor nothing else, then
to bring us Christians in belief that forsakyng Christ and renouncyng the
doctrine of the Gospel, we should repose the salvation and redemption of our
souls, and the forgeuenes of our Sins, not in the Son of God, but in
Monckes and Monckeries.

But let us pursue Osorius by the tracke of his foot, whiles he hasteneth to
the end of his book, who glauncyng away from the Mou^ckes at the last, does
begin to proyne his feathers, and to make a show of his proper wit to Kings
and Princes. And here he rusheth upon the poor Lutheranes with an horrible
accusation of high Treason. And why so I pray you? whether because the life of
Princes has been preserved by them? or de^owred by their practice? Osori. page
208.
No. But treason has been conspired against their lives, and their Crowns,
and vproares raised. As in Germany against Charles the Emperor. In France
against Henrye the King, in England against Edward, who he does affirm was
poisoned by the Lutherans: Against Queen Mary. In Scotland against the King
whom he affirms to be horribly murdered: Yea Sir, in this last you speak
true indeed, but to name the Author of this murder, you play mumme budgett.
Yea and not against these Princes only, but against many more princes besides,
Osorius does boldly say, conspyracies to have been attempted by the Lutheranes.
And why does he not amongst the Kings and Princes of Germany, France,
England and Scotland before named, reckon up also Princes of Turkey, of
Scithia, of Persia, of India, of Aethiopia with their Emperors, Kings, and
Potentates? The great Sophye Emperor of Persia and Moskouia, Prester John? And
sithence he takes so great a delight in lying, why does he not with as
shameless a face exclayme, that the Lutheranes have conspired Treasons, and
procured poisons against those persons? forasmuch as his lying therein cann
bear no better countenance, then it does in the rest.

But forasmuch as these slanders are wisely and sufficiently answered before
by master Haddon in the first book, it were labor lost to abuse the Readers
time in refuting those untruths which be already confounded before:
especially sithence this cause does neither concern the doctrine which we do
profess, and sithence Osorius will be proved a liar herein by no person more
easily, then by the Scottish Queen her self, to speak nothing in the mean
space of the public and general testimonies of Germany, France, and
England. Therefore passing over those Princes, I will frame my self to the
other part of his complaynt which concerns our most gracious Queen Elizabeth
above all the rest. And here I beseech thee (gentle Reader) let it not seem
tedious unto thee to pawse a whiles, that thou may perceive how like a Divine
Osorius does behave himself.

For framing himself to discourse upon Ecclesiastical government, which he
does constantly deny, is not meet should be committed to the creditte of a
Temporal King, much less to a Queen in any respect: which because the
Queens Majesty shall not take in ill part, as though he defaced any part of
her honor: he does very humbly crave pardon of her grace with an honorable
preface. Osor. page 208.
For he is not the man that will presume to extenuate any part of her honor,
but rather does wish with all his heart, that she may of all parts so abound
in virtue, that she may be shrined for a Saynct. We do joyfully embrace the
godly modesty of this sweet Bishop: and lo, because we will not be found
unthankful unto him, for the virtues that he does heartily wish to our
gracious Queen, we in requital of his curtesy do pray to GOD, to endue him
with as much of his heavenly grace, as may convert him from a vayneglorious
papisticall Babbler, into a friendly follower and embracer of the infallible
truth of the Gospel. But let us return again to the Ecclesiastical
supremacy of Osorius which he does yoke so fast to the Bishop only, that he
does utterly exclude all other kings, and Queens especially, from all charge
ecclesiastical. Osori. does exclude Princes from Ecclesiastical government.
So that he verilye adiudgeth, that there cann come no greater infamy to
Religion, the^ that all Churches, ceremonies, and all ordinances of the
Church, all priestly dignityes and holiness should be subject to the
government of a woman. For these be his own words: wherein what he means
himself, either he does not sufficiently express in telling his tale, or else
my blockishnesse surely can not comprehe^d his deepenesse. He does so swell in
hawtynesse of speech, that whiles he endeavors with waxed wings to flee
beyond the view of common sense, above the bright clouds of plain Grammar,
that through the heat of his skalding brains, he has drowned himself in the
deep, and by reaching beyond his reach, he reaches nothing at all. Wherefore
renouncing once at the length this curious cripsing and blazing bravery of
hawtye speech, begin once at the last to declare unto us in plain terms,
distinctly, and plainly, what your Rhetoryck means by these words, that all
holiness should be subject to the government of a woman? If you mean of
things that are of themselves holy and divine, your quarrel is altogether
untrue, wherewith you charge the Queens majesty. For where did the Queen ever
desire to govern, or where did she ever desire to bear rule over all holy and
sacred things, and this holiness whereof you make mention, or all the holy
ordinances and benefices of Ministers? But if you understand of the personages
of men, that is to say, of the Ministers themselves, and of Bishops, by whom
those holy things are frequented: If you do exempt those persons from the
lawful government of their own Prince: herein you show your self no less
injurious to our Queen, then a manifest rebel to S. Paul: who gives a far
other commandment in the scriptures: To wit: That every soul ought to
submitt it self to the power of their own Magistrates. Upon which place of
Paul, Chrysostom making an exposition, does so exempt no kind of people from
this subjection: Chrisost. upon the 13. to the Romans.
that he spares not to comprehend under the government of the higher powers
all persons, by one law as well Apostles themselves, Prophettes, and
Evangelists, as Mounkes. But let us peruse the Arguments wherewith this
gentle and obedient child of the Popes good grace does make his words
warrantable.

Osor. page 208.
Tell I pray you if you please (faith he) where did you ever read that a
Christian Prince did take upon him the office of the Pope? Truly to confess
the truth, I did hear never of any. For there was never any Christian Prince
so shameless to presume to take upon him so great a function: to profess
himself to be the head of the universal Church, to challenge the prerogative
of the consistory in common with God: and to usurp both swords spiritual and
temporal: to compel all humayne creatures upon pain of damnation to swear
him allegeaunce, and to yield all power and authority under him. And therefore
that I may be so bold to demand a like question of you in as few words. I
pray you tell us, if it may please you Osorius: where did you ever discern so
shameless an Impudency in any mortal creature at any time, that would presume
so arroga^tly to entrude upon the only possession and inheritance of almighty
God, and challenge an interest therein in his own right, besides this only
high Bishop of yours? But let us hear Osorius how he does prosecute his
arguments. Nay rather all Princes (says he) which did embrace godliness and
justice, did reverence the judgments of Priests, did obey the Bishops
without any refusal, and did most wiselye account it the greatest part of
their honor, to be subject to their commandments. And because his saying
shall not be void of creditt, for want of examples and witnesses, there is
vouched against us Englishmen, our own Countreyman Constantine the singular
ornament of our English Nation: The Emperor Theodosius: Osor. page 209.
Lodowicke the French King, Princes above all other most famous. All which
besides that they were notably renowned for their worthy acts and Princely
exploytes: yet deserved they not so great commendation and renown for any one
thing more, then in that they did show themselves so humble and obedient to the
commandments of the Popes.

We are taught by the rules and principles of the civil law, that matters of
equity are not determinable by examples, but by Law: what Princes have done, or
what they have not done, does not make so much to the purpose. But if right
must be decided by law, to wit, what ought have been done, I do answer, yt
there has been many and mighty Monarchs, whose overmuch tenderness and
lenity toward Popes and Bishops has procured the destruction, and utter
ruin of their own es^ate, and their Realms withal. How pernicious the
obedience of the pope has always been to Christian Princes.
Whenas Rodolph Duke of Swela^d revolted against his own Emperor Henry the 4.
by the instigation of the Pope, what success his obedience to the Pope came
unto, let Historyes report. Henry the fifth became a Traitor against the
Emperor his own Father, by the procurement of the Pope: he did obey the Pope:
vanquished his Father, and famished him in Prison: Osor. is not ignorant what
ensued upon that obedience. Phillipp the french Prince and french Kings son
was teazed to lead an army against John King of England, by the commandment
of the Pope: he obayed, and bidd him battle: what he wann at the length by
that submission and obedience besides many miserable calamities, appertains
not for this place to make report.

There was a truce taken with Amurathes the Turkish Emperor for tenn years by
the Hu^garianes: In the year of our Lord 1404.
not long after league being broken contrary to the law of Arms, by the
abetting of the Pope: Ladislaus King of Hungary is brought forth into the field
to encounter with the Turk: and overthrown in the conflict: In which battle
the King was not only bereft of life, but Christendom also lost almost all
Hungary withal.

I could make a great Register of the wars of Henry the 4. and Henry the v.
again of Frederick the first, and Frederick the second. After those of the
battle of Ludouicke Prince of Bauiere and Frederick Duke of Austriche, and
withal of the slaughter of many Christian Princes and Dukes. But for as much
as has been treated sufficiently hereof before, it shall suffice to have
touched these few by the way: by comparison whereof the Readers may
understand, what kind a thing this obedience toward this notorious See has
been: which has been ye nourse of so many treasons, conspiracies, tumultes,
and vproares, amongst Emperors, Kings, Princes and Subjects: and which does
daily invade the Christian commonweals with horrible outragies: does rende a
sunder Civil society: does disturb the quiet calm of Christ's Church with
seditious Bulls and cruel curses: does entangle the most mighty Monarchs of
the world with unappeasable mutynes, vproares, and tumultes: finally does
ouerwhelme the whole state of ye world with unrecoverable perniciousnes,
destruction, and dissipation. For as it is a needeles matter to revive the
remembrance of the old broils of the late scattered world, which does flicke
fast in our skyrtes yet scarce able to be shaken from the shoulders of all
Chistendome: even yesterday almost in the fresh beholding of us that are
living, what one other grudge did provoke the late Emperor Charles the v. to
invade the Germans? and enflamed the Spaniardes to the bloody spoil of so
many of their own bowels? In England likewise what one thing did procure so
many rebellions of ye subjects against their liege Lords Henry the 8. and
Edward the 6? What thing teazed Mary the Queen to so sauadge a cruelty against
her own natural subjects, rakyng together ^o many Fagottes and loades of
woods to the broylyng of so many Martyrs? finally what one thing at this
present does captiuate, and deteigne the whole Realm of France, in such an
vnentreatable massacre, but this Popish obedience? wherewith Princes (as
Osorius does suppose) do most circumspectly thrust their necks under the Popes
gyrdle. But I am of a contrary mind: and believe verily that Princes might
have demeaned them selves much more wisely and prudently, if in steed of this
childish submissio^, and servile subjection, they would with Princely severity
have sna^^led ye outrageous insole^cy of so shameless arroga^cy, To much lenity
of Princes toward the Pope.
in that proud Prelate: and following the President of our most gracious
Queen, despising those frantic furies of broylyng Bulls, and crauyne
curses, would banish this proud Tarquine from out their kingdoms and
territories. Which if they did, it were not to be doughted, but that the
public tranquillity of all Christian Nations would enjoy a far more
joyful countenance of freedom and concord.

And yet I speak not this to the end, that I would have godly Prelates
dispossessed from their dignity, or would wish their authority empayred the
value of a rush. S. Paul does not in vain admonish us to yield double honor
to Bishops and Rulers of the Church: Tim. 5.
but with this prouiso annexed, to wit, if they rule well, if they do labor
mightily in doctrine, and preaching. But what prerogative can the Romish Bishop
claim from hence, more then any other particular Bishop? The Pope has his
own Province, let him guide that as well as he ca^, let him not encroche
upon others: nor hawke for hawtyer Titles of honor, then beseems his
function. The Ecclesiastical dignity, is a ministry, not an Empire, a charge
and a burden rather then a Lordlynes, or superiority: wherein he that will
presume to rule the roaste over others, must look advisedly to him self
first, that he govern well, that he labor mightily in the word and doctrine.
If the Bishops and Priests be not negligent and retchelesse in their own
duties, they shall never be defrauded of their due honor, and dutyfull
obedience, nor ever were denied thereof. For eue^ for this cause that valiau^t
king of England Constantine, Constantinus.
that noble Emperor Theodosius: Theodosius Lndouicus Pius.
that famous Ludouicke Pius the French king, and other like Princes, did
esteem highely of good, and godly Christian Ministers, and obeyed them, which
instructed them in the word of God: and did enure them selfs to their godly
exhortations (as the Emperor Valentinian does report) even as to wholesome
potio^s, and medicinable restoratiues. Even so Theodosius being excluded from
partakyng the holy Communion by Ambrose, did most modestly obey: Ambrose did
enstruct Theodosius the Emperor.
The same Theodosius also being determined to exercize cruel revenge against
the Thessalonians, and being counsayled by Ambrose, that in geuyng sentence
upon life and death he would take breath, and pause by the space of xxx. days,
least in rage and fury he should accomplish that, whereof he might afterward
repent him: did willyngly and obediently submitt him self to the grave
exhortation of the godly Father. Semblably many other notable Potentates also
in many great and weighty matters, did humbly yield to the sweet persuations of
such, as were far their inferiours^ Princes for the preservation of their
health do obey the direc^^^n of their Physicians: In the laws positive they be
guided and ledd by the conduct of the Lawyers: And yet for all this, such
subjects do not cease to be subjects still, neither refuse their due
obedience to their liege Lords and Governors. It happens oftentimes that
the master will be advised by his servant, and the husband guided by the
discretion of the wife, yet cease not therefore the Master to be Master,
nor the Husband to be head over his Wife.

As in all well ordered commonweals be Mayor alties, Bayliwickes, and many
degrees of Officers, which do severally employ their functions for the
preservation of common society, yet must there be one only sovereign
amongst them of some greater countenance, who by his wisdom and authority,
may guide the inferior Magistrates, and bridle the insolency of the rude
multitude.

But the Catholics do deny that the Catholic Church ought to be subject to
this authority. If under ye name of Church they do comprehend the ordinances
and ceremonies wherewith the Church is administered, they do speak truly. In
deed the word of God, the Articles of doctrine and of faith, the
administration of the Sacraments, and the discretion of byndyng and
exco^municatyng, is not attempered by the regiment, and commandment of
Princes: nor does the Civil Magistrate entermedle with the administration of
any of these things. But if they mean the personages of men, who are exercized
in this holy function, or ye charge and disposition of particular matters, that
are incide^t to ye Ministry, they do say untruly: for as much as there is no
Civil potentate unto who^ is not committed the order and government of all
members of the common weal indifferently, as well Ministers and Preachers of
the word, as all other inferior Magistrates and Subjects. Otherwise the
doctrine of Paul were in vain. Romans 3.
Let every soul submit it self to the higher power: ye truth whereof is to be
Justified by the most approved examples of both the old and new Testamentes. If
we begin at Moses, who supplied the office of a Civil Magistrate, and from
him descend to all the Ages of our own Emperors, and Potentates, Amongst all
which Magistrates, we shall find none, but has received by Gods
commandment, the government of Ecclesiastical persons, as well as of Civil
Magistrates, as inferior Subjects.

It would require a long discourse to treat thoroughly of all the names and
gouernementes of Emperors and Civil Potentates. It apperteineth to the Civil
Magistrate to govern ecclesiastical causes.
To make a brief rehearsal of the chiefest: First in the old Testament, how
many examples are extaunt of such Princes, ^s do prescribe ceremonies for the
Tabernacle? which do fetch back again ye Arc of ye covenant? which make
holy Sonettes and Psalms? Rule over Priests? build Churches? moreover do
cleanse them again after they were defiled? do overthrow Temples and Altares?
reform abuses? which also sometimes do pronounce exhortations to the people
touching the worshyppyng of God? do advertise the Priests of their duties, and
ordeyne laws for them to guide their lives by? which appoint Orders and
observations in the Church? which do kill wicked Prophets? yea and many times
also do prophecy in their own persons?

In the new Testament likewise how many examples are to be seen in ye records
of the best ages of kings and Monarchs, who within their own Territories and
dominions have ordained godly and learned Byshoypes to rule over provinces, and
have deposed such as have been unworthy: have suppressed the riott and
insolencye of Priests: who have not only Sommoned Synodes and Counsels of
Bishops, but do sit amongst them, give sentence with them, yea and prescribe
orders unto them which they shall obey: are presidents over their Counsels,
do depose heretical Bishops: which give judgment upon matters of Religion:
which do set down articles, pronounce sentence, disanull the opinions of
heretics, and ratify the Doctrine of the Catholic faith? If the most
ancient and most Christian kings and Emperors did not entermeddle heretofore
in all these causes, the report of Historyes is false. If our kings and
Queens do the like at this present, what cause has Osorius to frett and
fume? If the charge of Religion and Religious persons do not pertayne to the
civil pollicye in any respect: surely Constantine did not behave himself
discretely, who in his own person decyded the causes and controversies of
Byshopps, which did appeal to his Majesty, entermedled his authority in the
pacyfying of quarells, determined and ended complaynts, and forced them to
unity and concord: all which he ought to have submitted to the po^tificall
jurisdiction. Moreover this also was a part of no less insolencye in him, The
Triper tite history 1. book. cap. 5.
to presume to fit amongst the Byshopps in ye Council of Nyce, as Theodoret
does testify, to direct them with his council, commanding the^ earnestly to
foresee, that in determining and decyding all matters of Religion, they should
have a special regard to the wrytinges of the Apostles, and Prophetts. The
same may be veryfied by the Emperor Theodosius, Socrates lib. 1. cap. 5.
who as Socrates reports, did not only sit amongst the Byshopps, and was
present at their disputation, but was president and chief of the Council
also, and did utterly condemn the opinions of the heretics.

Socrates. lib. 5. cap. 10.
In the council of Chalcedon when as Dioscorus, Iuuenall and Thalassius, were
condemned for heretics, who gave sentence upon them? the civil Magistrate?
or the Bishops of Rome? let Osorius make answer at his best leisure.

Action. 2.
In the 3. Council of Constantinople ye Emperor Constantine did not only sit
together with the Byshopps but subscribed their decrees also with his own hand
on this wise: We have readd (says he) and have subscribed them.

Likewise in the Council of Arausium we read the same was done, I do not say
of the Princes themselves, but of thambassadours of Princes, and states of the
Potentates also: who did not only utter their minds in matters of Religion,
but did add also their own subscriptions amongst the Byshopps.

Justinian in cap. de Episcop. and Cle^isis.
When as Justinian the Emperor made a law touching the reformation of life, and
the restrayning of the insolent lice^tiousnes of Priests: and when as he
deposed two Popes, Siluerius and Vigilius striving together for Peter's chair:

In like manner here in our little Britain, when as Athelstane, Edgar,
Egelrede, and Canutus do establishe Bishops in their Sees when as they do
make laws touching the Sabbath, touching payment of Tithes, touching
Ceremonies, touching worshipping, touching cases of Matrimony, of Penance, and
Excommunication, did they think that they had no charge committed unto them
for Reformation of Religion?

And what shall we answer to Jerome then? who writing against Rufinus
touching the lawful aucthoritye of Counsels: Tell me (says he) what Emperor
did command that Council to be sommoned? Jerome.


What shall I speak of August. likewise? who taking upon him to confute the
error of the Donatistes: amongst other many reasons forced this Argument
chiefly. Augustine.
Why did you convent Cecilian Bishop of Carthage before Constantine (says he)
If it be not lawful for an Emperor to determine upon matter of Religion?

Moreover how shall Chrysostom be answered? Chrysostom.
who by the authority of that place of Paul before rehearsed, does restrain
every human creature (not exempting the very Apostles and Evangelists
themselves,) to the dutiefull obedience not of one Bishop, but of every of his
own particular Prince.

Furthermore what shall we say of the Apostle Paul himself? who purposing to
be tried in the controversy of Religion, Paul the Apostle Acts Cap.
does make his appeal, not to Peter sitting (as the Papists do say) at Rome:
but to themperor Nero, notwithstanding he was a most horrible Tyrant. So that
concerning the duetye of obedience on the behalf of the subject, not the
person that is in highest authority (whether he be King or Queen) but the
estate it self, which is ordained from God is to be considered. Which being
most certeynely true, what cann be more void of shame then Osorius face? more
unsavory then his writing? and more false then his opinion? who raking a heap
of words together to bring us to be more maligned and envied: Barketh against
us Englishmen with his doggish Eloquence. Osori. page 209.
Who have submitted the Sacred affairs of holy Church, not only to a king,
which you do account a haynousnes unpardonable, but also to a Queen contrary
to all equitye and right, contrary to the holiness of most pure Religion, and
contrary to the prescript ordinances of almighty God: and have translated also
the Sacred dignitye of the highest Bishop violently taken away from lawful
Byshopps to the government and direction of a woman. etc.

Lo here (gentle Reader) the substance of a most grievous complaynt against
the Sacrilegous Englishmen, heinous enough, considering the force of our
accuser Osorius: which because you shall not think but that it is in each
respect as true, as it is cruel and odious: and least his declamation may
happen to light amongst such as be hard of belief, and therefore skarse find
any place of creditt: behold now with what Arguments, with what force, and with
what kind of proof he justifies his accusation: and therewith enforces
creditt, not by reason only but with aucthoritye: and does make it
vnreproucable by the testimony of an Oracle: so that now no man cann be so
distrustful as to conceive any ill opinion of the Accuser being a man
uncontrollable. Namely, because himself has spoken the word: every of whose
words, be invincible sentences. Go to then, what is it that Osorius upon his
superexcellent creditt does warrant unto us? Mark well you wretched
Englishmen, you outcast and abandoned Nation, which have made subject to a
woman's government all holy Church, and all holiness, re^nonucing the Pope of
Rome his aucthoritye, harke^ unto your complaint, wherewith Osorius does charge
you. Which thing verily I do affirm to be an heinous offense, a beastly and
sauadge wickedness, and a detestable and execrable abomination.

It is enough, for so our Tomme told us. Neither has he told it only, but
has proclaimed it also, and does so proclayme it, not as the Jews did
sometime exclayme when Christ was accused: for they cried out on this wise. We
have no king but Caesar. But Osorius pypeth up an other note: we have no King
but the Pope. And as for Priests and Byshopps to be subject to a womans
authority, he accompteth it an unpardonable haynousnes, worthy of a thousand
Purgatories. And I beseech you Sir, what was there done at Rome, when as Ioane
an English woman being Pope, all Churches and holiness were subject not only to
the Jurisdiction of a woman, but were at commandment of a Strumpett? But I
let this pass, and return again to you, who recompt it a matter
intolerable, that the affairs of holy Church should be ordered by any
Magistrate, other then by the Popes authority. By what Argument do you prove
this to be true? Forsooth because Osorius has spoken the word. But far
otherwise spoke, and did Augustine, Jerome, and Chrysostom, of whom we made
mention before. Otherwise also spoke Gelasius a Bishop of Rome, who does
franckly and boldly profess, that the privileges of the Church are in the
power of the Emperor, delivered unto him from above. I speak not here of the
person, man or woman, nor yet of ye manners of Princes: but of ye authority:
which whether happen to man or woman, if their prerogative be warranted by ye
ordinance of God: there is no cause why it should be defaced for ye peevish
pratyng of one Portingall.

Surely if ye authority of a woman have not prerogative in decidyng and
determining Ecclesiastical causes: Grego. lib. 11. Epist 8. 2. quest. 5.
Gregory did not demean him self discreetly, who in a cause of purgatio^ of a
certain woman named Me^na sent back yt Appeal to Brunichelda the French
Queen, as to her lawful Princess and Gouernesse.

What shall I say of Eleutherius Pope of Rome? who writing unto Lucius king of
England, Out of the ancient records and Hystoryes of England.
called him the Uicar of God, within the precinct of his own kingdom? and
therefore does exhort and require him, that he govern his Realm with wholesome
ordinances established by the word of God. If Christian Kings and Princes
every one within their own several Realms, do as it were represent the
Uicares of God upon earth, I beseech you Osorius what is more proper unto God,
then to provide circumspectly for the well orderyng and good disposition of
such things, as apperteigne to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? But of this
enough, and more then enough.

But of all other this is a most pleasant jest, and very fit for a
Rhetorician. Where you complain bitterly that the Popes and Bishops are
dispoyled of their lawful authority: which seems to me even as much in
effect, as if AEsopes Crow should take an action against the little birds for
entryng upon possession of their own feathers, AEsopes Crow.
which were their own of right. But because this matter has been sufficiently
enough debated already, take here a resolute answer Osorius for the knittyng
up of this knotte in few words. Peruse thoroughly this whole Papane
whatsoever, which you call by the name of a lawful authority: I speak not
of the personages that have supplied the place: I say behold again and again
the whole form and proportion of that See, and Pontifical royalty, as it is
at this present, the conversation, the practizes, the orders, the insolency,
the pride, the greedynes, the cruelty, the slaughters executed, the infinite
and unspeakable Martyrdomes, the Idolatryes, the blasphemies, the immoderate
injuries and tyrannies of this Popish Church, behold I say, search out, examine
and circu^spectly consider with your eyes and emprinte in your imagination all
the premises, and withal compare all the same to the notes, signs, and
Prognostifications of the Prophetical Scriptures: and if it do not approve by
the infallible Prophecies and most certain tokens, and for eshewynges, and
marks of the sacred Scripture, that this same Prelate^. even he whom you do
propp up so proudly in that Pontifical Prelacy, whom you defend so stoughtly
is the very natural Antichrist that Child of perdition: Behold here I will
yield over my right, and will become your bondsman. But if this ca^ not be denied
to be an vnuanguishable verity, nor gaynsayd by you by any reason, nor can be
mainteyned by you by any proof or due Arguments: what will you say then
Osorius? Where is that authority violently taken from your lawful Bishops
which you have most wickedly usurped so long, not without execrable injury of
other Christian Princes? Wherefore either defend if you can, that he that does
supply the place of that Romish Papane, is not very Antichrist: or cease from
he^ceforth to barcke so currishly against the government of our Maiden Queen,
unto whose authority we Englishmen do most humbly acknowledge our dutyfull
subjection, by the provident appointment, and most happy ordinance of almighty
God: whose Princely prerogative established from above, neither are you able to
suppress, but you shall withal become an errand rebel against Gods
ordinance: nor yield the souereignty thereof to that proud Prelate, but that
you shall herein conspire with Antichrist, and denounce your self an open
traitor against Christ the Son of the living God.

From hence now is our Portingall Parrott taken his flight, hoppyng from one
tree to an other, and passing over many bushes and brambles, that he may at the
last come to his appointed mark, to wit, that last place of his book:
wherein the seely Childish babe Haddo^ does (says he) tear his own flesh
with his own nails: Osori. page 209.
and has withal given him self a very deadly wound. etc. If this gallaunt
challe^ger were as valiant in arms, as he can face out the matter with a
card of ten, surely he were man good enough to overthrow all the Pigmees in
the world. Here is a great noise of wounds, yea and of deadly wou^des: but God
be praised, not so much as one dropp of blood shedd: we hear a sound o^
mostruous storms and horrible thundercrackes, but never a drop of rain:
wherein to my conceit happens to Osorius a chance not much unlike to that,
whereof the old tale makes mention: of an husbandman, not all of the wisest
that did sheare his Dog. Good Lord (quoth he) what a noise is here, and not
so much as a lock of wolle. But passing over those outcryes and painted
speeches of Osorius. Let us consider the matter it self somewhat advisedly.
The place of Haddon wherein this Scourgeluther does so much whyppe Haddon is on
this wise.

What now (says Haddon) shall this most sacred doctrine of the Gospel,
wherein we have always continued by the space of xxx. years together (except
that troublesome time of vi. years) wherein the Queens Majesty has been
trained and instructed from her infancy: wherein her highness has hadd so
many trialles of Gods great bountyfull liberality toward her: wherein has
been a general consent of all estates: wherein has been a settled stay of
most excellent laws and ordinances: shall this so pure and sincere
worshipping of God, so circumspectly defended and established by the Royal
Majesty, of all parts, be defaced and disgraced thorough the crakes of a
peevish `Portingall? These be Haddones words, in yt which place will be worth
yt notyng, to see what scarres Osorius has espied out.

The first is, wherein Haddon does name the sacred doctrine of the Gospel to
be the Discipline of Luther, Osori. page 209.
Zuinglius, Bucer, Calvin, and such like frantic fellows. Truly this is a
grievous wound. And why so? forsooth because those men have not only with the
rules of their doctrine, but also with the evil example of their lives, have
rooted out all shamefastnes, Modestye, Ciuilitye, and obedience. First here be
two lies at a chopp: but let us search out the other wounds: Osor. page 210.
Moreover in steed of faith and freedom, they have bestowed upon their
familiars, presumption and rashness together with unpunishable lycentiousnes of
sinning They have in steed of true righteousness brought in a false and
deceitful righteousness. They have made God the Author of all wickedness. The
decayed Church, which they promised to Restore to her ancient integritye, they
have defiled with more abominations: so that by how much the more a man does
incline to their discipline, so much the more is he estraunged from all
shamefastnes and Chastity. etc. These be old wind shaken Broomes, worn out
before to the bare stumpes, and which has been handled before sufficiently:
but have you any new Broomes? Furthermore a man may easily descry the nature of
this Doctrine, by the very fou^dacion of this Church. Osor. page 211.
And how so I pray you? Forsooth because Venus and Cupido were the founders of
this Church, breach of laws, and contempt of the Pope, have increased it:
flattery and lying has supported it: Greedy covetousness has established it:
Crueltye against the Saints has sanctified it: Tymerous fear of men has
straightened it: Finally a doctrine of men not sent from God, but sturred up
by Satan, has with most troublesome errors poisoned it.

Which being true: who does not easily perceive, with how many and how grievous
wounds this Haddon has embrued himself, through these ruinous fosidacio^s of
ye Church: who did dare to be so bold to call this Gospel of Luther,
Zuinglius, Bucer, and Calvin by the name of a holy Gospel: the beginning
proceeding, increase and end of which he does evidently find to be entered
upon, shuffled together, and shutt up at the last with intemperate lust, and
licentious outrage. Behold here (gentle Reader) a dangerous wound in deed,
and deadly enough I confess, which wound nevertheless Haddon did not procure
upon himself with his own hands, but Osorius has made. For if it be true
that the wise man spoke. The book of Wisdom the first. chap.
The mouth that does lie, does kill the Soul. I read you Osorius take good
heed to your self: least you have pierced your self with a far more
mortal wound through these cursed lies and detestable blasphemies: unless you
fall to repentance betimes: which I do heartily beseech the most merciful
Lord to grant unto you in deed. If this were the Gospel of Luther, or
Zuinglius, against the which you rail so rudely: then might your Raskallyke
outrage vomited out against godly and learned personages seem more tolerable.
But now forasmuch as there is nothing published in this Gospel that is
superstitious, or devised by man: but grounded wholly upon the Sacred Gospel of
Christ: which is not of all parts joined together with the truth it self:
builded upon the sure and infallible Rock of the word of God: the first
foundation whereof was laid by Christ the most perfect builder: increased with
Christ: enlarged by the conduct and guiding of Christ, tending to none other
end, but to the only glory of Christ and the assured safety and consolation of
the godly: Look you then to this: against whom your slanderous lies be
thrown out so dispightfully.

What you mean by Venus and Love: I cannot conceive you: but if you understand
the Marriage of those men, that did choose rather to Marye then to burn: with
what face dare a Portingall Bishop account that ordinance infamous, which S.
Paul thapostle has ratified for good? which God himself did institute at the
first creation of the world? which Christ did sanctifye with the first fruits
of all his Miracles? But if your railing tend to the licentious lust and filthy
life of Priests, to harlotts and Concubines, to other abominations of your
secret Paphia; to the inward boiling and skorching flames of inordinate
concupiscence, to the daily and nightly defilings, to pass over in silence
other unspeakable stenches horrible to be spoken, more then familiarly
frequented, and gredely haunted by Catholics of your coat: what answer
shall I give hereunto else, then the same which Cicero was reported to have
obobiected against Verres: who obbrayding Cicero with overmuch nycenesse, Ex
plutarcho de vitis.
having himself Children suspected for their incontinency, said: You must
speak ill of your Children within the doors, not without.

But what shall I say to the rest of his accusations, which are thrown
together in an heap with full skoupes, and wherewich (as it were by stepps and
grieces) all his Eloquence mounteth alofte: to wit, to the breach of laws, to
contempt of the Pope: to bolstring and supporting with lies: to greedy
covetousness, to cruelty against Saints: and terror brought upon all men? what
answer (I say) shall I make to all these? when as nothing can be uttered
against him in such bitterness of spee:ch, as his shamelessnesse does deserve:
when as also the matter it self is a sufficient testimony of Luthers innocence
herein: to the utter discreditt of Osorius.

When the first broyle begann about Pardons, how modestly, how constantly, in
how great peril and danger of his life did Luther behave himself in that
conflict? how humbly did he prostrate himself to ye Pope again and again?
with letters emporting most humble submission, full of dutyfull obedience, and
reverence? wherein what one spark of malice, or breach of law does appear,
when as yet there was no sentence given out against him? Afterward being
conuented to appear before the Emperor, how reverently did he make his
personal apparaunce? wherein, what bolsteryng and supportation of lies was
there? into what terror were all me^ enforced hereby? Nay rather into how much
more perilous fear was he thrown, when as being circumuented by the
malicious practizes of all men almost, he was forced to maintain his cause,
not with lies and cauiliations, but with most manifest scriptures? After these
beginnings, the veritye of the sacred Gospel glistering more and more, cruelty
and outrage was exequuted upon godly and virtuous personages: not by the
practice or procurement of Luther: But wherewt the Pope more like a Butcher
then a Bishop, did with vnentreatable bloudthyrstynes rushe upon good and
godly ministers, and innocent members of Christ, without measure and without
end. Of whose unmeasurable cruelty as there be infinite examples of godly
Martyrs: amongst all the rest, what sauadge brutishness was there executed
even in your own Country of Portingall, about xx. years past, against a
country man of ours named William Gardener: whom after sundry intolerable
tortures and unspeakable crampes, The cruelty of the Portingalles against
Gardener an English man.
more then horrible barbarousnes sustained, you would not dispatch out of life
speedely, as you might: but hanging him on hye upon a Gibbett, and by a pulley
drawyng him up and down sundry and several times into the flames, you
devised a mean rather by little and little to skortch him to death, chosing
rather to broyle him with leasurable torments (as it were by pausing of breath)
to the paynefull increase of miserable grief, then to kill him at once.

All which so great so grievous and so exquisite imagined tortures,
notwithstanding you could not prevail, nor ever shall be able to prevail so
far forth, but that the unvanquishable courage of the Gospel (which you
persecute so furiously) how much the more villanously is raged against by your
madness, shall daily so much the more wax mighty, and impregnable against all
your frantique assaults. And albeit our Portingall be not acquaynted with any
sproughtes, branches, and outstretched arms of this flourishing and fruitful
Gospel: yet by gods good providence this fruitful grain of Mustard seed does
mount upward nevertheless, and does increase daily in wonderful abundance,
which only thing might have been a good lesson unto you to enduce you to
conceive, that all this success whatsoever, was not devised by man's policy,
nor undertaken of any ranckor or malice, nor supported with earthly treasure,
but to have been furthered and increased by the special providence of almighty
God. Neither is it to be doubted if it had been a policy of man only, and not
rather the special appointment of the heavenly Father, but that it could never
have been able to have endured, and proceeded in so prosperous a course,
against your so great and unmeasurable Tyranny, and against so many conspyring
confederates of factious furies. Which only success (if the Testimonies of
holy scripture can not otherwise prevail with you, and the conduct of Gods
mercy which guides the stearne, together with the prophecies and foreshewings
which were apparauntly pronounced before the coming of Luther, whereof many
tokens sent from above are mentioned in the Chronicles of the Abbot of vsperge,
^x Abbat vspergens. Ex staurastico. Ioha^. Francisci Pici Mirandule.
and in the book entitled Staurosticon Iohannis Frauncisci, and Picus
Mirandula) might have been good presidentes unto you Osorius to instruct you,
that this Gospel is not the Gospel of Luther, of Zuinglius, of Bucer, nor of
Calvin, ne yet of men (as you prattle and lie) but the Gospel of God: and
that the preachers were not raised up by Satan (as your impiety does
blaspheme) but sent from an other founder, namely the very same, who in S.
John's Revelation is called by this name [ the word of God] upon whose Garment
and upon whose thigh is written, Apocal. 19.
King of kings, and Lord of Lords: Out of whose mouth issues a sharp two
edged sword, against the which neither all the confederate councils of the
wicked, nor Hell gates themselves shall be able to prevail.

But to proceed: of the self same stamp is that slanderous cauillation,
which this Scourgeluther has coupled in Rank. Of the continuance of thirty
years, Osori. page 211.
of title of prescription of the five years prosperous Reign of Queen
Elizabeth: of the grayheadded auncienty of our doctrine and Religion. Wherein
it pleased the hoareheadded Sire, of his seemly modesty, to trifle most
apishly, of purpose to represent unto us (as I suppose) that old toothlesse
Witch of whom is made mention in a certain Greek Poett. Lo what a dust the
old Trotte rayseth with her tail when she daunceth. For what if Uerity and
Truth which is called ye daughter of time, being discovered with a far more
excellent lightsonnesse in these our days, do begin to flourish more fresh
and green, in a certain largess of ouerflowing plenty, by the inestimable
benefit of God? shall it therefore be accounted a new doctrine in your sight,
The doctrine of the Gospel is not now first sprung up but is renewed from out
long darkness in to a more freedom of lightsomnesse. Apoc. 11.
because it is clothed with flesh colors? or because it buddeth out blossoms
a fresh, and is restored to the ancient beauty, will you therefore call it
newhatcht? never heard of before? as though it were never seen nor heard of
before thirty years sithe^ce? what shall we say of Christ? who after three
days lying in grave returned again to life, from out his Tomb? was not he
therefore the same Christ, wh he was before his death? We read in the Apocalips
of two Prophets, whose bodies being thrown out into the streets, did revive
and came to life again after thee days and a half. And after iij. days and
a half (says he) the breath of life was breathed into the^ by God. etc. The
meaning whereof cann not be extended any ways to any thing else, but unto the
doctrine of the Gospel. And what if the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ be
now risen again into the open world, out of the doungeon of darckenesse and
deep drowned blindness, wherein it has been so long suppressed by you? is
it not therefore the same Gospel that it was always before?

What? did not John Husse, Jerome of Prage and the greater part of all Boheme
embrace the same Gospel before Luther was borne? was not the same order of
Doctrine professed in England many years before our days, The au^cie^t
witnesses and professors of the Gospel.
in the time of Wiclef, Swinderbee, Brute, and others also and in other places
likewise amongst others, namely, the Valdenses, Albingenses, with the
Grecians, Italians, Moskouites, in Asye, in Affricke, and in Europe?
Betengarius, Bertrame, Peter de Aliaco, John Scotus, Peter Johannes, William de
sancto amore. Robert the frenchman, whom the hott zealous Pope raked out of his
grave, and consumed with fire, four hundred years ago: Niemus, Ioachimus,
Sauanarola, Veselus and many others in their time and before their time, with
whose goare the bloody slaughterhowse of the Tyrannous Pope was thoroughly
embrued: Did not all these worshipp the same Christ then, that we do profess
at this present? did they not confess the same faith and the same Articles of
the Creed, that we do now profess? Barnard in his dyscourse of the free
justification by faith, did he not teach the same doctrine then, that Luther
has uttered in writing? Augustine disputyng upon faith and grace against free
will, does he not treat upon the same matter, that Zuinglius and Calvin do
treat upon now?

Of the use of Sacraments we have extaunt with us long treatises written in
the Saxon tongue, many hundred years before those thirty years, that you
speak of, witnesses and professors of the same doctrine and faith, which we
Englishmen do acknowledge at this present. If this be the cause that does
enduce you to think, that we are entered upon a new Gospel, because we dare
shake from our shoulders the yoke of subjection, usurped by the Papisticall
See: the same did long before our days Robert Gostred a man notably learned
and famous who being Bishop of Lincoln, Rob. Grostred By^h. of Lyncolne
and commanded by special letters from Innoce^tius the Pope, to enduct a
certain boy a kinsman of his own into a Benefice within ye Byshopricke of
Lincoln, being unlearned and unskillfull of the Language, did openly resist
him: and withal, did most sharply inueigh against the Popes detestable
provisions as they call them.

But why do I allege examples of men for the ratifying of the continuance of
Christ's Gospell^ the creditt whereof does neither depend upon the maintenance
of man, nor is streighted within any prescription of time: howsoever human
actions toss to an fro, The Gospel of Christ as it is true so is it not new.
and never persist in any one settled state: certes the Gospel of Christ if it
be the Gospel of Christ in deed, can not be any new or strange thing: nor can
have any other original, or author but Christ himself, the very son of God:
But whereas in those latter days, the tongues and mouths of godly preachers
being stopped and shutt up through terror and Tyranny of the Pope, not daring to
manifest themselves in the open congregation, be now set at liberty by the
bou^tifull mercy of God, and restored to their ancient Freedom: shall we
therefore accuse the Gospel of innovation? or shall we rather embrace this
great liberalitye of God with thankfulness of minds and give our dutiful
attendaunce upon the truth? wherefore whereas this Portingall Parrot prateth
so much of xxx. or xl. years limitation, herein he behaueth himself very
injuriously. He perceaueth now a new face of the Evangelical doctrine to
glister and shine far and wide abroad, over all Christendom at this time:
which because was not so resplendisaunt and lightsome in the time of certain
of our forefathers of late years, (whereas nevertheless Christ did always
preserve and embrace his Church with like mercy and favor) therefore he
accompteth this Gospel of Christ to be a new and strange Doctrine, contrary
to Christ, and this also not Osorius alone supposes to be so, but many other
Deuines wandering inlyke error: who are maliciously wroth against Luther, as
though he and a few others were the first deuisours and coyners of this
Gospel: The^ which untruth can nothing be more untrue. What was the chief
cause and means of the Restoring the truth of the Gospel
Nay rather, if Luther had never been borne, if Bucer or Calvin had never
taught, yet could your ignorance and shameless errors, have no longer lurked
in darkness through one singular and especial providence of God: not that,
whereby Luther was sent abroad into ye world, but by that inestimable benefit
of Gods blessing, prepared for the behoof of his Church, I mean the singular
and most excellent Art of Emprinting.

By this means it pleased Gods good mercy both to provide for the weakness of
his Church, and withal aue^ge himself upon your Tyrannous cruelty, by a
certain secret and unsearchable manner. For imediately after John Husse, and
Jerome of Prage ye most holy Martyrs of God, were by your horrible fury and
wickedness consumed to ashes, and the veritye of the Gospel suppressed by your
Tyranny, could neither be suffered to speak franckly, nor show her face abroad
boldly, nor eskape your ravenous gaping freely: skarse x. years were come and
gonne, before that in place of two poor Prophetts, almighty God had raised up
all the holy Prophetts, Patriarchs, Apostles, Evangelists, and all the holy
doctors of the Church, Martyrs, Confessors, and Interpretours of holy
Scripture, (as it were a certain army of heavenly knights, armed at all
points to encounter your outrageous assaults) who, because could not be
permitted to speak openly in the Church, through your tyranny, begann to
press forth boldly now in ye open Printers shopps, and to leap into every
man's bosom and hands, and withal to bewray your ignorance and Tretchery,
and to discover not new wellsprings of Doctrine, but to skoure and make clean
the old fountains, and Conduyt pypes of the Gospel of grace stoppt up by the
popish Philistines. And hereupon begann to spreadd abroad with glystering
beams the large increase of this gladsome Doctrine: which if be so combersome
a block in your way, you may not therefore wreake your anger upon Luther, but
devise and make some prouiso for these Printers, for these books, for
learning, and for Languages, and to tell you as the truth is, you must
excommunicate God himself: Who durst be so hardy to bestow his unspeakable
mercy upon this later and declining age of his Church, in relieuing and
comforting her long and werysome travail, The Art of Imprinting was a
singular gift of God.
with so many and so plentiful graces and aids of true Doctrine, and sound
understanding: that would provide for her sickness so many learned Physicians
and Doctors: not Luther, Zuinglius, Bucer, and Calvin: but Moses, the
Prophetts, Apostles, Evangelists, and cannonicall Scriptures: through the
reading, and daily perusing of the which, if Christian hearts (being better
enlightened) do now feel and perceive sensybly that, which our forefathers
were forced to groape after in darkness, you ought not to muse thereat at, much
less to envy and malign it.

Wherefore as touching the grayheadded age of this Doctrine, whereat you do
bark so impudently with your currish snarling: for as much as we do profess
nothing else, then the same that is comprehended within Gods book, and which
before our time was taught by Moses, and aucthorized by the Prophetts and
Apostles: what means this your (I will not say) reason, but unreasonable
insensibilytye: with such unsavory subtlety so to wryth and wrest that, to the
defacing of this Doctrine, which Haddon did conceive of the outward lybertye
and freedom of the Preachers only: as though this doctrine were of no better
creditt, and no longer continuance, then these last thyrty years, and so
shamelesly by many hundred years to prefer the auncienty of Mahumets sect,
before the knowledge of this Gospel? But it had been more convenient for you
(good sir) to have learned by diligent enquirye, whether this comparison of
sects, do not serve more fittly with that your pampered Papane: for as much as
that heathenish Paganism, and your profane Papacye were both whelped nere
about one time, The year of Antichrist. 666.
and almost within the compass of one year: which year we do account by the
reveled computation in S. John, to be the six hundredth, sixty and six.

Now that this deep Divine has reasonably well beaten his brains about
matters of Diuynitye: he does begin to cast a new floorish about: and will
have a cast at the prosperitye, and stayed estate of Princes: presuming upon
his politic wisdom to council kings and Queens, and chiefly above others
our gracious Queen Elizabeth, with what modesty she ought to attemper the
prosperous successes and happy tranquillitye of her estate: That she trust not
to much to fawning fortune, that there is nothing certain in the course of
this life, Osori. page 212. 213.
and many perils are to be feared in matters most pleasant and prosperous to
the view: and that no thing is more dangerous then careless securitye,
Osorius exhortation to Queen Elizabeth.
because as after light, follows darkness, and after Calm come Clouds:
even so the whole course of this life, has his continual enterchaunges, Joy
sometimes surprised with sodeyne sorrow: again heaviness changed into
honor, and that all things are carried about in a certain vehement whyrling,
unstableness, as it were the fleyng vanes of a windemill, forced about with
Boreas blastes: The things that are now aloft, be suddenly thrown down, and
contrariwise the things that be simple and base, do at an instant mount aloft.
And that it comes often to pass, that whom God is most displeased withal,
those same he will ouershadow with more fruitful abundance of virtue and
grace, and endue them with happy assurance not of five years only, but of
many years continuance: that so the greater that their fall is, the deeper
may their wound be, according to the old proverb: the higher wall, the greater
fall. Briefly, that there is no state of honor so firm, and so sure guarded,
wherein a man may assure himself of a minute in safetye: which does evidently
appear by the example of Craesus, who being vanquished of Cyrus, and prepared
upon a pyle of wood ready to be bourned, did cry upon Solon with a loud voice:
and being demanded by Cyrus who that Solon was: Craesus does declare the
council that he long before had received of that Solon: whereupon Cyrus
commanding him to be taken down from the stacke of wood, after that he had
thereby learned to bridle his Choler, did not only preserve him on live, but
hadd him in great reverence and estimation.

This far forth Osorius even out of the very bowels of Hystories and
philosophy: wherein I do not so much mislike with him for his good council:
But whereunto were these glorious flooryshes framed more for Queen Elizabeth
then for any other Potentate or Prince of the world? then for the King of
Portingall? or for his proper pigsnye the Pope? When or in what place has our
soueraygne Lady (whose Princely mildenes does surmount all her Predecessors in
lenity and temperaunce) so demeaned her self in all her most fortunate and
prosperous calm of happy Reign, that her Majesty may seem to stand in need
of this your Philosophical persuasions, more then any other Prince? Wherein
has she ever vaunted her Royaltye in such sort, that she must be enstructed by
this Portingall Solon, to have regard to the slippery state of this fickle
life? Declare a good fellowshipp Osorius what matter have you noted at any
time, or heard of by report done by her Majesty, wherein you may justly
reprehend want of wisdom in counsel? or lack of cleme^cy in justice,
beseeming the most virtuous prince of the world? I will boldly also add
hereunto, wherein this maiden Queen may not worthily compare with the most
mighty and ancient Monarche of most famous memory? And if you think that this
little Isle of England is so void and barreyne of council, that Kings and
Queens must of necessitye be enstructed of Osorius. How happened it that you
did not utter your skill, and signifye your good will rather to Queen Marye
her graces Sister, whom you might have persuaded to temperaunce and lenity,
whenas she executed Tyranny without all measure and mean, in shedding her
own subjects blood? where was the^ this Portingall Clawbacke which should
have remembered the Queen of humayne weakness, and imbecility that was so
forgettfull of all humanity, and her own fraylty.

Rejoice therefore Elizabeth our most noble and virtuous sovereign for this
your Alcion days: you may well see now how much you be indebted for this
your most prosperous reign. For if that mighty Macedo^ King Phillipp were so
ioyously affected in his son Alexanders behalf, that it chanced him to be
borne in the time of the famous philosopher Aristotle: why should not ye rather
clappe your hands for joy, in respect of your most happy happiness, and more
then Alexa^ders felicity whom it happens to raygne now in the time of this
notorious Solon, the eighth wise in number, or the third Cato of this age: who
is able to replenish your ears with most wholesome precepts of life, and
fashion your faith with true catholic institution and doctrine, who (if your
Majesty will vouchsafe to believe his lessons) is able to direct your grace by
line and by level, to know the difference betwixt true religion and false,
how your highness ought to discern betwixt true and false Prophets, and how
you ought to conceive of Purgatory, of pardons, of auriculer confession: of
compulsary single life, of ye sacrifice of the Mass, of Images, Pictures and
Relics of Saynctes: Who cann restore your own person to her ancient
freedom from out of that Tyrannous bondage of false flatterers, wherein your
grace is now holden captive. Osor. page 211.
To with: that of a free Queen, you may at the last become a servile bondmayd
of the Pope. For upon this only bunch of thraldom, hang all the Keys of
Osorius free Manumissions.

And therefore since the matter is come to this pass, what remains Most
renowned and virtuous Queen? but that you find means to send for this new
Solon by all means possible, and assign him a place emo^gest the chief of
your priuye council, and alter the whole state of your Realm, after his
direction and appointment: who will guide your Majesty on this wise. First,
that renouncing this Religion, whereunto you have been enured even from your
Cradle, you may now straggle away to the trim Traditions of the Romish
Religion, which Osorius does maintain: that where as you have begone in the
spirit, you may end afterward in the flesh: that you may banish the
scriptures from your subjects hearing: That you may convert your public
preaching into mumbling Massing: That your subjects may beginn to learn to
call upon God in an unknown tongue: that excluding that righteousness which
does consist in the faith of Jesus Christ, your people may be noosled in
confidence and assurance of their own works and merits: that you should
dispoyle the communion of the one part of the Sacrament: that you should
dissolve lawful marriages of Christ's Ministers: Pestiferous Council.
That in your own Realm you should establish a kingdom to the Pope of Rome,
that he may govern your scepter, and you carry his Crosier: That he may have
full skope in your kingdom to distribute benefices, to give Byshopprickes, to
exact first fruits, tenthes, and yearly pencions: that after he has once
swept away the cropp of English Gold, you may come after and gather the
dross: Finally that you make a clear dispatch of these Lutheran Heretics,
kill them, spoil them, and ^^ll England full of fagott and fire, so that the
English blood being spilte, and the name of English Nation being utterly rooted
out, the Portingalles may freely be propt up in their possessions.

Surely this is notable council Osorius, and right well beseeming your
dignity: which whatsoever colorable show it pretend in words, does in truth
and in deed sound and breath forth nothing else, but slaughter and blood. For
hereof you can not be ignorant, that this Romish counterfeit could never be
received into this Region, without wonderful disturbaunce of the state, and
loss of many lives. And for this cause I suppose you directed your bloody and
murtherous Inuectiues to our noble Queen: whereunto if she would have been
pliable, the whole Realm had been long sithence replenished with fire and
flame, wherewith you would have made boanefiers with ye blood of many good
Preachers. But you come to late gentle Synon with these fables and bables: and
may keep your breath to keale your potage: The late lavish lewdnes of Queen
Maryes madd days has made us to well acquaynted with that Romish Iennett, The
Troiane horse.
to grant him any grasing within English soil, or to permit any pasture for
such a popish palfray. Christ Jesus be thanked for ever and ever, now that this
Romish Ruffler is excluded, we live in godly calm: who as now cann never hope
to have any footing here, before concord be exiled, and peace utterly
banished.

Wherefore if that your superexcellent Bishop of Rome, be ravished with so
hott a zeal of Ambicion, that he can not reign without a kingdom: if he will
follow my simple council either let him seek out for some strange unknown
Islandes, where he may rule over such as do not know him, or else let him
change the state of his Religion. In like manner I would aduertize Osorius (if
he be of that courage that he can not stay the outrage of his quill, but must
needs presume to perke and preach to kings and to Queens) that either he
recreate his spirits with some other exercize, or cease here after do abuse
our Gracious Queen Elizabeth specially with such kind of trumpery wherein to
tell you the truth Osorius you have lost your labor and cost, for you prevail
no whitt thereby, as you see: What success you may have hereafter, we committ
unto the Lord: Certes hitherto as yet you may putt all your winninges in your
eyes, and see never a shine the less: as the proof it self does declare.

Osori. page 214.
And be it (say you) that I prevail nothing herein yet wanted not sufficient
testimony of a well wishyng mind, which ought not be unthankfully taken
amongst grateful and honest personages. Of your good meaning what shall I
say? which how ready and inclinable it is, I do easily perceive: but to what
effect I beseech you? For to what other end shall we Judge it so ready, but to
procure our most gracious Queen, (then whose nature nothing can be more
disposed to lenity and gentleness) to be set on fire none otherwise then as it
were some flaming firebrand, contrary to the natural disposition engraue^
within her royal breast by the finger of God, to seek the spoil of her native
Country with cruelty, torments and destruction of her subjects by fire and
fagottes, like unto the furious persecutions and mad outrage executed in the
time of her sister Queen Mary? For what better success could have been hoped
for out of those wicked and mischievous counsel of yours? for let us suppose
and imagine in our conceiptes (which yet her most excellent Majesty could
never have suffered to have entered in her thought) that you might have prevailed
and obtained your purpose or at least as much as you hoped for: what then?
Could you conceive in your mind that the matter had been accomplished
forthwith, as soon as you had entered into the Castle of favor? as though her
Majesty alone be the only enemy to the Pope within this her dominion. Believe
not so, O Solon, and hereof assure your self, that there is within this little
Island a greater number by many thousands more then any man would Judge, that
will rather yield their car^asses to tortures, then suffer the^ selves to be
defiled with the mark of that Beast. And what think you will become then of
the rest of ye multitude, whose consciences are not yet fully settled? of whom
there is an infinite nou^ber within this Realm? you will say that the Prince
must use force, and force them to fagotte that will not obey. Is this the
counsel you give to a Queen? Herein forsooth we poor wretched Englishmen are
very much beholding unto your sweet Fatherhood, for your gentle reward. But
what if faith will not be forced? yea what if it can not be brought to yield?
what if her highness it self be not Queen over consciences? nor any worldly
creature else? for faith will be enstructed, can not constrained: I say also
moreover, it can not be vanquished by death, but even then rather it triumphs
most: And although it may lose life in this world, yet will it never yield to
earthly creature, but to God and his truth.

Wherefore in as much as this your whole discourse (which you prosecute so
earnestly) is of this condition, that it does no more concern any Christian
Prince whatsoever, then the subjects of his Realm (for what is more agreeable
with the manners of the people then Faith and Religion) If you have determined
with your self to bestow any further travail in the like cause by word or by
writing: In matters of Religion it is more meet to deal with men's consciences
rather then with Princes only.
I judge it best and withal do advise you, that you trouble not her Majesty
from henceforth with any such matter: but proclayme forth your challenge
against the Bishops rather, against the Doctors and Deuines, finally against
the subjects of England, and the consciences of the people: whom if you be
able to enduce with force of firm doctrine, and pytthe of substaunciall
Arguments, to the direction of their consciences: you shall show your self
herein a very honest man. But then must you frame us some other kind of
books, and other manner of letters. For the books that we have hitherto
received from you, are such kind of ware, as neither delighte the Queens
grace, nor like well the subjects. For this cause therefore (my good Lord
Jerome) I do the more willingly aduize you not to cease writing henceforth: Nay
rather write on a Gods name, paynte on, devise on, and coin on, as much as ye
list: I will not let you. For so long shall it be lawful for you to have will
to endite, until at ye last, it will not only repent you of the loss of
your labor, but withal make you ashamed of so much good time so wickedly
employed. And therefore take me not as though I would wish you to surcease
from writing, and to throw away your pen: but rather I wish you to write,
and to endyte until you be hoarse withal. Hereof nevertheless I war^e you
before, that unless you mainteyne the quarrel that you have undertaken with
better furniture: you shall both come to late (as I said) and lose your labor
also. For what do you think to gain in this cause of Religion, wherein if
you hadd none other adversary, yet the Lord him self does war against you
with the very breathe of his mouth? the whole Scriptures fight against you, and
the authority of ancient Fathers have bent their force to overthrow you.
Osor. quarrel for the Popes Chair.
Your purpose was to plead for the Popes proper Chair: But he is quite
abandonned, not out of our Churches only, but much further banished out of
men's consciences, nor can possibly by man's policy be restored to the
possession of Christian consciences, in despite of Gods word. It is the Lord
who has by his divine Inspiration cast a darkened cloud over this proud
Prelates Chair, which all Portingall can not bring to light again, though it
lighten all the Tapers, torches, and wax lights in Portingall when the Sun
is at the highest. But Osorius upon confidence of his Rhetoric does dream
upon some dry Summer, and nothing mistrustyng his Tackle as it seems, which
shall be more stronger then any Cable or Anchor, but that he shall be able to
enduce our most Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, to like well with his Request at the
length, maugre the bearde of thousand Haddones: for after this manner writing
against Haddon he says.

What (says he) do you suppose that her wit is so rude and so uncivil:
Osori. page 214.
when I shall have discovered the practizes and co^spiracies of treacherous
traitors by invincible Arguments, and Reasons clearer then the Sun in
mydday: when I shall paynte out unto her view, eue^ before her eyes the
mischievous filthynes and wickedness of this new fangled Religion: when by
manifest proof I shall make evident the foolish and illfauored scatteryng
Reasons of these heretics, wherewith they attempt the maintenance of their
cause: that she will rather allow of that most pestilent opinion, coupled with
vnauoydeable peril of her own life, then return again with most assured
sauety and everlasting glory to the ancient Religion of her noble
progenitors, disco^tinued by the heinous impiety and wickedness of
flatterers?

First where you seem to conceive so well of the disposition of our most
virtuous Queen: herein you do no more then her Majesty deserves, gentle
Sir, nor less the^ beseems your person. And as touching the offer yt you
make, to wit, to Justify your promise by unvanquishable Arguments and
Reasons, more clearer then the Sun in mydday, we do gladly accept, and
withal do most heartily desire, if you have yet any greater stoare of better
Arguments or Reasons, that you will vouchsafe to emparte us of your notable
abundance. For the Fables that you have told us hitherto, be no Reasons, but
bables: be no Arguments, but monsters: wherewith you set a good face in deed
on the matter, with brawlyng and scoldyng: but prove nothing, define nothing,
divide nothing, conclude nothing: edify no man, and the cause it self which
being in dispeyred case, you took in hand to redress, you have with
illfauored handlyng made it as lean as a Rake. And you wonder nevertheless in
the mean space, that in all this land no man can be found so wittlesse, that
will yield to those your illfauouredly patcht Reasons, or rather no Reasons at
all, and those your clouted conclusions framed after most foolish form and
fashion. But it is well yet, that for these foyffy and raynebeaten pretty tales
you have promised us much more strong Arguments and Reasons, brighter (as you
say) then the Sun it self on mydday: which you will so prynte out even to
the view and beholding of our most gracious Queen: that at the twincklyng of
an eye she shall be able easily to descry the uncleanness, and wickedness of
this forged Religion: This is a great promise, my good Lord: But when will this
be done? when pigges fly with their tails foreward, and when S. James of
Compostella, and our Lady of Waltsingham become man and wife. But let us pursue
the tracke of Osorius lusty promise. For on this wise he does in his answer
Reason with Haddon.

Osori. page 214.
If Reason (says he) may persuade her, if Authority of ancient Fathers may
prevail with her: If Gods Law may reclayme her to be of the mind, that she
become once desirous to abhor this sect. Go to and admit that all these
may happen, which your hypotheticall proposition does ground upon: which
nevertheless I am fully resolved will never come to pass during the life of
our most gracious sovereign. But in respect of the chaungeable and variable
estate of human actions, let us grant, that this may be done, that the
Queens affection seduced with the books of Osorius may have an inward desire
to suppress this sect with all her heart: Go to, and what then I pray you? Now
listen gentle Reader to his amplification more then Rhetorical.

What then will Haddon (says he) of his own absolute power forbidd that which
the Queen will have done? does he presume so much upon his own power, and
mistrust of her wit and understanding, that he dare be so bold to affirm,
that without his consent she will by no persuation nor means be reclaymed to
that sincerity of Religion, A slanderous cauillation against Haddon.
whereof her Ancestors were notable defendours to their great renown and
glory? Will you (Haddo^) restrain her in her own Realm and Dominion? will
you abridge her of her will? will you direct her what she shall do? shall she
not provide for her own safety and dignity, for fear of your displeasure? O
Muses, what a force and fortress of words is there here? what a bravery? what
a stir of Rhetorical swellyng speeches in a matter so frivolous? so forged?
and so false? a man would think it a peaze in a Mounckes hoode, or you would
take it to be some Ape pleadyng in Ciceroes purple Roabes. Haddon is accused of
a certain arrogaunt presumyng upon power, wherewith he should think him self
able to abridge the Queens Majesty of her will, as that the Queen her self
did not dare to suppress this Lutherane sect, without his consent and
commandment, yea though she would never so feign: which how foolish and
slanderous a devise it is, your felfe did right well perceive, when Haddon was
alive, and may much more plainly see and imagine now sithence he is departed
this life. You wrate letters first to ye Queens Majesty of England, full of
words and tedious enough, if words could have prevailed ought in matters of
faith: what gained you by it? within a whiles after, you contrived three
Inuectiues in one volume, against Haddon touching the same matter: which you
believed would have purchased you no small credit and countenance with her
highness and her Nobility: what has this auailed you? The Queens highness
remains yet unshaken, in the same mind that she was. What is the cause
hereof? Is it think you because she is aghast or ever was aghast of the
displeasure of Haddon? or any her Subjects? Surely if you think as you speak,
you are a fool: but if you speak against your conscience, you are past all
shame: for now that Haddon is dead, dare she not for fear of his bigg looks
profess whatsoever she lists? And therefore you see well enough, that the
dread of her Subjects does not restrain her from yelding to your doctrine.
But there is an other thing in the wind, which if you be desirous to know I
will describe it unto you in few words.

Whenas the Queens highness to whom you write a Princess adorned and endued
with most excellent ornaments and qualities of Princely renown, Why Oso.
books treating of Religion have no force to persuade.
perused your letters, and according to her singular dexterity and ingenious
capacity could read, could see, could feel no sound nor substantial matter
worthy of creditte, which had any affinity with truth or modestye: when she
beheld in the^ no reasons at all, or surely very windeshaken, motheaten and
worn out to the hard stumpes by many others heretofore, no pith in your
arguments, and nothing concluded orderly: when she perceived that out of
councels, out of ancient Fathers, and Doctors, you uttered nothing but bare
names only, and no sentence to the purpose, and withal no example of the
primitive and most purer ages: when she could not find out any likeness of
Apostolic doctrine, throughout all that your discourse, nor any mark or
sparckle almost of Eua^gelicall sincerity: but all things overwhelmed with
darcknesse, tumbled and drowned in deep dongeons of errors and superstition:
and did thoroughly perceive that you alleged in stead of reason, impudent
Insolency, in stead of sound argument foreiudgementes: in stead of testimonies
and authorityes of ancient fathers, outrageous outcryes, craftily conceived
lies, spittings, reproaches, skornefull tauntes and infamous slanders: finally
nothing else but skolding and malicious railing: may you yet be so blind as to
be ignorant or in doubt of the cause, that does stay her from partaking with
your doctrine? It is not, I wys it is not that slanderous cavil, which you
have so malapertly and grossly imagined, and whereof you accuse Haddon so
undeservedly: For Haddo^ was never that kind of man, The consta^cye of Queen
Elizabeth in defending Christian Religion.
as would permit his imagination to be whirled about with any such vain
arrogance. Neither was Queen Elizabeth ever so embased or apalled in courage,
or ever will be so daunted in spirit, as to be afraid of any her subjects
lowering or browbeating: or that ever cann be undermined from that invincible
fortress of her Religion, with all the Engynes and Crampes that Osorius can
devise.

And therefore if your imagination have heretofore been deluded with any vain
hope of winning the castle of the Queens Maiestyes constancy in faith and
profession, trust not from henceforth to any such co^ceipt: for what likelihood
of success can you hope or persuade your self in, whenas your self open
nothing that deserves any creditt? define or divide nothing that ought to be
discussed? make proof of nothing soundly or substantially? conclude nothing
but altogether ridiculously? how can any such thought (I say) comber your
brains, as to believe you shall be able with any smooth fawning or delicate
speeches (as it were with Syrenes melody) so to bewitch the Queens highness,
that she shall renounce her Christ, and follow Antichrist? that renou^cing the
doctrine of faith, in the assurance whereof she is grounded and rooted by the
infallible testimonies of holy scriptures: which she has sucked out of the
Source and welspring of the Apostles, Prophetts, Evangelists, yea and from
Christ himself, she shall be carried away with the devises (I do not say) of
deuines, but drowsy dreams of dronken Sophisters: that abandoning the true and
assured consolation of mind which she has reposed on high, in the bosom and
boweles of the free mercy and promise of God, through faith in Christ Jesus, she
shall decline to the hungry and naked elements of this world, to windeshaken
rotten posts of your Satisfactions, to pardons, to Masses, to Sacrifices, to
Purgatory, to Freewill, to Traditions? that cowardly fleeing from the freedom
of the Gospel of grace, she shall yield her self Captive to the Law, and
shroud her self under the ruinous roof of the Law and of merits? Finally
that by the sinister enticementes of Osor. flattery, she shall make an
exchange of the safety of her soul, of the infallible hope and possession of
everlasting glory, and the eternal love and fruition of the Lord of Lords,
for a peevish blessing of a Romish Pope? Could you be at any time so
Braynesicke as to conceive any such vain toy in your head, to be able to
persuade her thereto? Next herunto you add.

But be it, Osor. page 214.
that she be so subject to your commandment, that she dare not gaynesay you
in any thing: what if she be enlightened by the inspiration of the holy ghost?
what if Christ himself will incline her heart to have a desire to behold his
inestimable riches and to enjoy it? what if he will open her understanding that
she may evidently see the plattformes of Traiterous Treacherous conspiring
against her life? what if but meanly ouershadowed with the enlighteninge of
Gods spirit (to say nothing else) she shall easilye perceive that Luther and
his sectaryes were never raised up by the spirit of God: Osorius reproach
against the Lutherans.
but sturred up by the furyes of hell. etc. I do hear how you do barcke
against Luther and his Sectaries Osorius. Now therefore do you harke^ again
what answer I will make in the behalf of Luther and his wellwillers. And
first: where you speak of the inspiration of the holy Ghost: this is an
vndoughted truth: unless that Queen Elizabeth had been raised up, and
advanced by the special providence of Gods spirit to the dignity Regal,
unless that the Lord Christ had opened the eyes of her heart, with a marvelous
and singular grace of his enlightening, not only to look upon, and behold,
the precious Jewel of his Gospel, but also to be a patroness and defendresse
thereof: unless the same goodness, liberality, and mercy of the most sweet
Savior had with that profound and unsearchable power of his omnipotency both
guyded her cou^cells, The wonderful providence of God in the preservation of
Elizabeth our Queen.
and preserved her life, for the safety of this common weal: it could not
possibly have come to pass, yt her life might have eskaped safe, and
defensible from those raging storms of that swelling Gulf procured by ye
privy practizes of popish pirates, in her Sisters days. At what time that
sauadge Leopard the professed enemy, of Christ, that stately Stephen greedye
Gardener attempted all means and ways possible, The tempest of Queen Mary's
persecution.
to take her head from her shoulders. Unless the Lord himself (I say)
miraculously and beyond all expectation, had at that present as it were with
his outstretched hand raught her from the bloodye paws of her enemies and had
shielded her with his Targett and Arms, and caught away Gardiners life amiddes
his furyous attemptes, and Traiterous snares: and withal bereft the crown
from Mary her Sister within a whiles after: surely the head of Elizabeth and
the whole hope of Christ's Gospel had been chopped of at a blow. And therefore
whereas the happy felicitye of the most virtuous Queen prevailed as then,
whereas she now lives and reigns at this present, and is vau^ced in Throane,
enjoying so calm a continuance: and whereas also the glory of the Gospel
does flourish, and stand unshaken, in a certain mean state of tranquillity: we
do herein most joyfully and thankefully acknowledge our selves indebted not to
any policy of man, but to the power of the almighty, and his heavenly
benediction, and do most humbly thank him with all our hearts, in all
reverence and humility, and power out in his presence most thankful prayers
with outstretched hands unto heaven: by whose unspeakable mercy, as the life
of her Majesty was preserved from that slaughterhouse: so were ye powers of her
soul enlumined with the orient beams of his divine inspiration: wherewith she
was enabled to pearce into the knowledge not of the furious outragies of these
Lutherans (wherewith you say they be enflamed) but to preserve them harmless
and deliver them from your frantic madness, and rampaunt claws, and clear
them from the fierce fierbrandes and raging flames of your bloody bootchers.

In which wonderful brightness of Gods inestimable bounty and liberality, if
the canckred clowd of mischievous malice had not dazeled ye sight of your
harish head: you should easily discern a most evident token and singular
testimony of Gods favor and mercy, not only in the miraculous preservation of
her Majesty, but much more discernable in the restoring, and relieuing the
dispeired cause of his distressed Church, and mangled Gospel: against ye which
you rave at this present so barbarously. And if it may please that heavenly
grace to ouershadow the afflicted members of his weak Church with the bright
beams of his favorable countenance some longer time yet, as he has already
most mercifully begone, and pardone our sins and vnthankefullnesse, and will
vouchsafe also to heap up unto the days of this mild Phoenix our most
gracious Sovereign, a few years more in this life: truly I do nothing
mistrust but that ye whole generation of your Catholic Caterpillars and
loytering lozels shall be driven shortly not to ye gallows, but to that
howling outcries and gnashing of teeth described in the xviij. Chapter of the
Apocalipps, Apoca. 18.
which you may read and peruse at your leisure: and afterward answer us
when time and place will serve for it.

But we must co^mitt all these as all other our actions and successes else, to
the guidyng and conduct of him, in whose hands are the hearts of Princes and
Potentates, and the order and disposition of times and of chances. He is our
Lord. Let him determine of us as seems best in his sight: whether his
pleasure be of his infinite mercy to bless us with a continuance and settled
stay of this quyett calm, which he has favorably bestowed upon us: or
whether he will scourge our Sins with the cruel whippes of these Popish
Philistines: or whether he will vouchsafe according to his promise, after the
long and grievous afflictions of his tourmented Church, to root up the
foundations of your Babylonicall Towers, and ouerwhelme them in the deep
doungeon, as it were a mylstoane in the Sea. But whatsoever the successes
shall be of our hope, it can not be but most acceptable and commodious for his
faithful, whatsoever his provident Majesty shall determine. This one thing I
would wish from the bottom of my heart: that our lives and and conuersations
were aunswerable to our public profession: and that our manners were so
conformed, as might no more provoke his indignation and wrath, then the
doctrine that we embrace and profess, does move him to displeasure, which one
Request if might prevail with our Englishmen, there were no cause then
wherefore we should be afraid of hundred Romes, six hundred Osorianes, and as
many Portingall Dalmadaes. Now the only thing of all other whereat I am
dismayed most, is not the force of your Arguments, not the bravery of your
books, not the crakes of your courage, not the legion of your lies Osorius,
but our home harms only, our pestilent botches of pestiferous wickedness,
and licentious insolency. Wherein you see Osorius how little I do bear with
the manners of our people, and how much I do agree with you in condemnyng their
waiwardnesse, whose manners you do gnawe upon so fiercely: whose Faith and
Religion nevertheless I can not choose but defend against your Sycophanticall
barkyng, with just commendation as they do duly deserve.

But for as much as we have treated largely of Queen Elizabeth: I will now
come down unto others: and will pursue the conclusion and end of your book,
furious enough, and full of indignation: wherein you heap whole mounteynes of
words bravely, and behave your self most exquisitely and artificially and
besturre your stumpes like a sturdy pleader courageously, and launche out lies
as lustely, yet herein not as Orators use orderly, but after the Cretensian
guise ouersauishely. Of whom S. Paul makes mention. The men of Creete are
common liars. For you say that Haddon did counsel you that you should not
meddle with the holy Scriptures. Which counsel as never entered into Haddones
head, so never raunged out of Haddons pen. And out of this lie being as it
were the coin of the whole buildyng, it is a wonder to see, how you shoulder
out the matter, what grievous complaints you do lay to our charge: which have
neither top nor tail, foot nor head. I would wish you to peruse the place
of Haddon once again whereat you cavil so much, but with more deliberation.
For this was never any part of his meaning to abridge you the Readyng of one
line so much of holy Scriptures: Moreover neither did he so couple you to the
College of Philosophers, and Orators, as to exclude you from the noumber of
Deuines: as your cauillation does sinisterly emporte, without all cause of just
quarrel. For what can be more convenient for a Bishop, and a Divine, and an
old man also, then to be exercized in the mysteries of heavenly Philosophy
night and day? or what did Haddon ever imagine less, then to raze your name
out of the Roll and order of Deuines? But when he perceived, as truth was, that
you did behave your self much more plausibly in other causes, and therefore
highely commended many qualities in you, to wit, an excellency of style:
exquisite eloquence joined with ingenious capacity: stoare of Authors: and
many books of yours likewise, and especially your book De Nobilitate: and
withal did gravely consider by the conference of your books, that you were by
nature more inclined, or by Art better furnished to treat of other causes,
then to dispute of those controversies of Religion: wherein you seem a mere
stranger, and go groapyng like a blyndman, wandryng altogether in Judgment,
and withal a professed enemy to the Majesty of the glorious Gospel: taking
upon him the part of an honest friendly man, thought good to aduertize you
friendly and lovingly, not that you should not employ any study or travail in
this kind of learning: but surceasing that presumptuous boldness of rash
writing, and unadvised decyding of controversies, wherewith you were but
meanly acquainted, that you would with a more circumspect deliberation
consider of the matters, whereof you purposed to discourse: and that you would
not from thenceforth rush so rudely against us with such disordered Inuectiues:
which do in deed bewray naught else but your ignorance, procure general
myslikyng, and avail nothing at all to public commodity. For hereunto
tended the whole scope, mind, and meaning of Haddon. Which you do causelessly
miscouster against him even as though he had debated with you, as your
Catholics do usually accustom with old women, poor badgers, Carters, and
Cobblers, and the meaner state of poor Christians, whom you do prohibit with
horrible manacings, and cruel prohibitio^s, from ye reading of sacred
Scriptures, none otherwise then as from books of high Treason.

But in very deed you do interpret of the matter far otherwise then ever
Haddon did mean. And therefore here was no place for your nyppyng Satyricall
scoff which you did pretily pyke out of Horace Uerses, wherewithal he does
dally with his Damasippus: and you being an old and meary conceited man
resembling the old dottarde Silenus of Virgile, do ridiculously and
unseasonably deride Haddo^ withal: The Gods and the Goddesses Reward you
with a Harbor for your good counsel. Horace. ser. lib. 2. satir. 3
Nay rather keep this Harbor in stoare for your self Osor, and for the
rascal rabble of your sinoath shauelynges: who in respect of your first and
second clippyng, nypping, shearing, and shauing, must needs room daily to the
Barbours shoppes, who also do account it an heinous matter to wear a long
bearde, as is also especified in the same Satyr. For you (I say) even for you
and those dishheaded dranes of that shauelyng and Cowled rowte (who with bare
scraped scalpes, being a new fangled mark of Circumcision, have glorified your
Church, The circumcision of the crown amongst the Papists. Osor. page 215.
carrying the mark of the Beast upon your crowns) that Harbor of Horace
whatsoever he be, will serve for your turn much more fittly.

Upon which words of the Poet you proceed forewarde. But by what means do
you know me so well? Who did euertell you (say you) that I have not bestowed
longer time upon the Readyng of holy Scriptures then upon Cicero, Demosthenes,
Aristotle and Plato? Truly if you perform in deed Osorius as your words do
emporte, you are much to be commended. But your books declare otherwise.
Howbeit we do nothing mistrust but that you are busily exercized in readyng the
Scriptures, as your function and dignity requires, nor did Haddon obrayde you
with any such matter, as that you did little or nothing at all apply the
perusing and conference of Scriptures: and so also did he mean nothing less,
then to forbidd you being a Bishop (as you say) and a Priest, from the study
and practice of Gods holy Testament. Wherein you do vnhonestlye slander him
and belie him, without cause. And therefore I cann not see to what end these
words of yours which you infer hereupon, and wherewith you seem to fight
with your own shadow as it were, do prevail on this wise.

Is it lawful for you to give full liberty to women, to Porters, Osor. page
216.
and Carters to tattle and clatter without Judgment of matters of Divinity?
and will you presume to prohibit me, I do not say a Bishop, I do not say a
Priest, finally I do not say a man many years exercised in the most sacred
Scriptures, furnished with no small increase of knowledge, but as you do
affirm, a man of understanding and wisdom, that I may not meddle with this
most holy learning? Abate somewhat of your courage, good my Lord Bishop I pray
you if you can. And let us reason together upon some true allegations. Tell us
a good fellowshypp, where? in what place? when? and at what time? in whose
presence? with what phrase of words did Haddon ever forbidd you the study of
heavenly Philosophy, in speech or in thought? If you can not Justify against
him by any means: to what purpose then is all this so gorgeous and glorious
floorish of words about the Mooneshine in the water? But this brave Merchant
would needs blaze out his bracelettes and Jewels, lately transported unto
him, from out the Calecutes, and therefore on this manner ietteth forth this
Buskine Portingall.

Moreover by what law? by what authority? by what power may it be lawful for
you, being a Cyuilian to perch so presumptuously, to handle Gods book?
Renouncing the proctorshipp for old Rotten walls, windows, and gutters, vile
and base contractes, Couenaunts, and bargains, and pleading with pelting
libells? and may not I who am called to this function, to instruct my flock
committed unto me with the word of God, be so bold to employ some labor and
diligence upon the interpreting, and expounding thereof without your
comptrollement? etc. You have heard an accusation tragical enough (if I be not
deceived) and a very heinous complaynt of this babbler. For the rest now harken
to the Moral of the Fable. You offer me a double iniurye (says he) for you
do both entrude upon an other man's possession: and you dispossess me from my
right with most injurious prohibitions. etc. Yea, but if a man may be so bold
under correction, and by your leave being so great a Bishop, so wise a Priest,
and so great a Clarke, to speak as the truth is: your self have made two
lies together Osorius without touch of breath. For neither he being a Ciuilian,
forsaking his pleadyng of walls, windows, and gutters, does entrude upon any
other man's possessions, nor yet does force you out of your own right, nor does
prohibit you with any such kind of prohibitions: but that you may proceed in
that course of studies, which beseems your age and profession best, and
bestow as much travail thereupon as you can, by all means possible. Yea
rather he does earnestly persuade your holiness thereunto.

Enjoy therefore a Gods name, those possessions which you claim as your right,
as much, and as long as you may. Haddon will never interrupt your course, no
more will any Christian man else drive you from your interest therein. But in
the mean space: let us behold what manner of possessions these be whereof you
speak? verily if you mean the knowledge of Christ, ye word of life, holy
Scriptures, readyng and hearing of heavenly Pphilosophye: Certes I see no cause
why you should have any more especial prerogative in these possessions then
any other: The knowledge of the Scriptures does apperteigne to all men
indifferently.
Nor why this treasure ought apperteigne more to Osori. because he is a Priest,
then to Haddon being a Ciuilia^: for as much as by Gods institution, this one
learning above all other is prescribed to all persons indifferently, as the
chief and principal rule of this life: unless we will account this saying:
Search the Scriptures, to be spoken to Priests only, and that for this cause,
Lawyers and Ciuilians ought not intermedle therein. But if it were lawful for
Bartillmew Latomes being a Lawyer to write against M. Bucer in matters of
highest Diuinitye: If Julius Phlugius a professed Ciuilian, might be warra^ted
by the emperor Charles the 5. to sit in Synodes and disputations of Deuines: If
Albert Pius Earl of Carporites writing against Erasmus a Divine and a Priest:
If King Henry the 8. doing the like against Luther, and descending into
disputation in matters of Diuinitye, being neither a Bishop, nor a Priest, was
supposed nevertheless to do nothing unseemly his Regal magnificence, nor
contrary to order. Why is Haddon accused then as an encrocher upon other men's
possessions, because being a Ciuilian he dare presume to encounter with a
priest in matters of Religion?

But he should have yielded over the charge of writing against you, to Deuines,
and Bishops, rather: Truly it is not to be doughted, but he would have done so
(Osorius) If in this kind of conflict, he could have been persuaded, that he
should have contended against a Divine: But whenas he perceived by ye course of
your writing, that your whole discourse sauored of nothing, but of a
Rhetorician, and a Philosopher: and that in your treaty of Diuinitye you
alleged skarse any one sentence of true Dyuinytye, and sound doctrine: he
being himself a Rhetorician, and withal thoroughly studied in the same kind
of exercizes, did conceive in his mind, that there could be no fitter match
for him, then being a Rhetorician, to deal against a Rhetorician (as Bithus
did in times past with Bachius) that so with one manner of weapon, and one
kind of furniture he might encounter your lies, wherewith you do so nimbly
seek the overthrow of the verytye. In this point therefore of Haddons
determination, touching the debating of this cause, he did nothing uncomely, or
unseemly for his personage, nor did he for this cause relinquish his own
walls, and encroch upon your possession: yea so much the less was he minded
to throw you out of your right. But in the mean space as was most convenient
for him, and most commodius for you, he thought it not amiss to give you
friendly advise: according to the sage Counsel of Aristophanes. Let every man
deal in the matters wherein he is skillful and exercized: Not because he would
have you estrau^ge your affection from the knowledge of Gods truth: but
because he saw you abuse the sacred Scriptures of God, most peruersly wrested
by you to deface the veritye of Christ's gospel: therefore he gave you this
counsel, not that you should renounce your profession, but that you should
restrain the unbridled insolency of your pen: not that you should not read
any thing in these profound misteryes of heavenly wisdom, but that in reading
those books you should learn first to understand well what you do read in
them, before you take upon you the person of an Expositor: not because he
co^playned of any defect of wit, or pregnaunt capacitye in you, but because in
explaning these controversies he found in you a greater mayme of judgment,
then want of wit: and this also not he only and alone saw in you: For I know
many besides him, both godly and learned, who conceive of you herein as much as
Haddon did: And I think there is no man, though but meanly exercised in the
conference of holy Scriptures, who perusing these your Inuectiues, that will
not easily descry the same mayme and want of Judgment, that others do find
in you: and withal wish, and give advise with Haddon, that your industry may
from henceforth be wholly applied to this kind of learning, to your singular
profit and increase in knowledge: but would heartily desire that your pen
(sithence it delights so much to vaunt out her skill) may be employed to such
kind of matter, as may procure your greater commendation in disputing, and may
less abuse the Reader by your Judgment.

Bidd adiewe to these dispightfull reproaches, and perverseness of brabbling:
set a side partialitye, cursed custom of evil speaking, and blind
affections: And let us now weye in upright ballaunces of indifferent judgment
those your books so exquisitely slau^derous, which you have hitherto
published, touching ye order and administration of most sacred Religion, even
as it were in despite of Diuinytye. What may any man find in them commendable
for a learned Divine? or aunswerable to the sound doctrine of Christ's
Euangelye? There be skattered here and there certain sentences taken out of ye
very bowels of holy scriptures, but I pray you how unaptly applied? how
contraryly misconstrued? and how injuriously mangled? In how great choler do
you mount, as it were an vnentreatable Orbilius, against godly and learned men,
whom you call enemies of Religion? of whom it might have beseemed you to have
learned your lesson, rather then to have controlled them with your Ferula.

You say that you have entered upon a most just complaynt, and most true
discovery of our wickedness and abominable filthynesse of life: In
slaundering and reproching whereof, you do employ the greater part of your
discourse: which being laid open by you, shall find no place to be shrouded or
colored by any protection of mine. Yet in ye mean time you may not be
ignorant hereof good Sir: that it is not enough for a man to snarle and barcke
openly at other men's faults: unless he join withal an upright
consideration, namely, with what affection, upon what occasion, by whose
persuasion, and upon what certeintye in truth he may iustifye his raunging so
at ryott. If you have taken upon you to inueigh so insolently against other
men's manners, carried by overmuch creditt of talebearers and secret whisperers,
or the report of fleeing fame (as ye confess in one place of your writing)
which is commonly given to speak the worst, and to make a Camel of a gnatt:
what do you herein else then willingly bring your self into deserved obloquy?
and to be noted of that filthy disease of gyddy credulitye? But if you have
coined the same out of your own idle brains: how can you clear your self of
intolerable Sychophancye? In both which you may do very well to enquire what
your own conscience will tell you in your ear. In manners likewise and common
conversation of life, in the order and discipline of virtues, you do allege
much matter, and the same not altogether amiss: but yet in such wise, as you
make no distinction betwixt ye gospel and the law, and by utter show express
your self a moral Philosopher rather then a Christian Divine, or at least not
unlike those Deuines, whom S. Paul in his Epistle to Timothe does note by
these words: 1. Tim. 5.
They would feign seem to be Doctors of the Law (says he) and yet understand
not what they speak, nor what they do justify. etc.

Nevertheless you proceed on still and keep a foul coil, but with bare
brawlyng only, and castyng your cappe against the wind: you kick sturdely,
but altogether against the prick: you are a pretty bow man, but your luck is
very ill: you are a good Piper, but an illfauoured Fiddler: you prate hard, but
you prove naught: you build a pace, but not upon the Rock, nor do you couch
your stoanes with Evangelical lyme and mortar, but with Babylonicall durte and
plaster, wherein you build not the consciences of men, Osor. does build
Memphyticall Steeples.
but high steep Memphyticall steeples (as I may term them) very stately and
notorious, in stately turretts of lofty speeches, but grounded upon no sure
foundation of truth.

Of all which if we should make a proportionable account, according to the
noumber of words heaped up together, with a tedious lauishenes of tongue, and
hoyste up a loft even beyond the clouds, they be infinite and
incomprehe^sible: but if we measure them according to the quality of their
substance, they be wythered wyndeshake^ leaves: If we consider the truth of
them, they be untruths and lies: If we sift them according to the rules and
form of Logic, there will almost nothing else appear in all this glorious
Iocado akane of words, then as was some time noted in Anaximenes by
Theocritus: A great floodd of words, but never a drop of water. Let any man
peruse ye will, or that can spare so much time, this whole discourse of the
true and false Church: of the Romish Lordly Majesty: of the invocation of
Saints: of worshypping of Images: of Mounckery: of coacted single life: of
vows: of ceremonies: of Sacraments: of Ecclesiastical and Temporal
preeminence, and of all other things, which this monstrous deep Divine so
long and so much exercised in Readyng Divinity (as he persuadeth him self)
has either forged of his own imagination, or scraped from some where else, not
out of the closettes of Crispine, but botched and patcht up together out of
the rags and refuse of Hosius, Pighius, Latomus, Eckius, Roffensis and such
like clouters every where: the discourse and the handlyng of the matter will
easily discover it self, how in speaking infinite words, he has uttered
little or naught at all agreeable with the truth, and aunswerable to the cause:
so that the saying not of Thucidides (...): In few words much matter. In many
words nothing at all.
but that other turned backward (...), may be aptly and worthily applied.

And because it shall appear more evidently: Go to. Let us Imagine that some
one Logician either of the ancient Uniuersity of Philosophers, or of the crew
of these new Schoolmen, did take in hand those books of Osor, wherein he
treats so busily of Catholic Divinity: Osor. wrytinges discussed.
who rippyng away this outward husk of gaye painted speech, may take a perfect
view of the soundenesse of the shell and the inward kernel of his best
Arguments, and reduce them by particularities, to the plain rules and form
of Logic, and may pare away all rotten and unsavory subtilties, may cut
clean away all lyeng and untruths, may pruyne all idle and untimely
applications, wherewith his discourse is altogether bedawbedd: may shrowde of
all unprofitable and withered superfluities and reduplications: may banish away
all slanders, reproaches, tragical exclamations, and Thrasonicall crakes,
quyte void and impertinent to the matter: what will he leave behind then in
all his whole three books? In so manifest a truth, what need any probation? I
will describe one for example sake, and from no where else but even out of his
principal and exquisite exhortation, directed to our most Royal and noble
Queen of England. In which Epistle (if at least it may deserve the name of an
Epistle, then the which her Majesty never received any one more talkatiue, nor
I ever saw more wittlesse) you seem good my Lord Bishop, somewhat willing
and desirous to aduertize her highness of matters of great emportau^ce, and
highly Catholic: to wit: That if the Queen will be wise, if she will be
desirous to have especial regard and consideration of her person, of the
Realm, and of the preservation of her soul, and body: If she will vouchsafe
to give creditt to Osorius being a Portingall, geuyng wholesome and godly
counsel, proceedyng dutyfully from godly affection of pure love: What must she
do at the length? Forsooth, That renouncyng in season this entangled crabedd
doctrine of the Lutheranes, masters of misrule and errors, Captains of
knavery and villainy, pernicious botches of ancient discipline, counterfect
coyners of a new Gospel: open Enemies of public and private tranquillity,
she return again to the ancient obedience of the mother Church of Rome, and
yield her humble obeysaunce to the Pope high Bishop thereof as next unto
Christ, and Christ his own general Vicar over all the face of the earth.

For if I be not deceived this is the very scope of all your persuasion: to
this end tends the whole force of your glorious Epistle: wherein if we shall
have regard to your words, I see that you have spoken very much, but if we
consider the matter it self, you have spoken nothing at all, or at the most,
no more the^ may seem to be compreheuded and concluded in three propositious
only: The Mayor whereof makes nothing for your purpose: The Minor is simply
false and wickedly slanderous: The Conclusion such as may be more fittly
reuersed against you, and the rest of your Catholics. If you be desirous to
have a view hereof by some plain demonstration: I will not refuse for your
sake Osorius, to represent to the Reader the whole substance of your Epistle,
and the whole force thereof concluded in a brief form in full proportionable
parts and propositions. Behold therefore the whole form and manner of your
Sillogisme.

Mayor.
A recapitulation of all Osorius Epistle to the Queen.
Whosoever are enemies of sound doctrine, and do procure assured destruction
and decay of honest conversation of cyuill society: who may dought, but that
the Prince may banish them far from out her Realm, and that she ought not in
any wise support them.

Minor.
The Lutheranes, wheresoever they set foot on ground, do infect the soundnes
of doctrine as it were with a botche: they do kill men's bodies: they do destroy
men's souls: they do disturb the state of the common weal in sowyng
seditions, they do overthrow lawful Regimentes, they do sow abroad every where
outrageous and close kinds of licentiousnes of life, they do turn vpsidowne
and bring to confusion all laws spiritual and politic.

Conclusion.
Ergo, Whosoever will be adjudged a godly Prince, and especially Queen
Elizabeth, ca^ do nothing better and more commodious, then to banish quyte from
out her Realm these pestilent impostumes and Caterpillars of the earth, and
exclude them from all partakyng with the common wealth.

If this be not the whole drift of all your discourse, let the matter it self
convince me. If it be so: let us then take a taste how coldly and vnskillfully
you have behaved your self in prouyng this Argument. For the proposition which
you assume for matter confessed, and make the surest foundation of your whole
discourse, what if we deny altogether at a word Osorius? to what end then will
all your tedious lofty lauishenes puffed up with so many vain and triflyng
amplifications, and lies tend? You do assume that all Lutheranes ought to be
abandoned from out all commonweals as open enemies of Religion, rank
rebels, common Barretours and Traitors: On the contrary part, whereas we do
affirm boldy that all your vain suggestion against the Lutheranes is false,
on their behalf, and most true on the Papists behalf: hadd it not been your
part to have Justified first by probable and sure Arguments the whole matter,
which we do by good right and duly deny? yea with Scriptures and Doctors, if
you be a learned Divine? what? did you account this sufficient proof to
persuade your Assertion, because your Lordshypp did boldly pronounce it to be
so? or suppose you that there is no more required in an Accuser, but to rail
outragiously and slanderously, alleadgyng no firm, or honest proof of ye
crimes, yt be forged or forced against the adverse party? I beseech you good
courteous Gentleman tell me for your courteous modesties sake: To hale men into
hassard of their lives upon trust of raungyng rumors (if not altogether
innocent, yet altogether unknown to you) against whom you are altogether
unable to Justify any probable crime, besides bare and naked affirmatiues: Is
this to deal with Princes, and to write unto Queens? Do you behave your
self at home with your own King in this wise, to accuse men, whom you know
not, only upon Hearesay and report? And what if the Queen her self, who by
daily proof may be acquainted with the daily conversation of her Subjects,
better then Osorius being an alyen and stranger, do of her own knowledge
feel all this to be untrue, which you so maliciously enforce? and in her
secret conceit do utterly detest those your stinckyng lies? have you not made
then a fair speak? and given your self a foul fall without touch or trippe
of your adversary? Go to yet: and what if some defect or disorder be in the
Lutheranes lives (as you call them) is this therefore by and by a good
consequent, that whatsoever blemish or reproach be in men's conuersations shall be
forthwith imputed to the reproof and reproach of doctrine? Did holy Divinity
teach you to argue on this wise? or does your Mistres Dame Slander rather
teach you so to do?

And thus much hitherto of your Epistle, not much unlike hereunto are all the
rest yt follow in all your Inuectiues against Haddon: which if any man will
take the pains to examine exactlye by the common rules, and principles of
Logic, as he shall find in them many words nothing to the purpose: so shall
he want two things, chiefly, and especially required in a divine, namely,
Truth and Charity. What does want in Osorius books.
Which two virtues the farther they be estraunged from your writings, so much
the more causeless was your choler against Haddon for his good counsel that
he gave you, and his judgment, whereby he accounted you more like a Cobbler,
then a foreman of the shopp: unapt and unskillful yet to cut such large
thonges out of other men's leather: And yet meaning nothing less herewith, then
to drive you from touching ye testament of Christ, whether because he
conceived, that the labor which he employed upon this kind of exercise was
either very small, or altogether fruitless: but having regard rather to make
manifest what the right consideration of that doctrine is, and how much you
were short yet of a true and perfect knowledge in the true doctrine of
Diuinitye.

For if this be a true definition of Dyuinitye, that it be a profession of Gods
heavenly wisdom and truth: what one thing is more contrary and repugnaunt to
Gods truth, then your opinions? wherein you do enterlace untruths for
verityes, newfanglenesse for auncientye: men's traditions for true Dyuinitye:
None otherwise then as false Pedlers are wont to choppe and change false and
deceitful wares for good, or as some our horse-coursers in England use to
bring into open fayres, and markets outrydden Iades pampered up in flesh,
fair, brave and smoathe to the eye, garnished with fine Saddle and trappers,
being otherwise full of windegalles, stuffed with glaunders, yelowes, and hundred
horse evils, unprofitable and unapt to hackney and to draw, or to carry:
Saving that this one difference is betwixt you and them: whereas they by crafty
dissimulation, and artificial Conueyaunce do beguyle the simple, and such as
be without skill: but you (as you seem) utter your wares not as of any set
purpose or skillful craft, but because you have no better wares in stoare, and
withal seem not willing to buy any better. But I will press you no further:
only this one thing will I say: If your industry had been employed in the
study of holy Scriptures, as much as you would have it seem to be: truly I
must needs account you a very uncivil and ungentle person, who covering your
knowledge as it were under a Bushel, will vouchsafe to express out of that
sacred treasury of holy Scriptures so little, and out of ancient Doctors scarce
one sentence through out all this your whole discourse.

But hereof enough: It follows now, that I touch somewhat of the manaces and
threatninges of Haddon: with the force whereof he would make you dismayed, as
you say in these words, wherewith you bring him self in place speaking, and
threatening you in this wise. Osori. page 216.
If you be determined to make a show of your skill, to some of your own
faction, by rushing so rudely upon us any more from henceforth. I tell you
before hand, come heareafter better furnished then you be now. Further where
you declare that it will come to pass that if you happen to dye, there will
not want some that will break of my force. These be the words of Haddon as
Osorius does cite them: wherein I do perceive, that he does not conceive so
much as by any probable conjecture, what the meaning of Haddon is. For what do
these words emport else, then to stir you up, and set you on edge as it
were by this friendly admonition, to make you more earnestly bent to the reading
of holy Scriptures? that if you did determine with your self to offer any
fresh skarmish in this kind of conflict, you might feed your own humor
herein as you lifted, but yet you should foresee to be better provided with
more skillful, and more warrantable reasons, yea much more defensible, and
armed as it were with armor of proof: Osori. but a green soldier.
for that you be perhaps to green a soldier as yet, not able to endure the
force of this Combat, with so slender provision. Well now, what kind of
threatninges be these good Sir, that may geaue you any cause of terror? After
this Haddon proceadeth: and because he would not have you deceive your self
with this vain persuasion, as though there were not in England besides Haddon
only, any other which in this defense of the Evangelical veritye, both would,
and could skilfully enough encounter with you by the help of Christ: herein
likewise his meaning was to give you to understand: That you should find here
in England not one or two only, but very many, not only in our Churches, and
universities also, but even amongst the Courtyers, which did far excel him
in learning and knowledge, and were in all respects comparable with you. These
be Haddons words: wherein I see a certain comparison made but no threatninges
at all as yet.

Wherefore comfort your self Osorius, there be no bugges here to make you
affrayd. And surely I can not choose but commend you for your natural country
courage: which like a lusty Portingall Prelate, will not be dashed out of
countenance for any bygge looks of any of all those men, whom Haddon does
compare you withal: And in deed there is no reason why you should. For why
should Osorius be aghast of seely English dwarfes or babish wretched Haddons?
And yet though you be without all fear of men, it will not be the least
commendation of your wisdom, to fear the Lord your God Osorius, and to stand
in awe of his threatenings. For being so studious a Reader of holy Scripture,
you can not be ignorant of the plagues which the Lord does threaten to the
Enemies of his Gospel: for how sharply and grievously he will be avenged of
such, the daily and continual examples of his wrath may be good lessous and
warnynges unto you. Let the records of Historyes be perused, if your memory
comprehend it not: what happened to the Emperor Sigismund and his whole
forlorn household, not long after the death and Martyrdom of John Husse? God
does avenge him of the persecution of his Gospel.
what chanced also to Julian the Cardinal? and to the emperor Albert son in
law to Sigismund, after the Tyranny executed against the Bohemians? what
fortuned to Henry the 2. the French King? what also to Francisce the 2. his
Son? likewise also what happened to Charles the 9? his other Son after the
great murder and slaughter in France. Were not Sir Thomas Moore and Roffensis
(after they had burned John Fryth that excellent learned young man and his
companion) imediately after committed to prison, and suffered just plague for
their unjust crueltye? And to pass over other,, what end Eckius and James
Latomus came unto, I suppose you be not ignorant. Mary Queen of England,
after she had consumed so many godly Martyrs to Ashes, being first forsaken of
her husband, and afterward raught away so quickly, with such an untimely
death, shall we think the same came to pass without some great judgment of
God? Can you tell us of nothing happening in your own Country of Portingall,
after the horrible tortures and execution of William Gardener, which might have
been a manifest token of Gods vengeance against you?

But why do I stay upon these? when as besides these, infinite like
presidentes be manifestly extaunt, which ought worthily to terrify you and
others also in the like. For as for those Englishmen whom Haddon does make
mention of, there is no cause why you should be discouraged. Especially
sithence this little Island is (as your self does confess) replenished with so
many notable godly men, excellent of wit, of learning and of pietye, who will
never molest you as you say, Page 216.
because they do wonderfully agree and consent with you in Religion. etc.
Surely Osorius in this you lie nothing at all: wherein yet you have forgotten
somewhat your old wont. For this is to true that you speak, that here be
ouermanye companyons and confederates of your errors in this Realm? whereof
some are roonne away of late, more afraid a great deal then hurt. There be
behind yet many tarryers, English Papists.
I will not say Traitors to the Common weal, whose wit and learning as we do
not despise, so also do we not fear any harm they can do us: for there is no
question to be made at all of their wit, nor of their learning, but of other
matters, the direction and disposition whereof rests wholly in the power of
the Lord, and not in any pollicye or force of men. Let these therefore
whosoever they be whom you praise so much, have their deserved praise for their
excellencye of learning, and actyuitye of wit, as much as you will: who if
they be of your sect may happily be learned, doughtlesse godly they can not be.
Again if they be godly, I am sure they will never agree with you in this
Doctrine. But as for men's agreement in opinion, is not so much material.
Neither is any part of our co^trouersye at this present, touching matters
determinable by common consent, multitude, or wits of men: but must be
decided by the infallible and unchangeable rules, and ordinances of ye sacred
Scriptures: whereunto if your opinions be consonant, as meet is, we will all
together likewise consent and agree with you: If otherwise, what shall it
prevail you to be lincked in any uniform consent of those men, though they be
never so excellently well learned, but only that you may seem to become a
raunging rouer amongst straggling Starters?

From thence you proceed, leaving them, whom you say be of your mind, and
turn back again to these Lutheranes and Haddonistes. Osori. page 216.
Who if would contend with you, as you say, with reasons, with arguments, or
with Testimonies you promise that you will not refuse the conflict. But if they
will brawle with cauntes and cursed speaking, you will not be persuaded by any
means to make them any answer. etc. Lo here a very pleasant panion and
Master of his Art: After yt your gaye goodly choler had cought up as many
slanderous and reproachful croomes, as it could, eue^ to ye casting up of
your gorge, to the poisoning and infecting of godly and learned personages: now
at the last you prohibit them for pleading their causes: least happily some
one or other in making his purgation, will s^^t somewhat near your holy
Reverent skirtes, or least with some corrysiue in au^sweryng, he frett to much
upon the skabbe of your delicate conscience. For that your Nature is of that
complexion, Osori. page 117.
as will not lightly be offended with any slau^derous tou^ges, nor account it
any ioate prayseworthy to exceed by any means in so filthy a kind of
contention. Moreover that it is no wisdom to spend your time so unprofitably,
whereof you have skarse any breathing from other more weighty af^ayres. And
therefore if Haddo^ or any other of that Crew shall be so disposed as to rush
upon you with snatching and taunting more rigorously, then shall beseem them:
you will give them free skoape to chauffe, foame and exclayme against you as
much as they list, and as much as they can. And that it is not convenient for
your personage in respect of the charge that is committed unto you, that either
you ought to be distempered with railing, or that you should answer to all
cursed speaking.

If to these words and speeches all his other doings and writings were in
each respect correspondent, what siner man might any man find in this world?
what more noble mind? what more excellent nature? which having so thoroughly
mortified his affections, will not suffer him self to become impatie^t with
any injuries or railing raging against him? But if his doings be called to an
account before strickt Inquisitors: and if they will examine his words by his
deeds: I beseech you gentle Sir where was this mildness of spirit so
gloriously commended by your self? where was this lenity of nature? where was
this contempt of reproaches exiled at that time, whenas your reverence being
never provoked with any injury offered of our nation, nor so much as ever
molested by word, could not measure your insolent malice, and wrath, nor make
any end of slaundering, backbiting, and railing in so excessive outrage,
against the godly and learned Preachers of Christ, both altogether unknown
unto you, and withal never deserving to be thought ill of at your hands?
Every man must suffer the penalty of the breach of Law that himself makes
says Ausonius: Ausonius.
You require us to cut of all contentious brawling, and to deal with you with
sound Arguments and Testimonies. We do like well your law. For what can be
more seemly for discreet Deuines, then a calm and peaceable modesty in
disputation, not disquieted with any natural motions, nor waxing wroth with
other men's railing? But who does observe this order that you do prescribe
worsse then your self good Sir? If want of time, which you allege in excuse,
or consideration of your function (as you say) be such an estoppell unto you,
that you have no leisure to answer to all men's raylinges, how is it the^ yt
in this your answer to Haddo^, be so many slau^ders heaped up upon
slau^ders? so much railing in such skorpionlike nipping and bitterness?
wherein how vnmeasurably lavish you seem beyond all consideration of your
personage, all this your own whole discourse remains a sufficient witness
against you, which does breath out, bray out, and spew out nothing else but
flames, fierbra^ds, furyes, botches, madness, frensies, outrages, drou^kenes,
fevers, childishnes, Satha^s, Deuilles, Treasons, false Prophets, Coyners of a
new Gospel, subuertours of virtue, Enemies of their country and of Religion,
Churchrobbers, most abominable, the destruction and pestilent Co^tagion of the
whole world, and what not? But if this outrageous licentiousnes of your
unmoderate wilfu^lnes might have been satisfied with three or four tauntes and
slanderous reproaches, it might have been pardonable: as seemyng some escape
issuing somewhat unadvisedly rather in some heat of disputation, then of any
natural greedynesse of curssed speaking. Now what is your whole answer else
almost, then a continual process, and an vncessaunt course of cursed raylyng?
You begynn with cauillyng, you proceed with slaunderyng, and end with railing.

Nevertheless after all these tragical outragies wherewith you have provoked
both the wrath of the Lord, and teazed all godly personages against you so
insolently, you do now at the length challenge other men to keep modesty. If
any man (say you) do write against me: if he will argue with reason, with
Arguments, or with Testimonies, I will not refuse the Challenge, etc. And
herewithall in the mean space is enterla^ed a place of S. Paul. Tit. 3.
Whereby we be taught to eschew the company of endurate heretyques after once
or twice admonition, forasmuch as they be condemned by their own judgment.
Which Rule of ye Apostle if must be observed duly, as it ought to be, surely
there is nothing of more force, to maintain our departure fromout your
papisticall See. For if we be commanded by the authority of the Apostle to
avoid the company of such, as being once or twice warned, will not be
converted from their waywarde obstinacye in error, what fellowshipp and
partaking ought we to have with such a conuenticle, which being polluted with
so many more then heretical errors, which being so bastardly estraunged and
defiled with so heathenish Idolatry, with such absurd Traditions, and so
manifest blasphemies, does not only couple with this filthye stenche of
Deuelish doctrine, sciffenecked and obstinate supportau^ce, but also add
thereunto a more then Pharisaicall and Tyrannical persecution?

Wherefore in that you think it best to pass over and eschew our society from
henceforth, therein follow your own affection Osorius a gods name. But whereas
you give us full skoape to frett, fume, and exclayme as much as we list,
truly we are not so minded, nor affectioned to rush so rudely into other men's
interest, as to seek to disfrau^chise you of your froward, malapert
sauciness, which by the law of Arms you have so valiantlye won in the
field. And therefore you shall freely and without impeachment continue still
your possession as in your own proper Title: From the which we do so much the
rather disclayme, because in this kind of faculty you do excel, and are
Master of the Craft. But let us hear this most mild Bishop reasoning with
this unquiet Haddon.

I did never provoke you (say you) by word or writing being a man that I never
knew. Osori. page 217.
Mine Epistle which you do infame with slau^derous railyng is clear from all
unseemly speeches: unless perhaps you will say that a most just quarrel,
and a true discovery of Errors and wickedness, is a kind of reproach. etc.
First I will say somewhat touching your Epistle: and of Haddon shall be spoken
afterward. Now therefore, were your wits distempered with wine when you
wrate this Epistle? have you forgotten now what you wrate then? If your Epistle
have not one reprochefull word, I beseech you what name shall we give to these
words wherewith you rage not only against Luther, as though he were a
dissolute person, a common Barretor and manqueller, but withal against all the
congregation of those, which profess the true Gospel of Christ? against whom
you be carried with more then a Carterly kind of railing with foul mouth and
most slanderous Tauntes: Osorius Epistle to Queen Elizabeth how full it is of
slanderous reproaches.
As men that raging in madness, do rend in sunder all established orders of
law and Religion. Page 14. who with their frantyque preaching and books do
exile all shamefastnes: do put honesty to slight: do tread under foot all
laws positive and politic: do proclayme havoc of sinning, defile Temples,
skorne holiness: do support unshamefastness, do suppla^t all Christian society
with most horrible fierbra^des of discord. Page 15. all whose enterprises tend
to none other end, then that spoiling Princes of their lives they may conspyre
with full consentes against the utter rooting out of their dignityes and
honors, some of whom they have raught hence already by poison, and some others
they do practice to destroy with the sword. Page 16. Finally he calls them
false Prophetts. Page 34. Who wheresoever they set foot on ground, of purpose
to enforce their Gospel upon the ignorant, they are so far of from
Reformation of manners, that they do defile all things with much more stench
then they found it, who do abandone ciuility: give skoape for covetousness to
raunge riotously: and renouncing all fear of God grant free liberty to do
all manner mischieues, without co^trollement in such shameless carelessenesse,
that they seem to wish nothing rather, the^ to see utter confusion of all
things. Page 30. Who be not only of themselves estraunged from all honesty,
but account it yea and ratify it for matter as heinous also as high Treason if
any man dare be so bold to vow perpetual Chastity for Religion sake. Page 22.
Who also do affirm that it is wicked to be sorrowful for sin. Page 27. And
do say that sorrowful tears do emport a weakness and want of faith. page
26. And this much of ye professors of ye gospel: Now let us hear his
blasphemous tongue touching the Gospel it self, and ye doctrine thereof,
which he does call by ye name of a Sect. For these be his words. Believe me
gracious Queen (says he) this sect, which for our sins has invaded many
parts of Christendom, is the ruin of Co^mo^weales, the Canker of Civility,
the dissipation of the Realm, and the small destruction of princely renown.
Page 17. And in an other place making mention of ye same Gospel he does
exclame on this wise O Gospel full of conspiracye and false dissimulation: for
it promises lardge good things and procures present infection: it makes a
fair countenance of hope of Freedom, and it cloggeth with yoakes of
intolerable bondage: it does persuade with glauering allurements of present
felicity, and afterward it drowneth the soul in deep doungeon of despair:
it preaches a direct way unto heaven, and them that trust upon assurance
thereof, it does throw down headlong into hell. Page. 32. And again:
proceading in ye same Epistle, does give this judgment of ye doctrine of the
Gospellers: that he affirms it to be wholly patcht together of the crafts and
subtiltyes of Satan. Page 35.

I have now rehearsed your own words Osorius if at least they be your own
words, and not some other guest of yours, not all of the best: which how far
do differ from reprochefull and slanderous raylyng in your eye, I know not:
But in my conceit it appears none otherwise, then if some Poet would raise
up some Furyes of hell as Megera or Alecto, out of that fiery lake to lie and
to rail, he could not have imagined any other speeches more apt, and
appropried to all reprochefullnesse then this your Epistle seems to be.
Wherefore as you can not make your Epistle excusable of most heinous
slaunderyng, without a most manifest lie: so is that also in no respect more
true: wherein you do accuse Haddon of the same crime.

Who being (as you say) never known to you, Osori. page 217.
nor ever provoked by you with any evil word, yet does gnawe your Epistle with
slanderous teeth, and does rushe ragingly upon you as it were a wild Boar
deadly wounded with the hunters spear. In good sooth Osorius you do very
lively represent unto us, a singular pattern of that old Pharisee in the
Gospel: who very briefly beholding a very small moate in his brothers eye, was
not able to discern a monstrous beam in his own eye: so forcible is the
dazeled blindenes of self Love. For even with like insensibiltye does Osorius,
being himself a very cursed speaker, expostulate with Haddon about cursed
speaking. Antithesis, a figure whereby one contrary is joined for an other
You say he was never provoked by you. In deed never by name I confess. But
when as that your beastly Epistle and mo^struous Antithesis, then the which I
never saw any more foolishely talkatiue, did rail against so many godly
personages, he being one of the same noumber, and under the same predicame^t of
them that were slaundered, could not but acknowledge the common quarrel and
iniurye of others to be stretched out also unto himself. And therefore made
answer in his own and their behalf, though not without his own furniture
and pollicye, yet much more modestly, I will not say then became him: surely
more quietly a great deal, then such an Importunate adversary deserved: for so
was it requisite according to your desert Osorius, that you should not have
hadd a more entreatable aunswerer: but a far other manner of answer, that
might have blazed out your arms in their right colors, and have painted you
out altogether according to your due deseruings. But Haddon thought it better
to have consideration of public humanity, then of his own private grief.
And yet as though he attempted all the force and sharpness of his pen
against you: it is a wonder to see what mounteynes you rend abroad, because he
was not impeached (as you say) nor teazed with any injurious word of yours. Go
to then, And how had the people and Nation of England displeased you that you
must needs rage so rudely against them, rather then Haddon might against you?
For so you proceade: And yet he runs furiously against me, as though it were
(say you) a wild Boar deadly wounded with some boarspeare. etc. How furiously
I pray you, I would feign learn? what? Because he does commend your wit?
praise your dexteritye of nature? advance your Eloquence? A Comparison betwixt
Haddon and Osorius.
and highly esteem your books? and especially that which you wrate of
Nobilitye (as your self confess no less) is this the part of a madd man? or
the courteous commendation of a friendly wellwiller? And here I beseech thee
(gentle Reader) Judge with me herein indifferently: what difference there is
betwixt the disposition of these two, Haddon and Osorius: whereof the one does
with friendly praises advance the style, the Eloquence, and artificial
disposition of words in Osorius: the other a most ungrateful creature of man,
and beast, blinded with self love, drowned in malice, swallowed up with his
own conceit, does so not vouchsafe a man in all men's Judgments grave, wise,
and excellently learned, one ynche so much of commendable place amongst the
learned, that he shameth not to condemn him, even of most base ignorance, and
extreme childishnes: as one yt is not able to expres by mouth his own
meaning, and can utter nothing purely, nothing fully, nothing plainly. Wherein
I do now appeal to the Readers judgment, whether Haddon does rage more
against Osorius like a furyous Boar: or whether Osorius do more impudently
lie against Haddon like a shameless Goat. But because these meadows have
been reasonably well ouerflowed already, I think it not amiss to shutt up
the hatches here.

This Interlude is at the length come now to the last cast: wherein this turn
coat getting a new Coape upon his back, and putting on an other visor upon his
face, does change himself (as it were) into an Angel of light. A man would
verily think, that some one of the superexcellent Seraphycall sort of the ix.
orders of Aungells were flowen down from heaven, speaking with whotte burning
zeal of Charity. Osor. page 217.
Where calling God himself to be his wittnes and Judge, he does bind himself
with a most holy protestation: that we should firmly believe that he
undertook not this travail of writing against Haddo^ as urged thereu^to for
any other cause, then of a very earnest desire and zealous affection unto pure
and most sincere Religion. We have heard of his affection. Now let us harken to
the dutyfull love of Christian Charity, and more the^ brotherly compassion of
his, and let us weep with him for joy. For on this wise he does proceed. If
you did know (says he) how great compassion I take of you: with what deep
desire I am ravished for your sauetye (that as it is the part of a good
Christian man, Osor. charity for our sauety.
I would willingly suffer loss of life for you, and for your Countrymens sake)
Surely you would become friends with me. etc. If the duetyes and parts of true
Love and charity may be valued by words, and not by matter, what can be found
more virtuous then this mind? what may seem more loving? or more fully
replenished with charitable zeal of our sauety? For what love can be greater
the^ for a man to yeald over his own life, for an other man's safety? But if
you will vouchsafe to compare these words written here with the slanders,
Tauntes, and Reproaches which are skattered every where before, and will examine
Osorius thoroughly within and without: I am afraid a man shall not find him
the man in proof, that appears before in words: but a clean contrary
conditioned man, nor very much differing from the shape of those, whom Cicero
does not vnfittly decypher unto us. Cicero in his 1. Book of duetyes.
Of all the kinds of fraud and unrighteous dealing, there is none more
pestilent (says he) then the craft of those men, which when they do deceive
most, will so handle the matter, that they may be taken for very honest men:
Not much unlike hereunto seems to have happened in Osorius at this present.
For after that he has slaundered and rayled (like a common skold in a Cage) in
backbyting and reuyling the names and co^uersations of men, whose life he never
knew, nor understands their doctrine, yea and with such an insolent kind of
sawcynesse, nypping and skoffing, that no common Barretor could have more
fiercely exclaymed against the most Rascal in the world, nor have forged more
shameless lies: tourning now his Typpett about, does begin to do, as many
men wont to do, which through malice have wounded any one grievously on the
headd, will think to salve the injury again, with puttyng the cappe on the
headd, and telling him a merry tale of Robin Hoodde.

Semblably Osorius having well whett his own humor upon reproaches and
slanders, being otherwise insatiable with any cursed speaking, outragiously
raging in all manner of filthynesse against them whom he does not know: and
having discharged his stomach of the very gall of his Melancholy, does now
endeavor to persuade, and thereunto pledgeth his faith with solemn
protestation, that all his words and deeds before were not procured of any
provocation of hatred or malice, but proceaded from very pure love of godly
affection, and from most hartye desire of our safetye. Well the^, Sithence you
will have it so Osorius and because you make so solemn a protestation: we do
believe your oath, that you did write this unfeignedly, with all your heart, not
of any malice at all, but simply, of a very Catholic zeal and charity. But
yet we can not but marvel much, what kind of Charity this may be, that rages
so cruelly? gnaweth, skrapeth, and roumbleth so pestiferously? howbeit we do
not deny but that charity is sometime moved with choler, and has her proper
chydings and chastisements according to the mystical Sonett of the Prophett.
Psalm. 140.
The Righteous man shall smite me fre^dly, and reprove me, but the precious
balmes of the ungodly shall not break my headd. But to forge manifest lies
against them that you know not: to bear false wittnes against your neyghbors,
to rail with most reprochefull blasphemies against the Testament of the living
God, and to teach Princes to rage against their Subjects, is this a point of
Charity? or an evident badge of that horrible hellhounde, which is a liar, and
a manqueller from the beginning? But there is no need now to rippe up a
fresh rehearsal of those unmeasurable and incredible lies, slanders and
blasphemies, wherewith this your volume is fully fraught and stuffed every where.

But this in the mean space does seem to carry a wonderful show of
marvelous Charity: Osori. careful of our sauety.
Whereas he affirms that he will willingly lose his life for our sauety: To
contemn death boldly in words is a very common practice in many me^ and to
make stought bragges of undaunted courage, especially when no peril is in
place. So seemed Peter chearefully willing to dye for his Lord and Master,
whiles all things were calm and no Ieoperdy thought upon: which foreward
stomach nevertheless immediately upon the sight of present peril vanished
away into flatt denial of his Master. But thanked be God, there is no cause
why you should offer any such hassard of life in our behalfes good Sir. For as
concerning the safety of our souls: (we are well assured) is firmly grounded
upon an vnpenetrable rock, not upon your death which can avail us nothing at
all, but upon the death of the son of the living Lord. Therefore if the care
that you take for our salvation, you will employe diligently for your own
preservation, you shall in my judgment so much the better provide for your
self, by how much you be now more farther of, and more daungerously distaunt
from the right rule and course of the truth. For if according to your
Rhethorick, the way for us to salvation and to the hope of eternal felicity,
The way to salvation after Osorius Rule.
be none otherwise open then being atchiued by godly actions and excellent
integrity of life: And if this be the only righteousness (as you say)
wherewith the favor of God is procured to mankind. Page 142. Then what does
this your doctrine emport else, the^ to forclose you and us both from all
passable way to heavenly inheritance? for where shall we find that excellency
of integritye? where shall we find that absolute righteousness whereof you
brag so much, which in equal ballaunce is able to counteruayle the judgment
of God? Surely not in England you will say, nor in any common weal of the
Lutherans: who do set their foot on no ground, but that they do infect the
same with all stench and abominable contagion. Amongst the Portingalls
therefore hope I, where a man may be bold to say, be no hedgcreepers men, but
Golden Aungelles, flying abroad. Truly, that is well. And how comes it to
pass then that amongst those Aungelles, so many of all sorts, men and weomen
be daily seen in your public assemblies, to scourge and tear their naked
carcasses, with grievous whipps, and bloody lashes? I would feign learn of you
whether they do it for any their good deeds? or else for their offenses and
sins?

What means Osorius himself in this, that he so holy a Father does so often
roonne to reitterate confessions? let him answer at his best leisure,
whether he confess his good deeds or his wicked: Wherefore if neither this
reverend Bishop, so curious a carper of other men's faults, is able to behave
himself so precisely, but that he must flee daily with us to the mercy seat
and compassion of God: where be then these glorious crakes of integrity? or
whyther will your integrity and absolute perfection address us to seek out
this superexcellent excellency that you boast upon so much? Peradventure to
Platoes common weal, or to Moors Vtopia, or else to the goodly fields in
hell, whereof the Poets make mention: for without question it can not possibly
be found any where in this common course of universal imbecility of nature.

But even as it is reported, that Xenophon the wise Philosopher of Athenes did
in the describing of the famous virtues of Cyrus, imagine him to be not such a
one as he was in deed, but such a one as he ought to have been: and to have
expressed his wished and hearty desire, rather then any true description of the
Prince according to the very nature of a description historical. So do I
suppose yt Osorius has a will to teach us not so much what we be, but what we
ought to be, and so purposed in his mind to make a proof of the force of his
eloquence, what it were able to do, in the extolling the praise and
commendation of virtue. And hereof who can either be ignorant or doubtful,
that all our actions and course of life ought to excel in such a perfection,
Osor. divinity is Philosophical.
that there needed no supply to be required to absolute and Angelicke
integrity? the which neither the Profane Philosophers before the birth of
Christ, neither the Pharisees had any feeling of without Christ, no more did
they express the same in the dutiful affairs of their life, who being
altogether estraunged from the knowledge of Christian Religion, were
nevertheless not ignorant hereof, that all man's felicity consisted wholly in
virtue only and civil direction of life: and that it was virtue only which
alone could make a passable way for godly minds to attain everlasting
felicity: the likelihood whereof as many their notable lessons did abundantly
declare, so above all other who can wonder enough at that heavenly voice of
Scipio the Romayne surnamed Affricanus being an Ethnicke? whereof Marcus Cicero
does make relation in his Treatize called the dream of Scipio. Cicero in the
dream of Scipio.
Writing on this wise. There is (says he) a certain sure and determined place
reserved in heaven for all such as do preserve, aid, and advance their native
country, where they shall live in everlasting felicity for ever and ever.
There is nothing more acceptable to that high and mighty God, that guides and
rules all the world, amongst all the actions of men, then counsels,
corporations and societies of men lincked and knitt together with orders and
laws: which are called Cities. etc.

If we regard the judgment of the flesh, what sentence cann be spoken more
plausible or more notable in the singler commendation of virtue then this was?
which does assure the good deseruinges and mutual amities of men each toward
other exercised here of eternal and infallible rest and joys in heaven. Go
to. And what is it else almost that this diuinitye of Osorius does train us
unto, then to teach ye very same yt Scipio the Roman did? namely: That there
is no passable way to the attaynme^t of the blessed felycyty of eternal life,
then that which is atchyeued by godly actions with an absolute integryty of
excellent life. Page 32.

But heavenly Philosophy does direct us a far more near way: The heavenly
Scholemaister does out of heaven display abroad, and chalk us out a speedier
way and an easier journey toward heaven, teaching us in the Gospel on this
wise. I am (says he) the way, the truth, and the life: John. 14.
Neither will Osorius deny this to be true (I know) in word, but in deed what
does he else then deny it? For to admit him his saying, yt there is no passable
way to heaven, but which is purchased with absolute perfection of life: what
may we win hereof else, but yt this way to heaven be not Christ? but ye
special prerogative of our own purchase? So yt by this reason, if our own
industry do satisfy all things: what need is there of Christ the^? or to what
use will his death and passion avail? yes forsooth to this purpose you will
say: that by the merit of his passion, he may purchase for us the grace and
gift of sanctification and regeneration: wherewith being once endued, hereof
fortwith springs that excellency of absolute perfection, and other ornaments
of charity and virtues, which will make us an easy passage into the kingdom of
heaven: What then? do you so depaynt us out the whole office and power of
Christ in this one only action, namely yt he shall power out upon us new
qualityes and godly actions, by the Divine operation of the holy ghost? what?
does he not redeem us also? does he not justify us, and reconcile us? yes.
What else, you will say. Does he justify all men without exception? or the
faithful only? if he do justify them only that do believe: I do demand
further, what the cause is why they be justified? Is it for their faythes sake?
or for their works sake? If it be for their faythes sake, I ask again,
whether for faith only? or faith joined with good works? I do here expect some
oracle from you for an answer hereunto. If you find yt there is no hope of
any thing to be justified by without faith, then must you needs alter your
foundation, that you grounded upon before, to wit, That there is no passable
way to heaven but which is atchyued with godly actions of this life. Page 32.
And that it is only righteousness that does obtain the favor of God to
Mankind. Page 142. And in an other place. That faith only, is only
rashness. Page 74. What? shall faith therefore be quite banished away?

No, but you will couple her with some copemate: that neither Faith without the
company of good works, nor works without the company of Faith may be able to
procure righteousness. But this knott will the authority of ye Scriptures
easily crack in pieces: Faith is not coupled with Charity in the Article of
Justification. John. 6.
for if Faith only do not advance ye faithful to salvation, except it be
coupled with excellent integrity of life: why did not Christ the^ couple them
together, when he spoke simply, He that believes in me has everlasting life?
Why did not Peter couple them together, when he does preach Remission of Sins
unto all as many as do believe in his name? prouyng the same by the
Testimonies of the Prophets. Act. 10. Acts. 10.
why did not Paul couple them together. Acts. 16. Acts. 16.
where he instructs ye Gaylor in Faith? Believe (says he) in the Lord Jesus,
and thou and all thy household shall be saved. Many Sentences might be vouched
purportyng the same in effect: but it shall suffice to have noted these few
for breuities sake. The History of the Galathians is notably known, who being
seduced by the false Apostles, did not simply revolt from Christ, nor did
simply abandone their Faith in Christ, but endeavored to couple the good works
of ye believers together with Faith in ye Article of Justification before God
for the attayneme^t of life everlasting: On which behalf how sternely and
sharply the Apostle did reprove them, his own Epistle bears sufficient
Testimony.

But here comes a Reply by and by out of the same Epistle, Galath.
where writing to the Galathians, he does treat upon such a faith as does
work by love. Upon this place Osorius agreeyng with the Tridentine Council
does build an inseperable coniu^ction of Faith and Charity together: The
Triden tyne Counsel. Ses. 6. Cap. 7.
so that Faith without Charity as an unshapen and unformed Image, is
altogether ineffectual to the absolute fullnes and perfect accomplishment of
righteousness: But that Charity (which they call a righteousness cleauyng fast
within us) is so unable to be severed a sunder from the work of Justification,
that they dare boldly pronounce, that it is the only formal cause of our
Justification.

To satisfy this place of S. Paul, here is an easy and a Resolute answer.
For in the same Epistle: the Apostle does endeavor by all means possible, to
call back again his Galathians to the only righteousness of Faith, from
whence they were backslyden: and withal because they should not be seduced
with a vain persuasion of counterfaict Faith, he does discover unto them, what
kind of Faith it is, which he does mean. Not the faith that is idle, and dead
without works, but which does work by Faith (says he) And in this respect,
it is most true that Faith is not alone. But what manner of concludyng an
Argument is this.

Lively Faith is not alone without Charity.

Ergo, The fallax from the Division to the Conjunction.
Not Faith only, but coupled with Charity does Justify.

The Argument that is derived from things setterer by nature, to things
coupled by nature, concludyng from that which is Secundum quid, ad Simpliciter,
is worthily rejected in the Logicians School, and is called a mere
Sophistication. If all things that go commonly after a certain manner together,
and be done together must be coupled and applied to one and the self same
operation^, by this Reason it must come to pass, that he that has feet,
eyes, and ears, and have them not by them selves alone, therefore he shall be
supposed to go not upon his feet only, but to walk upon his eyes, Only
faith works Justification, but is not alone.
and to see with his ears. For the matter goes none otherwise in Faith, Hope,
and Charity: which three heavenly Iewelles albeit be instilled into us by the
free liberality of God with Remission of Sins, and cleave fast within one
subject: yet every of them are distinguished by their several properties and
functions notwithstanding. As for Example. In what respects Faith, hope and
Charity be coupled.
If a question be demanded, what thing it is that does Justify us in the
sight of God, and obtain us everlasting life? I do answer: that it is
Faith, yea and Faith only: If you demand by what means? I do answer,
through Jesus Christ the Mediator. Again if you ask what kind of Faith that
is? I do answer: not an idle, nor a dead Faith: but a lively Faith, What
faith does work through love.
and a workyng Faith. If you will demand further by what marks you may be
able to discern a true Faith from a false Faith? S. Paul will make answer
unto you: The true Faith is that, which works by Charity. If you will
demand further yet, what this Faith works? I do answer according to the
several properties thereof, two manner of ways, namely: Faith works
Salvation thorough Christ: and it works obedience of the law by Charity:
what? absolute obedience? I do not think so. What then? imperfect obedience?
But such a Faith must needs be insufficient to the full measure of absolute
righteousness and perfect felicity. And where is now that excellent integrity
of life which does purchase us a way into the kingdom of heaven? where is the
effectualnesse of Charity auayleable to eternal life? where is that solemn
Decree of that Tridentine Counsel, which does ascribe the only beginning of
our Justification to Faith, A new kind of obedience but imperfect.
but makes the Formal cause thereof only Charity, as a certain new kind of
obedience (which they call a righteousness cleauyng fast within us) whereby we
are not only accounted righteous, but be both truly called righteous, and be
also truly righteous in the sight of God. Annexing thereunto a very dreadful
and terrible curse. The formal cause of Justification according to the
Tridentynes.


If any man dare presume to say, that man is justified either by the only
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, or by only Remission of Sins,
excludyng Grace and Charity which is poured forth into their hearts by the
holy Ghost, and cleaves fast within them: or if any man will presume to say,
that the Grace, whereby we be Justified is the only favor and mercy of God.
Let him stand accursed. And again in the Cannon followyng. The Council of
Trident. Cano^. 11.


If any man dare presume to say, Canon. 12.
that Iustifiyng Faith is nothing else, then a Confidence of Gods mercy,
forgeuyng Sins for Christ's sake, or to be that only affiau^ce whereby we be
Justified, let him be holden accursed.

Behold here, learned Reader a notable Decree of this Council: which when
these grave Fathers did coin, may any man dought, but that the Master of the
Family was a sleep, when the envious man did scatter abroad darnell amongst
his wheat? Math. 13.
They do discourse and determine upon Justification, but none otherwise then
as they might argue in Aristotle's school, about natural causes, or powers of
the soul. For how much more nycely could Aristotle him self the Prince of the
Peripateticall School dispute, if he hadd acco^panyed them, and debatyng this
cause together with that Ghostly Council, then Osorius and the Tridentine
Deuines did Philosophically dispute of the formal cause of Justification?
which consideration of doctrine if must be holden for an infallible foundation,
then let us be bold, and blush not to root out withal, the whole native and
essential substance of all mystical Divinity, and let us ra^e out the very
foundations of all our Religion. For if the state of our Salvation be come to
this pass, that it must be established by merits, and not by free Imputation
only: where then is that righteousness, which is called the righteousness of
Faith? the force and power whereof is so highely and often advanced by Paul,
what shall become of the difference betwixt the law and the Gospel? which if
be not observed very diligently, we shall wander and straggle blindely in the
course of the Scriptures, none otherwise then as wantes and rearemyce at the
bright beams of the clear Sun? Moreover what shall become of that
Antithesis of Paul betwixt the righteousness of the law and Faith? betwixt
grace and merit? what shall become of all that excluding of glorious boastyng
upon works? where is that Faith Imputed to Abraham for righteousness?
Moreover how shall this saying of Paul agree with these Tridentine Lawgeuers?
to wit. Romans 4.
Not to him that works, but unto him that believes on him that does Justify
the wicked and Sinner, Faith is imputed for righteousness. Moreover what shall
become of those exceptiue, and exclusive sentences of S. Paul? wherein all the
consideration of our Salvation being taken away from confidence in works, is
ascribed wholly to Imputation? Finally what shall become of all those sweet and
most amiable promises of God? if according to the rule of this doctrine, we
shall be excluded from our assuredness of Salvation and Gods free imputation?

How much the merit of Christ's death and passion may avail unto us according
to the Tridentyne Council.
We do hear the Lord promising in the Gospel. When you have lifted up the
Son of man on high, I will draw all things unto my self. And how cann this
be true, if all assuredness must be attributed to merits according to the
Tride^tines? Not so simply to merits, say they, but we do couple Grace
therewith which grace because is not received, but through the merits of
Christ, herefore there it comes to pass, yt the merit of Christ is so far
forth effectual to us in the work of our salvation as God does power into us
the measure of his grace, to work well. O notable Deuines. But go to, that I
may the better answer them, may I be so bold to demand a question or two
touching Abraham? whose works if we behold, what thing could be more holy? An
Argument against the Trydentines derived from Abraham.
If we respect the vprightnes of his life, what was more excellent? if we
regard the grace of his sanctification and renouacio^, where was it ever more
ple^tifull in any man? And now let us hear the judgment of S. Paul
concerning all those so manifold and wonderful works. For if Abraham have
any thing, whereupon he may glory (says he) he has it in respect of me^ but
not of God. What? where the most excellent works of Abraham are nothing worth,
shall our most filthy works be auayleables.

Let us have recourse to the first creation of mankind and let us call to
remembrance the ancient age of our first Parent Adam: who alone tasting of
the forbidden fruit, An Argument against the Tridentines derived from the Type
of Adam.
did he not withal difile all his posterity with that one only morsel? And
by what reason I pray you? surely not by way of participation of his offense,
but by way of propagation unto the posterity. In this Tipe of Adam, let us
behold the thing signified aunswereable to the Type: And by Adam let us
consider Christ: who only and alone being found obedient, did by this his own
only obedience purchase life everlasting for all his posteritye, not by any
partaking of his obedience, but by propagatio^ in ye posterity only: namely by
faith only, which faith does only and alone begett us unto Christ.

Take an other Argument of the same doctrine, out of an other Type.

Even as in old time to the Israelites was external health of body given by
the beholding of the brazen Serpent: An Argument against the Tridentines
derived from the Type of the Brazen Serpent.
so likewise to us is granted internal health of soul through Jesus Christ.

The Israelites were healed by the only view of their eyes.

Ergo, We are justified also by faith in Christ only.

Hereunto may be annexed an other Argument as forcible as any of the rest taken
out of Saynct Paul, whereunto what answer Osorius will make I would wish him
to be very well advised. An Argument against the Tridentines derived from S.
Paul. 2. Cor. 5.


We are made the righteousness of God through Christ, by the very same reason,
whereby Christ was made sin for us.

But Christ was not made sin, but by Imputation only:

Ergo, Neither are we made righteous in the sight of God but by Imputation
only.

Hitherto in the behalf of righteousness of faith, out of S. Paul to the Roma.
Now let us encounter Saynct Paul with an argument of the Romanists: which they
do knitt together for the mayntenaunce of righteousness by works, arguing in
this manner forsooth.

Osorius Argument out of the Tridentine council. An Argument of the Tridentine
Council against righteousness of faith.

There is no justification without the sanctification and renouation of the
inward man.

Sanctification and Renouation consists in holy actions and works.

Ergo, Justification consists in good works, and not in faith only.

This Captious Sophistication can no man better answer then Augustine: An
Answer out of Augustin^.
Good works do not go before in the work of justification, but follow
justification. If works do follow, how do they go together then? If works
must be joined together with faith, how are they reported in Augustine to
follow? Now therefore to answer the Argument. If the Mayor be taken in this
sense, that an unavoidable necessity of coupling and conioyning new obedience
must needs be required in the work of justification, as the very cause
thereof, so that there be no hope for the ungodly man to be justified, but by
his own merit and innocence of life, New obedience is not the cause, but the
fruit of Justification.
then is the Mayor false. But if good works be said to be required as ye
fruits of justification, and not the cause of justification, the Mayor is
true. And it is not to be doughted, but yt with remission of sins the free
gifts of the holy ghost are joined, who does begin and lay the first
foundation of renouatio^, and sanctification of life. And yet is it not
therefore true, yt this renouatio^ is the thing for yt which ye ungodly man is
to receive remission of sins, and to be adopted into everlasting life.

Moreover whereas the Tridentine Fathers do add further, that Justification is
not the only Remission of sins, but the sanctification and Renouation of the
inward man (To speak their own words) through the voluntary receiving of
grace and Gods gifts. etc. The Assertion of the Tridentines confuted.
By what testimony of the Scripture will they prove this to be true? Surely if
sin be the only thing which did scatter abroad death into the world: which
alone does procure the vengeance of God, and make seperatio^ betwixt God and
men: which alone does make us guilty of eternal damnation: It is proved that
Justification in the sight of God, is nothing else then the Remission of Sins,
against the Tridentines
which alone forced Christ to suffer death upon the cross: Now I beseech you
tell me for the love of Christ, what thing is justification else, but a
continual skourging, and suppressing of sin? Even as the life and the health
of the body is nothing else, but an excluding of death and Sickness: Even so
sin (the reward whereof is death) being utterly extinct through remission:
what remains else but life? and sin being utterly blotted out, what
remains else but justification?

Howbeit neither do we allege this on this wise, as though \ we were
ignorant, or did deny that sanctifiaction and Renouation, and such godly
actions and virtues, which do proceed from thence, be the proper and peculiar
gifts of Christ, and must be practiced of all godly Christians of very
necessity. The state of the question.
But this is ^ot the state of the question properly: for the state of the
question here does not consist upon the direction and government of this
present life, but of the life to come, and of the cause thereof: not whether
virtuous and godly actions of Christian piety ought to be exercised in this
life, but when they be accomplished, whether they be of such valor in the
sight of God, as to be able of themselves to deserve salvation, and reconcile
God unto mankind? and whether virtues or the good works of them which be
regenerate be of such efficacy, as may stand upright, and cou^teruaile the
rigorous curse of the law against the judgment of god, to preserve us from
damnation: and whether in extreme terrors of conscience, man may undoubtedly,
and without fear rest assured upon works, when that dreadful question shall be
demanded to become the Sons of the living God, and to deserve the
everlasting inheritance of our Father.

In yt which you see two manner of questions Osorius: in ye one whereof we do
easily agree with you: Two kinds of questions
In the other not we only do gaynesay you, but the whole authority of Gods
Testament does determine against you, whereby we be taught that man is not
justified by works, but by faith in Jesus Christ. Romans 3. Romans 3.
And that we, whiles we seek to be justified by him, are not found righteous,
are not found already endued with excellent integrity, but are found ungodly
sinners: so that in this life which we lead in this flesh, we live none
otherwise, then through faith in the son of God, who loved us, and delivered
himself to death for us. Gala. 2. Galath. 2.
Let us note the words of the Apostle himself: of being found sinners we live
by faith, how cann Osorius make it good that we be righteous? To live Through
faith.
but if we be found righteous, how does Paul justify us to be sinners? but
only because whom this life does make guilty of death, the same is released by
faith of the Son of God: not whom he does find righteous, but whom he does
make righteous, not by living uprightly, but by not imputation of sin.

Neither is this therefore false, that a godly carefullnesse of living
virtuously is required in the faithful, which may exclude presumption of
sinnyng: but it must be considered after what manner it is required. If you
suppose it be requisite to the necessity of obedience: you say truly: but if
you think it to be an infallible assurance of Salvation and eternal life,
there ca^ be nothing more false and more damnable: for as much as the same is
not obtained by our own merits, and deservings, but is freely geauen to the
unworthy and undeserved: When good works be necessary.
and is the^ also geauen, whenas we are found Sinners: so that in this whole
work, the mercy of the Lord does bear the whole and full praise and palm,
not our works, which do but follow Gods reconciliation as fruits, and not make
atonement with God. None otherwise then as Osorius, whenas he does Consecrate,
when he does geaue orders, when he does wear his Myter, he does not all these
to the end he would be made a Bishop: but because he was made a Bishop
before, therefore he does execute the duties apperteignyng to a Bishop. And as
the Servants of noble men are known by their several Badges: but do not
wear noble men's badges because they shall become those noble men's servants.
In semblable wise Christian Faith, albeit it work always by love, and does
show a special demonstration of pure and true Faith: Wherefore faith only
does justify.
does not therefore procure Salvation, because it works: but because it does
believe in Christ Jesus, who being able alone to geaue that absolute integrity,
which is required: for this cause therefore only Faith in Christ Jesus does
obtain our Salvation, not our perfection and integrity. So that all the whole
felicity of our happy life does not proceed from any efficacy or force of our
own work, but by consideration of the Object only, which is received
thorough Faith.

Neither are the endeavors and actions of love, charity, and piety, excluded
in this course of transitory obedience (as I have often declared before) as
though by this means they should be of any less necessity not to accompany,
Faith works by love, but not as effectual to eternal life.
or not to attend upon Faith: Again neither are works so joined with Faith,
as though they should exclude Faith from her dignity and her proper operation:
nor enfeeble or abase the wonderful riches of the grace of God, which is in
Christ Jesus: nor that they should extinguish the Glory of Christ's Cross: nor
dispoyle afflicted consciences of their heavenly consolation, nor should
destroy the synceritie of sound doctrine which the Apostles have left unto us:
which for as much as ascribes the whole estate of our Salvation to no one
thing else, then to the only free liberality and mercy of Christ Jesus: I do
appeal to the secrett Judgments of all the godly, whether the opinion of
them be better, which do establish their sauetie in Faith only: or of
Osorius, which does measure all our assurance and confidence of Salvation, by
the only Rule of our own righteousness? and who does affirm that Faith only,
Apoca. 3.
is only rash temeritie. Truly if the Spirit of the Lord could not digest
those Laodiceans, which being drou^ken with vain persuasion of their own
righteousness, hadd not any feelyng or perseueraunce of their own ugly
deformity and filthy barraynesse: It may easily be coniectured, what we may
determine of the hawty spirit of this Portingall Divine, and of all his
Divinity.

Wherefore in that you seem so inwardly careful for our sauety Osorius, as
herein your honest inclination of gentle courtesy toward us may not
unthankfully be neglected of us altogether: Even so we also in requital of
our good will toward you, do earnestly exhort and heartily desire you, that
either you will vouchsafe to instruct us in the true doctrine of Salvation more
wholesomely and purely hereafter, or else that you reteigne still with your
self this your safety, which you do wish unto us, if you can wish us no
better: and enjoy the same to your great comfort as much and as long as you
will for ever and ever, world without end.

Amen.
Let us pray.
OSorius. A Collect. for the kingdom of England.
I do heartily pray, and beseech the high and eternal Lord Jesus Christ, for the
love of his most precious blood which was shedd for the Salvation of all
mankind, for his wounds, for his bitter passion, for his death, wherewith he
did vanquish death, for his victory wherein he triumphed over the kingdom of
Satan, that he would vouchsafe to enlighten with the bright beams of his
countenance and deliver from all errors this kingdom which was once a
Receptacle of all virtue, Religion, wisdom, and Justice, disquieted now by
the wicked practices of naughty packes: and would also vouchsafe to reclayme
it to the Faith and uniform consent of most sacred Religion, into the ancient
bounds of the Church, and defend the same with the assistau^ce of his holy
Spirit, that whereas we are now disagreeyng in opinions, we may be conformed
together at the length in unity of one Faith, and one uniform mind of most
vndoughted Religion, and may attain together that everlasting glory, to the
unspeakable joy and Rejoicing of all the holy Citizens in heaven. [At the
Feast of Easter] Alleluya, Alleluya.

In recompense of this your solemn collect Right Reverend Father? what
remains at the length, but that we all and every of us do with one mouth,
one spirit, and one voice sing as loud as we can unto you? Amen. which being
but one word wanting only to ye knitting up of the prayer, I do not a little
marvel, why was forgotten of you, unless perhaps because it was skarse a
good Latyne word, and never found in the books of Cicero, therefore it was
unworthy to be inserted in this place as not meet for your fine phrase of
Ciceroes Eloquence. Nevertheless it is right well yet, that making
intercession for us poor outcast Englishmen, you skippe over all other pelting
and petty mediators and advocates, and have thought good to call upon ye help
of the most mighty and merciful Lord Jesus Christ, without calling for, or
inuocating the help of any other Gods. Which devise how well will agree with
the rest of your discourse, I can not well conceive: for you seem to pray one
way, and to dispute an other way quite contrary: You do pray as a Lutherane,
but you dispute as a Papist. What a contradiction is this I pray you, where the
Pyper plays the hornepype, and you dance the Antyck? Only Christ is to be
called upon as a Mediator.
For if this be true, as we are taught by your example, that we ought to flee
for succor to Christ only as the most chief and highest Sovereign: and in
him only and alone to repose all our whole shoot ancker of prayer and
invocation, without praying to all other perry Saints, what need we then of
any other Sollicitours, Patrones, and Advocates? But if the estate of our
necessitye be such as may not want their aid and assistaunce, how chances
it, that renouncing the necessary helps of pettygodds and pettygoodesses,
intercession is made here only unto Christ?

Afterward you do proceade in your whott zealous prayer and do make
intercession For his bloods sake that was shed for the salvation of all
mankind, for his wounds sake, for his most bitter passion sake, for his death
sake, wherewith he vanquished death, and for his conquest sake wherewith he did
triumph over the kingdom of Satan. etc. In all this you both speak well, and
do well. Stand fast therefore, and be not removed from your self if you can,
and grant that veritye may wringe that perforce from you in the matter, that
you can not deny: If his blood were shedd for the salvation of all mankind as
you say: if that vnentreatable rygor of Gods wrath could no be pacyfied with
any one thing else besides the blood of the Lamb: from whence then is salvation
to be sought on our behalf? or to whom ought we ascribe our sauetye, but unto
this one only sacrifice? If we be healed by his wou^des and bitter
bloodshedding, with what shamelessenesse dare your Romish pelting Potticaries
presume to apply other rotten drugges to our soars? to what purpose serve so
many Rosaryes and garlandes of the blessed Uirgine Mary? so many inuocations of
the dead? so many Suffrages of Saints? so many Statio^s? Iubiles? so many
prauncing pilgrimages? so many peevish pardons? so many Momish Mounckemerytes?
so many ragged Churchrelliques? so many vain vows of votaryes? so many
marketts of Masses? and so many Dolldreanches of dryueling Sacrifices? finally
to what end preuayleth all the pelting pylfe of Popish patcheryes? If it be
true, as you do bear us in hand, that death is vanquished by the death of
Christ, so that now it has no more interest or title in them, or in their
lives which be engraffed in Christ Jesus: wherefore should we Christians be any
more afraid of death, that is swallowed up already, unless paraduenture your
popish Archprelates with your outrageous Tru^petts do think by blowing wind
in his tail to restore him to life again, which you do endeavor daily and
busily in deed, but all in vain notwithstanding. But now forasmuch as it is
certain, yt there be two manner of deaths, the one of the body, The death of the
body and the soul swallowed by Christ only.
the other of the soul: and whereas also Christ did swallow the^ up both,
namely one by his resurrection, the other by faith: vain therefore and fruitless
be all your practices, dryftes, and turmoyles, wherein you promise a conquest
of death, which is putt to flight already: Again if death be not vanquished,
then does Osor. lie.

The very same may be verified of the kingdom of Satan, whose whole force
sithence is contained in the obligation and handwryting of Sin: sithence also
Christ has victoriously tryumphed already, both over the whole Empire of
Satan, and over all the power of Sin, as your self do confess: Why do
you so frett and fume then against Luther and against us, The Conquest over the
Empire of Satan.
who do affirm nothing else then you do, and who do call back all things to
the only victory and Triumph of Christ?

Therefore, whereas abandonyng all other intercessors you dyrect your prayer to
Christ only: whereas you do so highly advance and magnifye the death and
conquest of Christ, herein hitherto you denounce your self a notable
Lutherane: Now therefore from henceforth let us as briefly consider of what
the very thing is in deed, which you beg so earnestly of Christ: theffect of
your request is, that he would vouchsafe to help us wicked English outcastes.
And why do you not crave his aid as well for your self, and for your native
Country of Portingall? what moves you to pray so devoutly for England
perticularly by name without any mention made of your own Country men? I do
suppose verily, because there is no wickedness practyzed in that Country:
there is no sheep there either infected with noisome murrayne, or so tied by the
buttock in brambles and briars of errors, that it needs any aid of the
Shepherd. In Portingall grows no Bruske neither Bryar, no furse, no
baggadge, no fearne meet for fire. Why then rejoice with the holy Pharisee
Osorius, and give hearty thanks unto Almighty God, both for your self and for
your Country, that you be not like unto other men, and especially to that most
pestiferous and abject Nation of England: Wherein was sometime (as you say) the
Princely palace of virtue, of Religion, of wisdom and of Justice, but now is
turned vpsidowne by the wickedness of desperate castawayes and is defiled
with abominable errors.

Go to, what be these so foul enormities and so heinous errors for which you
keep so great a coil? what men be these whom you call desperate abiectes?
what Faith and what kind of Church is it, whose bounds and limittes we have
raunged over? you were now to be demanded to render a reckonyng of all that
your accusation particularly and orderly. What need that say you? I have done
this sufficiently already in my former books. In deed so have you done and I
trust you be sufficiently answered also to every of ye former forged and false
accusations. And so have we heard more then enough by you of the outrageous
haynousnesse of our execrable castawayes in our Realm at this present. But in
the mean space this notable Rhetorician has not all this whiles uttered one
word so much of the hurly burly that this Child of perdition has kept, 2.
These. 2. The Child of Perdition.
not in one kingdom only, but through the whole state of Christendom, nor
tells us what a coil he keeps daily: what troubles he procures, what
wars he practizeth, what discord he scatters, in what continual broils
he has wallowed these many years against the chief Princes and Pote^tates of
ye world: what monstrous poison and Botches of erroneous doctrine he has
vomited out against the Church, what a floudd of Christian blood he has
spilte: how many thousand souls he has bereft of life, for whom Christ
suffered his bitter Passion: Finally how he has turned all things typsy
tyruye: of all these I say, mumme budgett altogether. For this is a special
principle of Rhetoric wherein he is well-beseene, that if he espy never so
little a scabbe in his adversaries visadge, there shall his nails be always
rakyng: on the other side, if there be never so mo^struous a Carbunckle on
their own behalf whereat the adversary may take some advantage, either will
him self not take any notice of it, or else will he color it with some pretty
shift, or wype it away with some crafty conueyaunce and dissimulation.

In the foot of your Orison, you do annex afterward, that Christ would
vouchsafe with the assistaunce of his Spirit to gather together again us
which be now scatteryng and disagreeyng in opinion, into one uniform agreement
of faith, and within the bounds and limittes of his Church whereby we
altogether may attain everlasting glory to the singular joy and rejoicing of
all the holy company of heaven. To answer this your petition briefly: Do you
bring to pass according to your duty first, that it may be lawful for us to
be associated in your felowshipp with safe conscience, with sound Faith,
without manifest impiety and Idolatry, without most heinous blasphemy against
the living God, and without present peril of everlasting damnation: and
believe me we are not more willing to do any thing in the world more readyly,
then to join with you. What can you crave more Osorius? But if this request
can not be brought to pass, nor obtained of you, to wit, that you abandonne
out of your Church Idolles and profane worshyppynges: nor will yield to a
reformation of your filthy errors, and corruptions of Religion, according to
the true touchestone of sacred Scripture: that the same confuse licentiousness
of unclean single life, croochyng and kneelyng to Images, and greedy gaddyng
to the Relics of the deadd more then Heathenish may be utterly banished: that
your breadworshypp and Imageworshypp, your profane abuse of the Lords Supper,
your false packettes of Pardons, ear whisperyngs, satisfactions, and merit
meritorious, and other unmeasurable monsters of your ragged Religion may be
altogether abrogated: If these (I say) so many so horrible botches, and cankers
of superstition, disceiptes, untruths, patcheries and impieties propped up
in the Church by your filthy ignorance, you will not raze and scrape clean
out of the Church of Christ, but have determined rather to mainteyne and uphold
the same more then barbarously with slaughter, blood, and all manner of sauadge
cruelty: nor will as yet yield to be tried by any lawful authority: but
continue unappeasable against the manifest truth, and persist unremovable in
the supportation of your blasphemous Idolatry with unmercifully greedynesse:
Briefly if you call us to such a Church, and to the embracying of such a
Faith, as no Christian faithful man may by any means profess, except he will
renounce the true Church of Christ, unless he will utterly deny Christ him
self and his Faith, herein neither shall it be convenient for us to agree with
you, and become partakers of this your horrible bootchery: nor shall it become
you to require us thereunto: moreover we assuredly trust that Christ will never
permit us so to do.

I have answered you now as briefly as I could: yet will I speak it somewhat
more briefly. If any man dare be so hardy to change, to counterfei^t, to
pervert the Laws, Statutes and autentique Monumentes of any earthly Prince, or
the Testament of any deadd person, after this sort, as you do Canuasse the word
of God, no Prince would permit such a treachery in his Realm, and an hundred
Gallows and Tortures would seem to little for so heinous an offense. And what
shall be said then to them, who having mangled and made havoc of the
everlasting Testament of GOD, whereunto to add, or to diminishe therefrom any
title is not lawful upon pain of damnation: who treadyng under foot the
ordinances of the the Lord of Lords, who having changed and counterfayted
the fine and pure gold of the sacred Scripture, and coined unto us such dross
and ofscombe of Religion, wherein we must be forced to live now, not after the
Laws and Ordinances of Christ, but after their Decrees and Decretalles: I
beseech you shall it be reasonable for Osorius to allure us to such a kind of
conformity? and then after this life to promise us everlasting glory, to the
joy of all the Company in heaven?

Wherein Osorius does express in deed a certain glorious presumption, of a
courage wonderfully fawnyng upon his own dexterity. Howbeit whatsoever sound
this shrill Trumpett of Osorius shall noise forth from out of Portingall, we
must nevertheless give our attentyue ear rather to the Trumpett of GOD, and
mark diligently whereunto it calls us, as the which soundyng unto us a far
unlike march, commands us in any wise not to go out of Raye, nor to depart
from our Ancient and Standarde, upon a grievous pain: least we be partakers
of their Treason, and be punished with their plagues: Apoc. 18.
And again with most cruel manaces threatenyng all such as shall receive the
mark of the Beast, either on the forehead or on the hand: to whom he does
promise not everlasting glory to the rejoicing of all the company of heaven,
Apocal. 14.
but the bitter cup of Gods everlasting wrath, which is myngled with wine in
the Cup of Gods vengeance. And they shall be tormented (says he) with fire
and Brimstone in the sight of the holy Angels before the face of the Lamb:
and the smoke of their Torments shall ascend world without end. Apocal. 14.
Which I do most humbly and heartily beseech the most merciful Lord that he
will turn far away from you, and from us all. And so is both your prayer
come to an end, and our Apologye finished. And so an end.

A knitting up to the Reader.
NOw for as much as Osor. and I have sufficiently debated our matters together:
It remains that I use some conference with the godly and Christian Reader
herein: whom I would aduertize by the way in few words, to be well advised of
Osorius, not of any malice truly, nor of any dishonest affection of disquieted
mind, conceived against the man, but moved hereunto, by necessary instinct of
well wishing heart, in respect of some young men, not altogether void of
comme^dable knowledge and learning, though perhaps otherwise not so well
settled in Judgment, who may be easily carried away into vain conceit,
allured with the outward glittering bravery of Osorius minion Eloquence, as
seely fishes caught with sugared hayte, unless they flee the hidden hook: whom
for the same I thought good to admonish before hand: Not meaning to dissuade
them from reading of Osorius books altogether, nor to defraud Osorius of any
his prayseworthy grace of Eloquent style, or to extenuate his glory, if he have
deserved any therein. For as for me truly, as I am neither acquainted with ye
countenance of the man, so do I not so much regard the outward foil of his
painted speech: howsoever any man shall streake himself with blazing the
beauty of fyled tongue, concerns me nothing at all, so also apperteigneth as
little to the matter. There is an other thing that I requier more: namely in a
Bishop, a Priest, and a Divine. Therefore if any man shall take pleasure in the
floorishing form of Osorius phrase, and will not be removed from the fragraunt
flowers of Osorius speech, let him enjoy his delight a gods name, and let him
read his books ye will, yea I do wish heartily that all and every person
would read and peruse him, that so the more witnesses there be in the matter,
the more directly men may determine of the creditt of the person. Therefore
let them read him (I say) whosoever be so minded, and let them not only
carry the book daily in their hands, but lull him also in their bosoms, I
will not gaynesay them therein. This council only I give, that they read him
with Judgment nevertheless, and esteem of him as a Rhethoricia^ and an
artificial Orator, but take him for no Divine: And that they become not so
ravished with the gorgeous gaze of this prancked Peacocke, nor fixed to fast
in the fine feature of his fawning feathers, but behold below his black feet
withal: let the^ be so enamored with the delicate devises of their smoath
Scholemaster, yt they give not in the mean time to creadulous an ear to the
counterfaicte craft of his proper pack, but have always in mind the pythy
sentence of Epicharmus the wise. (...). Be not light of belief.
And withal that they take especial care, if they have a desire to imitate
his writing, not to enure themselves in any wise to his saucy malapertnes of
slaundering or cursed speaking. Then which kind of contagion, as there can be
no Canker more Pestilent, skattered abroad amongst ye conuersations of
christian men, so do I more heartily wish that the virtuous wits of studious
youth may not be polluted with this crawling skabbe. And I cann not wonder
sufficiently, to think what frantique fury has whirled this Prelate into such
unmeasurable outrage of railing pen.

But the matter goes well enough on our side, namely, that his raunging speech
is agreeable to his disordered profession, and his Lavish style is coupled with
his lewd doctrine: for what could have been more fit for this bloody Religion
then bootcherly brawlyng, and currish cauilling, like unto like? yet how much
more commendable hadd it been, and withal how much more sitting and seemly
his personage and dignitye, if espying any blemish or wrinckle in men's manners
or errors, that might have been offensive: he hadd as a Priest, a Divine, and a
Bishop, with friendly and mild application of persuadible Scriptures enduced
the ignorant to better regard, by gentle enstruction rather then with rigorous
railing: and to have given a simple demonstration of the soundness of his
faith rather, then have bruted abroad the beastely botch of his shameless
impudencye: It is the propertye of virtuous literature and civil discipline,
(so called of the ciuilytye thereof) to reclayme the raunging riott of
wandering wits to mildenes of manners, and to a certain comely ciuilitye of
meek modestye. Certes this sauadge sawcynesse and wayward wrangling whether
may be found amongst tyranous Turks I know not: surely is very unseemly for
learned men, much more uncomely for Deuines, but altogether blameworthy in
Byshopps. Moreover besides ye rule of Christian Religion, surely reason it
self would have required this much at the least, yt in reproching other men's
faults, such as can not be mindful of their own, should reprove no more in
others, then such as be faults in deed, and not causelessly condemn ye
innocent with forged crimes, and malicious cauillations.

This also should have been foreseen as an especial point of a grave Divine,
yt he that of set purpose will become a prowling pickethanke of other men's
eskapes, should first peruse their books with earnest bent heedefulnes, should
advisedly note the manner of the errors: and make faithful report of the same
accordingly: not foreiudging the things which he knows not: nor carping over
greedely the things that he understands not, nor corruptly deprauing the
rest that is well spoken. But our Osorius here does inueigh against men, whom
he never saw: does defame their life whom he never knew: does with his
currishe Eloquence gnaw the books that he never handled: condemning the cause
first before both parties be heard: confuting first before he understand what
requires refutation. Not much swaruing from the example of some in these
days, Uenetians and Italians especially, who being enflamed with canckred
malice against the French Hugonoughtes whom they never saw, being demanded of
their Paramoures, and other unskillful young headds concerning the qualyties
and disposition of those Hugonoughts, do answer yt they be not men, but
certain mo^struous shapes of men, having Dogs faces, and glowing eyes, Boares
Tuskes sprouting along their snoughtes, Dragons heads, foul outstretched
cheeks, lowling ears from the crown of the headd to the bottom of the
shoulders: Finally they do describe them out in most ugly misshapen deformitye,
not because they be such kind of people in deed: but because they may by this
means, make them to be more enuyed, and more maliciously hated. Not much
otherwise this good man Osorius here does besturre himself against the
Lutherans. First wheresoever he may hear of any persons that be named
Lutherans, though he know not the men themselves, yet does he by and by
conceive in his brain, and by the very name Imagine them to be such, as he
has painted out here in his Books, to wit: Outcastes, Churchrobbers,
Traitors, Scorpions, Murderers, Leacherous, the firebrandes and whirlewindes
of all the world: Enemies of mankind, Spoylers of Princes, Heretics,
Scismatickes, Botches of Religion, Rooters out of all virtue: Finally skarsely
men, but under men's countenau^ces, nothing but hellhoundes, raised up of Satan
himself. Again wheresoever he does hear of any mischievous naughty packes,
treacherous villanyes, common Barretours, or any infamed persons reproched for
any corruption of opinions, errors, sects, scysmaticall deuisions, heresies,
or notorious for any other deteitable crime, or execrable mischief: he does
for forthwith conclude all those whatsoever under the common name of
Lutheranes, without exception: as it were within one predicame^t: even as
though there were no contradiction, contrariety, or diversity of sects,
people, judgments and factions, in the world but Lutheranes only.

Furthermore, as though all this sufficed not to procure the^ to be maligned
enough, he has forged hereunto opinions false, horrible, and blasphemous,
which neither entered into their thought at any time, nor ever eskaped from out
their mouths or writing, which although appear manifestly in infinite places
and manifest tokens every where: yet let this one be admitted for examples
sake. What? (says he) shall I believe that I shall recover health, Osor. lib.
2. de iustitia. Page 31.
so long as I do not feel my self stricken, and pynched with any such gryefe
of sickness, that I make no force whether any medicine be applied, so long as
I nourish mine own sickness? so long as mine own wickedness does delight
me? etc. No in deed I do not believe it, nor do I think it worthy to be
believed. And I pray you what one of all the Lutheranes did ever dream of any
such thing in his sleep? or ever taught it being awake? when consciences are
shaken with engines of distrust (as oftentimes happens amongst the faithful
being in affliction) whereas the whole force of the mind does imagine all
possible ways, by what means it may counteruayle the wrath and indignation of
God: The Lutheranes here have set down a plaster for this soar, taken out
of the Physic of Scripture: namely Faith only, and the merits of Christ
Jesus: On the contrary part Osor. urges very stoughtly, that we are not
reconciled unto God by faith in Christ only, but by only righteousness of
works, wherein we do exercise our selves thorough the aid and assistau^ce of
grace: how true this assertion of his is, I do appeal herein to the secret
judgments of the learned. In the mean space, let the godly Reader consider
well, with what slanders, and injurious accusations he does reproach godly and
virtuous personages, for whereas they do treat of the grievous assaults and
combats of tormented consciences properly, and of sinners stricken down, and
confounded with the remembrance of their own sins, unto whom chiefly
appertains the comfortable promise of faith: how can it be possible, that
this serious and earnest repentance cann conceive any pleasure or delight in
horrible wickedness? And yet out of this so manifestly false forged slander,
Osorius has clowted up the remnaunt of all his patcheryes. And from hence
forsooth are all those so many huge Tempests, Lightenynges and Thunderboltes,
so many outrageous exclamations, tragedies, and earthquakes raised up against
the poor abject Lutheranes no less unsavory, then shameless. Wherefore I was
so much the more desirous to aduertyze the godly zealous youth, that they would
not suffer them selves to be entangled by any means with the flattering
fawning of Osorius books: and that they behave themselves with discrete
moderation in ye reading of them, least as ye Serpent did once beguyle Eve,
they also may be carried away from the pure simplicity which is in Christ Jesus.
God did not in vain send his son into the world, nor in vain did he give
that especial commandment, that we should harken unto him: Moreover not in
vain likewise did the Son himself descending from out the bosom of his
Father take upon him to proclaim the fathers will out of heaven. If petitions
proceeding from hearty, inward, and most pure love, if most excellent and
undefiled prayers, if most commendable conversation of life, in all kind of
virtue, might have auayled to the attaynment of perfection of salvation: I see
no cause to the contrary, why the heavenly Father might have taken away that
bitter Cupp of heavy displeasure, out of the hand of this Son. But our
wounds could not otherwise be healed, but by the death, and deadly wou^des of
the Son. The wound was far more deep and deadly? then could be curable, by
any policy, power, treasure, works or actions of men. Briefly when Osorius
has spoken of and advanced justice, and most excellent integrity of life with
all the skill that he cann: Yet shall he never be able to bring to pass the
contrary, but that the song which we daily sing unto Christ shall be an
unvanquishable truth Thou only art holy. Thou only art holy.
Out of ye which what think you may be gathered else, but that all other
creatures whatsoever, adorned with never so plausible opinion of holiness, be
nevertheless unclean and defiled in the sight of God? And yet do we not
hereby derogate one hearebredth so much from ye grace of God, whose riches and
treasure we do confess to be unspeakable, and dispersed over the face of the
whole earth. Notwithstanding we do also as boldly profess, that this grace
wherein does consist the highest honor of most perfect obedience, did never
happen to any, nor was ever given to any, but unto Christ alone. But what need
any more Circumstau^ce? I will urge one Reason against Osorius and so make an
end. What one prayer can be more holy? or knitt up in fewer words, then the
Lords prayer? Herein I do appeal to his conscience: Let him pronounce the
same one prayer unto God in such sort, that he be not faulty in some respect,
nor swerve in thought any where from that absolute perfection of
righteousness, whereupon he does bragg so much, with such an unremovable
conversion of mind to Godward, and in so humble an abacement of himself, and
with so dutyfull a reverence, as is beseemyng so unspeakable a Majesty. And I
will yield him the victory.

I do most heartily desire and wish unto the learned Reader and to all other the
elect Saynctes of God, whosoever do profess the name, and wear the badge of
Christ Jesus, that departing from iniquity, and gathering all together into one
uniform agreement of sincere doctrine, by thenlightening and inspiratio^ of
the holyghost, we may be all together received into that heavenly Jerusalem and
into that kingdom of immortal glory, and eternal felicity, which shall never
have end: not for the works of righteousness, which we have done, but for the
love of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who suffered death for our sins,
and rose again for our Justification.

Amen.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

Anno. 1581.


