Pieties Pillar: OR, A SERMON PREACHED AT the Funeral of Mistress ELIZABETH
GOVGE, late Wife of Mr. WILLIAM GOVGE, of Blackfriars, London. With a true
Narration of her Life and Death.

By Nicolas Guy, Pastor of the Church at Edge-ware in Middlesex.

PROVE. 31 30. A Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

LONDON, Printed by George Millar, dwelling in Blackfriars. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR THOMAS LAKE, Knight, of CANONS, in Middlesex.
SIR,
THe Parable of our Savior in the Gospel must be my Apology for the
publication of this Sermon to the eye and censure of the world, Luke 11.
the which at the first when I preached it, I thought not worthy your judicious
ears in my private Church: but being overcome by the importunity of the
reverend Divine, Master Gouge, I condescended (though sore against my will) to
give way to his desire: thus have I made a Virtue of Necessity, and as it is in
the Proverb, Vnica fidelia duos dealbaut parietes: I have both satisfied his
pious desire for the preservation of the memory of his virtuous and religious
Wife: and also (having no better to present your Honor withal) I am bold to
offer this, as the poor man brought water in his hands to Artaxerxes: only as
a testimony of my willingness to return something to your Honors hands, from
whom I have received so much (even all the maintenance that now I have) either
immediately from your Honor, or mediately by your Honors procurement. It was
my happiness to be trained up by that Illuminate Doctor, Prelate and Pillar of
our Church, your Brother, and the now most reverend and religious, Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells; and since to be sustained by your Honor. So that I may
justly say with the Psalmist, Psalm 27.10
When my Father and my Mother forsook me, the Lord took me up, and committed
me to the charge of one Brother, of prime place in the Church, for my
spiritual estate; and to your Honor, the other Brother, of principal place
in the common wealth for my temporal. Now besides your Honors favors to me
in particular; your many real favors and great affection to the Church and
Churchmen, both when you were in public place of Honorable employment to our
lately gracious Sovereign, King James, of ever famous and happy memory; and
also since your private retiredness, may justly challenge the best of our
Labors to be consecrated to so learned and noble a Patron of Learning. Besides
these former respects, your Honor has yet another interest in these my weak
endeavors: because you went chief amongst many worthy and worshipful
Auditors, which honored the Funeral with your presence. In all these
respects, I hope your Honor will favorably be pleased to accept that of me,
which Almighty God does of us all, a willing heart and desire. Saint Paul tells
us, 2 Cor. 8.12.
in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, that God accepts us according to
that which we have, not according to that which we have not. If in this your
Honor pardon my ouer-great presumption, you shall more and more make me

Obliged in all the bonds of respect and service to your Honor, Nicolas Guy.

To the Reader.
Good Reader:
IT fell out with the Gentlewoman, at whose Funeral this Sermon was preached,
as it did with Iaakobs beloved Rachel. In a Mistress GOVGE brought forth her
last Child into this world, and went her self out of this world, in the
Country house of Master Simon and Mistress Anne Geering: who inhabiting the
greatest part of the year in Black friars Londo, were desirous to show to
their Pastor there, such respect as the Sunemite and her husband did to Elisha,
and Onesiphorus to Paul.
strange place they both fell in travel, and in the time of their childbed
they both departed this life. Answerably as Iaakob would not have his Rachels
memory perish with her corpse, but for better preservation thereof, erected a
Pillar upon her grave, so to the same end it is desired, that this Funeral
Sermon may be published. Rachel could not be more dear to her Iaakob, then
this Elizabeth was to her William. In her life time she carried her self
worthy of all honor: and at her Funeral she was honored with all the honor
that on such a sudden the Country where she departed could afford. Her sweet
soul left her body about one of the clock in the afternoon of the 26. of
October, 1625. being Wednesday, whereupon her Corpse being infected with the
Dropsy, and all the Pores of it open, by reason of her late travel and
weakness in Childbed, could not be long kept, but on the Friday following,
which was Simon and Iudes day, was buried under the Communion Table in the
Church, at Edgeware, in the County of Middlesex, being accompanied with a great
multitude of sundry sorts of persons, Honorable, Worshipful, and others. For
besides that, two whole Parishes there met together, Knights, Ladies, Justices
of Peace, Ministers and other good Christians round about that place, came
far and near to the solemnization of that Funeral. That the due honor done
to her may be more then the honor of one day, this Pillar of Piety is now
erected for encouragement to others in their life time to walk worthy of
honor.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mistress Elizabeth Gouge, late Wife of
Master William Gouge of Blackfriars, London.
JOHN 11.26. Whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never dye.


THE Emblem of the Evangelist Saint John was the Eagle, which being King of
all the Fowls of the Heaven, soars the highest of all other Birds; so may
Saint John in his Gospel claim precedence before the other Evangelists: he
was the Disciple of our Saviors love, his Favorite, on Christ's bosom he
leaned at Supper, Ioh 13.23.
and to him Christ at his death commended his Mother, so that we may think
that Christ did impart more to him then to the rest: therefore shall we find
in his Gospel higher mysteries of the nature and works of Christ then in the
other: and in him alone we find this miracle of raising Lazarus: which (if it
be lawful to compare) may seem to be the greatest of all that Christ did
whilst he was in this world. It is a story not altogether unbefitting this
present occasion, if it were not for the disparity of the sex. Both of them
treat of Funerals. I will first tell you what this was in the Gospel, and
after I have done with that, this present occasion shall be presented unto
you. I must not (in the relation of this Story) spend time upon the several
circumstances, wherein the Evangelist is so exact; that's done at large in the
Chapter: only for introduction of this particular which we have in hand, some
passages I will point out unto you. First, of the Person that was sick and
dyed. Secondly, of the means his friends used for his recovery. Thirdly, of
Christ's comfortable speech which he gave unto them.

First, for the Person, it was Lazarus, brother to Martha and Mary Magdalene,
which washed Christ's feet with her tears, and wiped them with her Hairs, and
anointed them with Ointment; this was his Kindred by nature; and by grace he
was honored with the title, to be a friend of Christ's, whom Christ more
especially loved. Thus even they who are the most dearly beloved of Christ
must look for afflictions, and infirmities, and sickness, and death in this
world. Lazarus whom Christ loved was sick. 2. His Sisters therefore use the
best means they can whilst he was sick. For his recovery they send to
Christ, to teach us that we can sue and seek to none in comparison of Christ
in all our troubles. For as he was reputed in those days a great Phycitian
for the body, who cured all diseases: so is he for the soul too, to heal all
our miseries. 3. For Christ's part, though he loved Lazarus, yet he does not
presently come to cure him, but suffers him to dye. He abode two days in the
place where he was, till Lazarus was dead: from whence we may note, that
Christ suffers the evil of affliction to come upon his servants whom he
loves, rather then preuents it with grace; and then also he does not presently
relieve them, but suffers them to send and pray, as these Sisters did here: and
as Jacob wrestled with God, and Saint Paul prayed thrice. And this he does for
diverse causes, both to manifest our grace and his glory. Our faith and love to
him by this means will express themselves the more: and this also will more
manifest his glory in bringing down to Hell and the grave, and then bringing
again to life. If Christ had come at the first and healed his sickness, an
ordinary Physician happily could have done as much: but though he tarry long, yet
at last he comes and shows the gracious light of his countenance upon us* so
that now you shall hear him with comfortable words, speaking both to his
Apostles in private, and afterward to the Sisters when they come to meet him:
to his Apostles he says, Our friend Lazarus sleeps: so that if we can get
friendship with Christ, our death shall be but a sleep, and Christ will
certainly awake us from it at the resurrection of the just. So Christ goes
forward to the house of mourning, where the Jews were comforting the Sisters
for the death of their brother Lazarus. But they were like Rachel mourning for
her children, they refused to be comforted because their brother Lazarus was
not. When Martha heard that Christ was coming on the way, she went forth to
meet him: few such Marthaes who meet Christ coming toward them, we rather
fly from him. When she was come to Christ, she tells him with a heavy heart
of the death of her brother Lazarus, which his presence might have prevented.
Christ therefore, in the words I have read unto you preaches a comfortable
Sermon, to pacify the friends of the deceased, that they should not sorrow as
those without hope; and tells Martha that her brother Lazarus (though he be
dead) shall rise again. And that she may not doubt of it, he adds, That he
will bring it to pass, not only for Lazarus, but for all other deceased in
the faith: and therefore he says, I am the resurrection and the life, he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives
and believes in me shall never dye. So that the words of the Text which I
have read unto you are a gracious and a large Charter or promise of Christ's,
wherewith he comforts Martha for her particular, and grants the same in general
to every one of us: In which is comprehended no less then the sum or Epitome
of the Gospel, which is, To believe in Christ, and we shall be saved.So it is
said, Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. All the Gospel
can say no more, and so much is said in these words that I have read unto you,
whosoever lives, etc.

The Law and the Gospel are as two lines tending to the same Center, or as
diverse Rivers leading to the same Ocean, or as the Cherubins on each side of
the Throne: though they seemed opposite one to the other, yet both of them
looked with their faces toward the mercies Seat: so the Law and the Gospel
intend and aim at one and the same end, which is to bring men to life; but the
difference is in the Author and in the tenure of the one and the other: the
Author of the Law was Moses; Christ of the Gospel. (...). 1 17.
The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. The
tenure of the Law runs thus: Hoc fac and viues: Do this and thou shall live.
But the Gospel goes another way: Creed and viues: Believe and thou shall live.
And thus in this Text, whosoever lives and believes in me shall never dye.

In the words we will consider these four particulars:

First, the Author or Donour of this Charter, Christ.

Secondly, the large extent of it, next only to some particular Nation or
people, but whosoever lives.

Thirdly, the Condition requisite on their parts, which is faith; Believes in
me.

Fourthly, the Privilege it self, exemption from death; shall never dye.

First, of the Author or Donour. He that promises and intends to perform,
must have both will and power to perform what he promises: or else we
cannot exspect that it will euercome to pass. The willingness of the mind
must be first procured, as the original from whence he must be moved to
good: but this ready mind or desire is not sufficient without power and
ability to perform what the will desires. From men sometime God accepts the
will for the deed: as he did Abraham's intention to sacrifice his son as well
as the action; as if he had really sacrificed his son. The reason is, because
God stands in need of nothing that is ours, and all that he exacts of us is no
more but the heart: if there be not further strength to express a good desire
by a good deed; 2 Cor 8.12.
a man shall be accepted according to that which he has, not according to
that which he has not: but when there is want and necessity (and even such is
our want and necessity in respect of God) there only a willing mind or
compassionate heart or good words (Vox and preterea nihil) are sufficient for
us. Many promise more then they can perform. Thus the Devil in his temptation
of Christ says, Mat. 4.
All these will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me, as if all
the Kingdoms in the world, and the glory of them, had been his to give. In
like manner the Pope freely disposes Kings and their Kingdoms, as he dealt
with Henry the fourth, the Emperor, and Childerick of France. But this is (as
we say) to be free of another man's purse, which is not in his power to give.
Thus it were easy to give large gifts, to promise much and perform nothing:
so that both will and power in matter of grant or promise are as the two legs
to support the body: either without the other, will go lame or limping home:
but this is our comfort, that in Christ there are both these, Will and Power.
First, for his Will: the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 2.4.
that he would have all men come to the knowledge of the truth, that they may
be saved. And if we will not take him on his bare word we have his oath for
it. Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live (says the Lord) I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked tuane from his way and live. So that we may be sure for his
willingness to do: he would not that any man should dye: then if we may see
his power to do it, there remains nothing more to add to our comfort: and
for this we shall easily be assured: for he is said to have the keys of hell
and of death; Reu. 1.18.
so that though a man should be locked up prisoner there, he has the Keys to
open the door and set us free again. Mat. 28.18.
To him all power is given both in Heaven and in earth. Power then he has
sufficient, as much as we can desire: the power of the greatest Monarchs and
Emperors, and wisest Artists in the world does not extend thus far, to give
life to the silliest creature, to the least Gnat or Emmot. They that are styled
Gods in the world, and sit in the seat of Judgment, as Pilate did, have power
over life, but only priuitiuely, not possitiuely; only to take away life, but
not to give life, unless it be only by way of saving alive; they cannot make
alive or restore to life: and therefore it was that the King of Israel answered
Naaman with indignation, 2 King. 5.7.
Am I God, to kill and make alive? This is a work of God alone. But this power
is given to Christ; who is therefore called, Joh. 1.1, 4.
Verbum Vitae, Fountain of Life. Psalm. 36.9.
From whence the diverse streams of all kinds of life do flow, both natural,
spiritual, and eternal: in regard of the natural life, he is called, Genesis
2.7.
The life who breathed the breath of life into us: and man became a living
soul. Act. 17.28.
In whom we still live, move, and have our being. In regard of our spiritual
life, he is our life: Gal. 2.20. 1 Ioh. 5.12.
So Christ lives in us, and he which has Christ has life, but he which is
without Christ has not life. In regard of our eternal life he is the life, as
appears by the Verse immediately going before my Text, I am the resurrection
and the life. Thus to his will he has also power; to both these what more can
be added? It may be you will desire that he should be as constant in his
promise, as he is ready and willing, and has power and ability. Of this also
we may be ascertained, Iam. 1.17.
for every good and perfect gift comes from above from the Father of lights,
with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of change. 1 Samuel 15 29
The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not man that he
should repent. So that if he has once promised, we need not fear he will
go back from his word. Has he said it, and shall it not come to pass? Let
him be true, and every man a Liar. So then, you see in respect of the Author or
Donour, the Charter is as full and sure as we can desire it.

I come to the second particular, the large extent of it: whosoever lives. It
is without limitation of time or place or condition of men. It is not bounded
within the compass of some particular men living in such an age of the world,
nor unto a certain people inhabiting such a City or Land; nor to particular
estates or professions and conditions living in this world. If we partake not
of it, the fault is ours, because we do not apply it nor lay hold on it: it is
promised and proffered to all men living: whosoever lives. In what age of the
world soever he lives, in what place soever he lives, from what stock
soever he is derived, and in what condition of life soever he lives, Prove.
^2.^.
the rich and the poor (says Solomon) meet together, and God is the maker of
them both: so is Christ the Savior of both. Of a truth (says Saint Peter) I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons. Acts 10.34.
Not of the rich before the poor, nor of the wise, and Scribe, and learned,
before the weak and unlearned. But in every Nation, he that fears him and
works righteousness, is accepted with him. Scythian and Barbarian, as well
as Jew or Grecian: be he of noble or base descent. This is the large extent;
Whosoever. I willingly pass by the secret purpose and prescience of God, who
sees all things at once, omnia simul, and so knows who will embrace it and who
refuse it. I will not here dispute whether in those general promises made unto
man in the Scripture by this form, in these words, Whosoever lives and
believes, whether (I say) God intends them alike to every one: this is a
secret locked up in the bosom of God, of which we may say as the Prophet,
(...): Isa. 24.16.
this is a secret reserved to God alone, which some interpret, Secretum meum
mihi, Secretum meum mihi. This is a profundity, at which we must stand amazed
with the Apostle, Romans 11.29.
and cry, Oaltitudo; O the depth, his ways are past finding out. But laying
that aside for the Schools, this is that which is more fit to exhort and
persuade withal in our Pulpits, Article 7.
and which our Church has taught us, that we should content ourselves with
this, we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they he generally set forth
unto us in holy Scripture; not restraining them or determining them in
particular to this or that man. It is fit that we should so conceive of God, as
delighting in no man's destruction, nor desiring the death of any, but that all
should come to the knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved; and if we
are not saved, we must not charge God with any inevitable decree to the
contrary, as if we perish upon necessity: but seeing he has set forth his
gracious promise in Christ to all men whosoever lives and believes: we must
ascribe the cause of our perishing to our selves. Perditio tua ex te, O Israel,
O Israel, Hos. 13.9.
thou have destroyed thy self, because they wanted faith to believe as others
that were saved; or else they might have been saved as well as others. It was
a favorable opinion of some, which said, That all mankind should be saved
effectually, to which, although we must not give assent, seeing such pregnant
proof to the contrary: yet we doubt not but the revealed Will of God would
have his Grace offered to all, and therefore his charge to his Apostles was,
Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.
Go and teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to every creature: the
which, as it seems, to vindicate God from all injustice, in the behalf of
those that dye, and are damned eternally: so it is a point of exceeding comfort
to whomsoever this privilege shall be offered. At the hearing of it, none
should doubt or suppose that he is exempted: but should believe himself to be
one of that number comprehended in whosoever lives. The Jew cannot challenge
this privilege more then the Gentile, for he is the Savior of the Gentiles as
well as of the Jews. The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every
one that believes: Romans 1.16.
to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian: neither is there any respect or
difference in Sex or degree, male or female, bond or free, noble or ignoble,
wise or unwise. Romans 10.11, 12.
There is no difference, but he that is Lord of all is rich unto all that call
upon him: so that here also we see a difference between the Law and the
Gospel. The Law was given to a certain people confined to Jerusalem, Jury,
and Israel. Few other people of the world had any knowledge of it, or means to
know it.

In Judah is God known, Psalm. 76.1.
his Name is great in Israel. He dealt not so with any Nation, neither had the
Heathen knowledge of his Laws. But the Gospel was preached to all; Psalm.
147.20
the sound of the Apostles went forth to all people: even to the uttermost end
of the earth. Hence in the Church Cathotique, the company of believers are of
all people, and kinds, and kindreds that lived in the world: so that the Law
was like a Torch or Candle, but the Gospel as the Sun. The Law (said David)
was a Lantherne to his feet, Psalm. 119.105.
but the Gospel is as the beams of the Sun, which comes out of his
chamber and goes to the ends of the earth, giving light unto all people. Thus
is the light of Christ the Sun of righteousness, as the beams of the Sun
which shines to all; and if any one do not partake of that light, it is
because they shut their eyes against it: so seeing they do not perceive nor
understand, least they should see, believe and be saved. Thus much for the
universality of this Charter or privilege, excluding none, comprehending all,
whosoever lives; upon condition that he believes. By faith he partakes of the
privilege. This is the only limitation of Gods mercy and promise in Christ.
Faith is the Channel by which it is drawn and dispersed over all the world,
and makes the earth to be fruitful as Eden, the Garden of God. The eternal
favor and goodness of God is as the Fountain, Christ is the Well or Cesterne,
and Faith is the Bucket whereby we draw from Christ living waters. He that
believes in him shall never dye: So that when we say, Faith is the condition
of life and salvation, you must note that it is not such a condition, as we
usually make in Bonds and Obligations, and bargain and sale, which runs in
this tenure, Upon consideration of something of equal value, we become bound
for the performance of such Covenants: as if the condition of faith should be
worth Heaven.

It is not for the worth of our faith, put for the merit of Christ, that the
faithful shall never dye eternally. And therefore the Scripture phrase runs
thus; By faith, and through faith we are justified. Not for faith, but for
Christ apprehended by faith. So that it is not faith as an habit, or work in
the soul, as other graces, love and patience, etc. which is of equal worth
and virtue to preserve us that we perish not, but it is Christ alone, who yet
has no virtue or operation in our salvation, and redemption without believing
on our parts, to apply him to us: no more then physic can cure a deadly
disease, or cloth afford any warmth to our bodies, if they be not both applied
unto us: so that the Charter runs between God and man, like as if a King
should grant a great privilege to his subjects, which they should not purchase
at a hard price, or with a great sum, but only upon condition to acknowledge
him their soueraign Lord from whom they had received such great immunities:
which is a point of great comfort to the Christian weak in faith: because it
is not for the worth or excellency of our faith that we must think to stand.
Though a strong faith is an excellent grace, which will make us as a Rock, or
as houses built upon the sure Rock Christ: the storms and sea and winds of
temptation and affliction may beat, but they shall not be able to overthrow us,
because we are built upon a Rock: yet a little and feeble faith, which with
fear and trembling lays hold upon Christ shall never perish, because it is
not the dignity of faith, which conueyes the benefit unto us: but the worth,
excellency and sufficiency of Christ, which is apprehended by faith. It was
not for the virtue of the eye which looked up to the brazen serpent that men
were healed, that had been stung with fiery Serpents; the weakest eyes as well
as the most sharp sighted, if they could but look up to it, were healed: and
the beggar which receives a gift may be fully possessed of it, even with a
trembling and shaking hand, as well as he that has the most steadfast hand. But
though a weak faith, believing in him, may serve the turn, yet faith there
must be, or else no hope for this privilege. Heb. 11.6.
For without faith it is impossible to please God. So that this is that which
puts a difference between the sheep and the goats, the wise and the foolish
virgins, the faithful, and unbelievers. Some say, that believing only without
other good works, will never bring us to life: the which though in some sense we
deny not: yet this is most certain that all other virtues, without faith to
believe in Christ, are nothing worth. This is that vnum necessarium, which the
Gospel requires of us, to believe in Christ; and for want of this, how many
Infidels, Jews and Turks perish everlastingly? even all those moral virtues
of the Heathen, their chastity, justice, temperance, etc. wherewith diverse of
them did abound and exceed many Christians in them, were all but splendida
peccata; (...) 115.
because to the Infidel and unbelieving, all things are impure: so that
notwithstanding all these, if they remain without faith in Christ, they shall
dye. For as there is but one name given under Heaven, by which we must be
saved; which is the blessed and sweet name of Jesus: so is there no way to
attain unto salvation by that name, but by believing in him. But as I have
showed you that this faith to believe is necessary, and a weak faith may be
accepted with God: before I leave the point, it will not be amiss something
more fully to show you the nature of true and saving faith: which consists
not only in believing in Christ in the History, for there is Credere de
Christo, credere Christo, credere in Christum. The first is to believe all is
true which the Scriptures report, concerning the Nature, Offices, and Merits of
Christ: this a man may do, and find no virtue or fruit of it in his own
soul. The second is to believe Christ as we would a man of his word, give
credit to whatsoever he has said: this we may do to the Prophets and
Apostles: but we must come nearer him then so, which is the third, to believe
in him: which implies a dependency and resolution to cleave unto him. As we
apprehend Christ, Phil. 3.12.
so must we likewise be apprehended of Christ: for Faith has (as it were) two
hands, one receiving Christ from God, the other giving the Believer to God; and
both these hands ^t uses at one and the self same time. At the same time that
the Believer applies Christ to his own heart, he applies his heart to Christ,
and cleaues to him with full purpose of ^oule. This was notably shadowed out
under the Ceremonial Law, in the conjunction of the sin-offering which pointed
out Christ, and the burnt-offering, which (as Saint Paul has interpreted it)
more especially signifies the sacrificing of the flesh, the crucifying of the
old Adam. I beseech you therefore brethren, Romans 12.1.
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. True faith offers both
these at once. But too many men's faith is lame on that hand which should offer
the burnt Offering; they only take Christ, but they give not themselves to
Christ: they offer the Sinne-offering without the burnt Offering, and therefore
applying Christ to themselves, and not themselves to Christ, they misapply. It
is therefore, as St. Bernard calls it, Infidelis fiducia, a faithless
confidence for any man to persuade himself, or presume that Christ Jesus is
his Savior, or that he has any part, either in the life or death of Christ,
albeit he continue under the power of sin and Satan. Such a faith, to speak
in the words of the Poet, is fallax fiducia, a confidence whereby men cosen
and deceive themselves, in hoping to attain unto Heaven, though they hold on
in the high way that leads unto Hell. Nay, it is indeed in effect, to
blaspheme and dishonor Christ, by denying (though not in word, yet indeed)
that there is any power in his death, any virtue in his resurrection, any
renewing grace received from him, to sanctify those who truly believe in him.
Turks and Pagans who plainly deny him, do not derogate so much from the
glory of Christ, as do profane professors of his name: tolerabilius enim
lingua quam vita mentitur. The lie (says Saint Augustine) which is made by the
lip, is more tolerable then that which is made by the life. Can Christ dwell
in their hearts by faith (as Saint Paul speaks) and not live in them. Ephesians 3
17. Gal. 2.20.
In whose heart soever Christ is resident by faith, there he reigns, and
disposes him as it seems best to his godly wisdom. Rom, 6.4.
By Baptism we are buried with him into death, that like as Christ was raised
up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life. Col. 3.1.
If we be risen through faith with Christ, we must seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Whosoever truly believes
in Christ conquereth this world. who is he (says Saint John) that overcomes
the world, 1 John 5 5.
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God. They that by faith are
Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Wheresoever there is
a Christian belief, there will also be a Christian life. Credere in Cristum
(says Saint Augustine) est credendo amare, etc. To believe in Christ is
through faith heartily to affect him, and to be really incorporated into him:
so that believing in Christ is more then to comprehend him in the
understanding; it is also to embrace him in our hearts and affections. As
Christ naked without respect of his merits is not the object of our faith; so
our faith, naked without our affectionate desire to be joined to him, is not
the true means to apprehend Christ, and conueigh his merits unto us. This is
that which is required on their parts, who partake of the privilege here
promised. The task is not hard: it is not to give a great ransom for our
souls; so the poor could not enjoy it: or to discourse accuratly, so the
simple and unlearned could not attain unto it; or to go a great journey to
find Christ, so the lame and impotent might miss of it, but only to believe
in him, which is a matter possible with every man. whosoever believes in him
shall never dye, and so I come to the last part of my Text, the privilege here
granted. Exemption from Death. Death has a threefold: acception. It is either
natural, spiritual, or eternal. Whosoever believes in Christ is exempted
from all these. The two later only have properly the name of Death. For Death,
to speak properly, is either a separation from God here in his Kingdom of
grace, or a separation from him hereafter in his Kingdom of glory. Not to
partake of his saving grace here in this world, is to be spiritually dead; and
not to be crowned with his glory in the world to come, is to be eternally dead.
They who have only vitam naturae, the life of nature here in this world, and
have not vitam gratiae, the life of grace, are spiritually dead, according to
that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.6.
She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives, and according to that of
our Savior, Mat. 8.22.
Let the dead bury the dead. It may be said of such as it was of the Angel of
the Church of Sardis, They have a name that they live, Reu. 3.1.
but are dead. So they who in the next world have only vitam naturae, the life
of nature, and have not vitam gloriae, the life of glory, are eternally dead.
From both these deaths, all true Believers in Christ Jesus are exempted, for
they live spiritually, and eternally.

That the true believers in Christ Jesus enjoy a spiritual life is evident,
according to that of S. John 1.12, 13. They that believe on his Name, are borne
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
Besides their natural birth they have a spiritual. As many as by faith are in
Christ Jesus, they are new creatures, they receive a new life: so likewise do
they enjoy eternal life, according to that of our Savior: This is life
eternal, by faith, John 17.3.
to know the Father to be the only True God, and whom he has sent Jesus
Christ. All the question seems to be concerning their exemption from the
natural death: but if we diligently observe their condition, it will easily
appear that they are exempted from that death also. For as they who enjoy
natural life are said to be dead, because they are deprived of the spiritual
life: so they who are naturally dead may be said to be alive, because they
enjoy the life of glory. The natural death to them especially is changed into
a sleep. Death to them is not exitus, but transitus: not obitus, but abitus:
not a dying, but a departing. A transmigration and exodus out of our earthly
pilgrimage, unto our heavenly home. Fratres mortui (says Saint Augustine) non
sunt amissi, sed praemissi. Profectio est (says Tertullian) quam putas mortem.
A passage from the valley of death to the land of the living. That all true
Believers departing hence are still alive, Math. 22 32.
is evident by the words of our Savior, that God who is the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, is not the God of the dead, but of the living. If the father
of the faithful be still alive, no doubt but so are all his children, who
departed hence, in the faith of their father. Death to them is but a sleep. So
is it said of David, of Solomon, 1. Kin 2.10. -- 11.43.
and of other Kings of Israel, and of Judah, that they slept with their fathers.
So in the New Testament, such as are dead in the Lord, are said to sleep in
Christ. 1. Cor. 11.30 -- 15.18. Job. 11.11.
So great a resemblance is there between sleep and death, that sleep is
called by Ovid, mortis imago, by Virgil, consanguineus Lethi* Seneca calls it
the brother, and Hesiode, the Sister of death. Sleep is a kind of death, and
death a kind of sleep. 1. These. 4.13, 14.
I would not have you to be ignorant (says the Apostle) brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. The Apostle says that the Christ, the
Lord (who gives life to all things) is dead: and mortal man (says he)
sleeps* which manner of speech at the first sight may seem strange, but
there is good reason for it. For we therefore sleep, because Christ died. His
death made our death but a sleep. Christ by his bitter death, made death sweet
unto us, made it, I say, but the very shadow of death: so that death cannot
hurt us, because Christ has taken away sin the sting thereof. O death where
is thy sting? 1. Cor. 15.55.
Lastly, though their bodies sleep in the grave, yet their souls live a
glorified life in heaven. So that the Saints departed are dead in their worst
part only, but living in their best, even in that wherein they desire to live
most, as Martial an Heathen Poet divinely, Sed lugere nefas: nam quite (Prisce)
reliquit
Viuit qua voluit viuere part magis.


Since death then to the true Believers in Christ is but a sleep, a passage
from misery to eternal happiness, Let us sing with old Simeon a nunc
Dimittis, and rejoice that our warfare, all our combats and conflicts with the
world the flesh and the devil are ended. So long as we are in this world, we
must continually fight against those lusts which fight against our souls. When
we have conquered covetousness, lust rises up against us; when carnal
concupiscence is suppressed, ambition takes place; when ambition and pride are
foiled, drunkenness endeavors to draw us on to eternal destruction. I know
that the men of this world count it their bliss, to be carried away by the
world, the flesh and the Devil, and to do service unto them. But the children
of God account it their bane, to be in any the least subjection unto them, and
therefore do they continually band themselves against them. Blame them not
therefore, though they rejoice when the combat is ended, and all their enemies
conquered, and crowned. What Soldier is not glad when the combat is ended,
and his enemy conquered? who in a great tempest at Sea, would not gladly be in
a quiet and calm harbor? and who in the sea of this tempestuous world, would
not give this world to arrive at the haven of eternal happiness: here is
nothing but wailing and weeping: Ioh. 16.20.
Who would not be there where all tears are wiped away? Our Savior told his
Apostles, being sorrowful for his departure. If ye loved me, ye would
rejoice, Ioh. 14.24.
because I go to my Father. To me (says S. Paul) to live is Christ, and to
dye is gain. Phil. 1.21.
Let him therefore dread death, who is not borne again of water and of the
Holy Ghost, but remains enthralled to the flames of hell fire. Let him fear
to die, who shall pass from the natural death, to eternal. Let him I say, be
daunted, when death draws nigh, who, when he shall pass out of this world,
shall eternally be tormented in the flames of hell fire: but let all true
Believers in Christ Jesus (whose home is heaven) with the Traveler think the
time long till they return home to their own country, where after the
wearisome travel of this life, they shall live eternally in all rest and
happiness.

Thus much of my Text.

Give me leave to add a few words about the particular occasion of this our
meeting, which is evident by the object here before our eyes, and makes unto
us a visible Sermon of our mortality. For it is a dead corpse, which was within
these few days the receptacle of the everliving soul of Mistress Elizabeth
Gouge. A soul which while it remained in that receptacle, enabled the same,
through the good grace of God infused into it, to do much honor to God, and
good to man. Which that I may the better demonstrate unto you, I will make bold
to set before you a brief, just, and true view of the whole course of her
life: that, though the substance of her soul be now taken from among us to be
among those i^ spirits which are made perfect in heaven and her body to be
covered from ou^ sight in the earth, in assured hope o^ the Resurrection
thereof to eternal life yet her graces may remain fresh among us for the
greater consolation of her friends, and imitation of us all.

She was the daughter of such Parents as while they lived were of very good
note and name. Her father Mr Henry Calton, was a Mercer and Citizen in London
of good worth. Her mother was of a good Gentleman's house, Mr Cois of Stubbers
in Essex.

Both her Parents died while she was young, and had not her Mothers own brother
Master William Coys, taken upon him the tuition of his Sisters children, they
had been made a prey. But he like a good Mordecai brought up his said Sisters
children, which were three in number, a son, who was drowned in swimming
while he was a youth, and two daughters; the eldest whereof was this
Gentlewoman, whose Funeral we now solemnize. The younger still lives being
married to the younger brother of this Gentlewomans husband. Such was the said
Guardians care over these Orphans, as, after he had trained them up some while
in his own house, for their better education, he put them forth to board in a
pious, painful, faithful Ministers house, Master Huckles by name, of
Hatfield-Broad-oake in Essex, whose wife had a great name, and that not without
just desert, for skill, and faithful care in training up young Gentlewomen.
There were the two suruiuing foresaid Orphans, Elizabeth and Mary Calton
educated six years together, and there were they well instructed in piety,
in modesty, in good house-wifery, and much skill in all such works, as
appertained to such persons.

From the said Ministers house the said two Orphans were brought to Stratford
Bow in Middlesex, the elder being about seventeen year old, and the younger
scarce fifteen.

In the said Stratford Bow there dwelt an ancient Gentleman Master Thomas Gouge
by name, who well liking the person, grace, and carriage of the said elder
Orphane, sent for his eldest son Master William Gouge, then fellow of Kings
College in Cambridge, now Minister and Preacher of Gods Word in Blacke-Friers
London, who being brought to the said Gentlewoman, after some mutual
conferences one with another, they took such liking one of another, as on the
11 of February in the first year of King James they were with full consent of
all friends on both parts married together, and continued like Isaak and Rebekah
faithful, and loving yoake-fellowes till the 26 of this present October, in
the 1 year of our now Royal Sovereign King Charles, on which dismal day
irresistible death, made an irrecouerable diremption betwixt them. Such respect
did this Gentlewoman bear to the Ministry of Gods Word, that when it was
told her that her suter had diuerted his studies to Divinity, and intended to
be a Preacher, she answered, I am so far from disliking a man of that
profession, as of all other callings, I most desire an Husband, being otherwise
well qualified, of that function. A pious mind in a maiden so young, and in a
Gentlewoman of so good means as she was! To her eternal comfort she had her
desire accomplished. And answerably did she carry herself, A pious, prudent,
provident, painful, careful, faithful, helpful, grave, modest, sober,
tender, loving Wife, Mother, Mistress, Neighbor. Many were the graces which
made her acceptable in Gods sight, amiable in her Husbands eyes, and
commendable among all that well knew her. But that I may keep my self within
some bounds, I will especially insist on four, wherein she made her self a
pattern worthy of admiration and imitation; These were Sobriety, Sedulitie,
Charity, Piety.

1. Her countenance, her conference, her carriage, her apparel did all give
evidence of her Grave, Gracious, Sober, Matron-like mind, whereby she did much
grace her Husbands Vocation.

2. She has left behind her many evidences of her indefatigable sedulity,
Pro. 31.^0.^
even such as the Wiseman commends in a virtuous Woman, Vallances, Cup
bord-cloathes, Quissions, and many such like useful thing, artificially
wrought with her own fingers, besides all her own, husbands, and childrens
wearing linen wrought by her self and maidens, whom by her own example she
made diligent. The shortness of daylight, she much helped by candle light.
She carefully kept Saint Paul's precept to keep at home. Tit. 2.5.
She was not like those whom he sharply reproves for wandering about from house
to house, and for being not only idle, 1. Tim. 5.13.
but tatlers also and busybodies. She utterly disliked such: she cared not
for their company. These commendable virtues of keeping at home, and keeping
silence; retiredness, and taciturnitie, made many mis-censure her of too much
stateliness.

3. Her charity exercised it self at home and abroad. At home, toward the
head and members of her Family. Abroad, toward her neighbors and strangers.
She was truly (...) and (...), an entire lover of her husband, and children.
Her love to her Husband made her to yield all dutiful respect to him, and to
be very careful over him, and that both well to nourish and cherish him, and
also to free him from the trouble of all those things which she in her place
could manage: For she most prudently and prouidently ordered the affairs of
her house, whereby he had the more leisure to attend his public function. Her
love to her Husband was further manifest by that delight she took in his
company: It was grievous to her to be where he was not, except urgent and
necessary employments required as much: neither did she care her self to go
abroad unless her Husband went with her. And when they were absent one from
another, they made a supply of that bodily absenee by continual intercourse of
Letters one to another, in which Letters she testified much piety, wisdom
and love. If at any time he had been sick, she was very tender over him, and
very careful to provide all things needful for him in that case. Her entire
love to him was many ways testified to the very last act of her life. The
longer they lived together, the more did this love show it self.

Her care over her children did also declare her true love of them. She did not
only bear them, and bring them forth into the world, which necessity forces
all mothers to do, but with her own milk she nursed seven, as many as
possibly she could, which too many mothers do too much neglect. It was not
sore nipples or breasts, nor an Infants wrangling, nor breaking her sleep in
the night, nor any other disturbance that could make her neglect this bounden
duty. Her tenderness over her children was not diminished by their growth in
years: yet as they increased in understanding, so wisely she ordered her
authority over them, as with a child-like fear they much reverenced her. For
well she knew how to keep both children and servants in dutiful awe. As she
was careful well to nourish, so also well to nurture her children. In
nurturing them, though she were not negligent of their civil behavior, and
good manners, yet her greatest care and pains was like Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5. and
3.15. Ephesians. 6.4.
to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, teaching them, so
soon as they were capable, the Principles of Religion, wherein some of them so
profited, as before they were three years old, they were able distinctly to
answer all the questions of a Catechism which her Husband published. Many good
instructions also from time to time they received from her after they were put
forth, Prou 31.1.
wherein she showed her self like the good mother of Lemuel.

Her poor Neigbours also, as she had notice of their need, tasted of her
charity: for very ready she was and forward to visit the sick, and to send
them succor. It was her usual practice, on the Lords days specially, to send
some hot, wholesome refreshing to such as needed it.

This her charity extended it self also to strangers. For where she had a
quarterly allowance of her Husband for her own proper use, she set a part a
good part thereof for charitable uses, and so dedicated it to that purpose, as
she accounted it sacrilege to employ any part thereof to any other use. Out of
this sacred stock she was ready to contribute to all charitable motions made
in the Church: to all private Collections made known unto her; and to many,
that time after time came to her Husband for relief, besides those, whom she
her self, with her own hands, of her own motion relieved. So as herein also
she was like to that good woman whom the wiseman thus commends, Prou. 31. 20.
She stretches out her hands to the poor.

4. Her Piety, as it was the best of her graces, whereby all the rest were
seasoned, so was it not less eminent then the rest. For she was a conscionable
obseruer of the Lords Day, and a constant frequenter of the week day Lectures
where she inhabited. She did both her self diligently and reuerendly attend
to the daily exercises of piety in her house, and also caused her children and
servants to do the like. She had also her set hours every day, which secretly
betwixt God and her self she spent in holy Devotions. With her own hand she
penned sundry devout Prayers, whereof some being for helps to humble her soul
the more before God, were very large. She has also left written by her self
many divine directions for Devotions. She further tied her self by a set daily
task to read the holy Scriptures, whereby she was able readily to answer any
question propounded about the History and Doctrine of the Scriptures. She did
also spend much time in reading English books of divinity, whereof she had a
pretty Library. She carefully put in practice this precept of the Apostle to
wives, Let them ask their Husbands at home. 1 Cor. 14 35.
Her piety left her not till her breath left her. For (to come to the time of
her sickness and departure) being long weak before her departure, and great
with Child, she was disabled from doing so much work as in her health she
used to do, yet was she not idle, but spent the more time in reading and
conferring with her Husband, and that especially, about evidences of true
grace, and assurances of salvation. It pleased the Divine providence about a
year and a quarter before, when she was great with Child, to visit her with
a Dropsy, though she was very temperate in her diet, no Wine bibber. Of her
Liver she complained from her youth, so as questionless her ill-disposed Liver
was the cause of her disease. After her delivery of that Child, through Gods
blessing on the means, which her good Neighbor, Master Doctor Argent, an
ancient, experienced, and skillful Physician prescribed, she was recovered: and
continued very well from September, 1624 till Febr following, when conceiving
again with Child, the Dropsy returned again. Notwithstanding the return of
that Disease, she was on the sixth of October 1625 delivered of her thirteenth
and last Child, which was a son, and retained such strength as ordinarily
she was wont to do in the time of her Childbed, so as on the baptizing day
she sat up, as women in that time use to do. But before she gathered such
strength as might enable her to take Physic for her Disease, death began to
seize upon her. For on the very day wherein the foresaid Doctor Argent had
prescribed such Physic as was fit for one in her case, which was the
fourteenth day after her delivery, the violence of her Disease was such, as
accustomed rest, and use of understanding was taken from her. This made her
talk much: but in all her talk not an impious word came from her. (Her tongue
was never accustomed thereto) But that it might appear how fast fixed, and
deeply rooted piety was in her, in her greatest weakness and extremity, if any
Broth, Drink, or other sustenance were offered her, she would lift up her eyes
to Heaven, and crave a blessing of him whom she knew to be above. In that her
restless time, she was much persuaded by her Husband to do what he advised.
To short questions, especially about her Christian faith and hope, she would
give short, but very pithy and comfortable answers. After she had thus remained
two whole days, it pleased the Lord to give some rest, whereby for two days
she recovered good use of her understanding, and made good use thereof, by
giving many good evidences of her sted faith in Jesus Christ. Which after she
had done, the former violence of her Disease returned upon her, and soon
deprived her of her sweet breath. Thus would God take her away even in her
calling, in the time of her Childbed, wherein for a woman to dye, is as for a
Soldier to dye in battle; yea, as for a Preacher to dye in the Pulpet* They
that in Scripture are recorded to dye in that time, are recorded to dye as
Saints, as the Wives of Iaakob and Phinehas: and so undoubtedly did this pious
Matron; whose soul, ever in that moment wherein by Prayer it was commended to
God, ascended to God, with whom she now, as we have great and just cause to
hope, reigns in everlasting glory: whether God bring us also in our time,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be
all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

The memory of the just is blessed. FINIS.

