A COMPENDIous Treatise entitled, De re militari, containing principal orders
to be observed in Martial affairs.

Written in the Spanish tongue, by that worthy and famous Captain, Luis
Gutierres de la vega, Citizen of Medina del Campo.

AND NEWLY TRANSlated into English, by Nicholas Lichefild.

Ianuarij primus. 158^.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East.

To the right Worshipful Master Philip Sydney, Esquire.
THIS little Treatise (Right Worshipful) entitled, De re militari: being
lately found in the Forte in Irelande, where the Italians and Spaniards had
fortified thesemlues, by fortune came unto wy hands by a soldier of good
experience, who latly served there: which after I had perused (and taken the
devise of some of better understanding then my self in those affairs, which
very much liked and allowed the work) I was greatly boldned and encouraged to
enterprise the Translation of the same, partly because these principal orders
are always to be observed in warlike government, and chifely because in our
English tongue, I find not the like extant, for the necessary instruction and
general commodity of our common Soldiers: which brief introduction (being
common in our language) may be an inducement to betrer knowledge, and further
understanding, whereby in time our seruitours by good obseruaunce and imitation,
may attain the like perfection, that all other foreign Nations do generally
embrace. And finding not any more forward then your Worship, to further and
favor this Martial knowledge (being of your self most ready and aduenterous
in all exercises of feats of war and chiualry) I have therefore presumed (as
unknown) to dedicate this brief work unto you, which as a simple token of my
good will, I do humbly pray you to accept in good part, not doubting but that
under your protection the same shall be sufficientlye defended and well lyked,
and those imperfections in me the Translator, the better borne withal, wherein
I have rather observed the true and litterall sense, then any ways varied
from the order of the matter, as the Author sets it forth. And even so
referring my self and slender travel unto your courteous acceptance, wishing
you that increase of worship and prosperity, as every ways your noble mind
deserves, do even so take my leave. From London the.9. of December. 1581.

Your Worships humbly to command, Nicholas Lichfild.

The prologue of the Author to the Readers.
MY old and feeble age which now has fully atteined the number of lx years,
with the sundry requests of many noble men my very friends, which many times
have given me occasion to yield hereunto, moves me now (my fatal,
uncertain end approaching) to satisfy and accomplish their reasonable desire,
and therefore I have now enterprised to show them in a small treatise, by
noting, that which many times they have entreated me by word of mouth, a matter
that has been thought by them I could better perform (then in truth I am
able) by reason of the long continuance that in the art De re militari, my
troubles and travel has brought me unto. And although y^ some have written of
this matter heretofore very excellently (with great perfection,) yet for that
those times and service the which they did write of, does differ much from that
which is at this present. It cannot be, but this my travel (at leastwise if it
deserve to be called travel) will somewhat profit them, which truly I have
taken in hand but only for pleasure and recreation. And forasmuch as that
which is already written of this matter, is but of a few authors, which were
well known, and if there were many more, yet it cannot be ordered by their
rules and precepts without great inconvenience, for truly in this matter there
would be great want within our time, if there were no order by art for to place
in proportion, whatsoever number be it great or small, ye which ought to be
esteemed and more chiefly observed, then those rules which binds and
compels with prescription of number by limitation, and mark appointed them
as though that there they should end, which is to be amplified and increased
unto such a greatness as the number does require, and this may be spoken of
many, that I do it of a new invention, if there were not many others that
read this little treatise, which will affirm themselves to know the same,
the which gives me occasion not to offer this my rude work unto such, but
unto those unskillful soldiers as are not instructed in the art of ordering,
or have any light or knowledge what they ought to do. Therefore unto such as
are most excellent Masters and Captains, there is no order but that they have
perfect, no device but they have seen, no wars but that they have been in,
nor no other science but that they do understand. Unto such therefore the whole
judgment ought to be left, forasmuch as Fortune and Nature has endued them
with so great value, whereby they deserve to be more advanced then those
hoarie heads of lx. years of experience, unto whom has all things been
contrary, for not allowing or having any regard unto strange things, but
esteeming more their own proper doings, whose knowledge cannot be less then
this that I set forth.

I do not mean to publish this to such like persons of understanding, but
rather I do request them to advertise me of my ignorance, for that the same
may be amended and corrected that is amiss. And also I shall desire them if
there be any thing in this which before was unknown unto them, that they
would in good part friendlye accept the same at their discreations, for my
intent is only to write unto those that are affectioned unto matters of the
war, and to the art of ordering, not desirous to stay upon a long
experience to see the same done, without there be an order to help them, or
art to make them perfect, to such I do pray, desire, and earnestly request,
that they do not desist from so worthy an intent, since that order that we do
principallye set forth and declare, is so marvelous and wonderful.

For by the same we do see the day and night is governed, by this the bodylye
health of man is preserved, all Cities and Towns well ordered and maintained,
and by the same, Kingdoms are sustained, vpholden, and kept in peace, and the
people in quietness and tranquilitye, the which order in matters of war,
they ought to have in like regard as in that of a City, that is well
governed, yea, far better, for in one only City, the hurt or loss of ill
government is therein enclosed, but the lack of order in a Camp or Army of
men in time of necessitye and approach of enimyes, oftentimes has been the
only loss of sundry kingdoms. The which being known unto the Majesty of
Princes, and to those that does govern in their high Counsels of war, has
bestowed such offices upon such excellent grave persons of understanding, to
whom they may most assuredlye commit and give all care and charge thereof,
leaving the same to their most prudent knowledge.

I do leave to speak of those excellent Generalles, the which are at this
present, whose praise I dare not with my pen to touch, but rather refer that
to others, who can better set forth their worthy commendation, and it is
sufficient for me to be thankful that GOD has given us them from above, for
the government of the earth.

And thus thou godly Reader which art affectioned unto this art of a
Souldyer, do not give over, nor cease not to proceed in this manly enterprise
and pretense, for by the same thou shall reap most sweet and delectable
pleasure and reward, that is ^^ayed for thee, and besides shall live in an
exercise, that is greatly esteemed, from whence thou shall obtain honor,
which is thy last desire. And now first you must understand, that it is
necessary to abandonne all such faults, as are accustomed to be, at the
Marching of a Company, of whose disorder commonly chances great dangers
and inconveniences, because the Captains have not commonly that great respect
and care to the charge that does apperteine unto them. And therefore I will
declare how they shall march and be governed, and of their obedience to the
order, the which is given them by their Officers, the which shall be divided
into three parts, beginning after the order following.

THE FIRST PART, De re militari.
Of the order which ought to be observed, in the marching forward of a company
of soldiers, from the place where they are lodged. Cap. 1.
AS for marching from the alodgment, from whence a Captain with his company
are in a readiness to depart, this order must be observed. First, the
Captain must cause to proclaim, that all such Soldiers which are entertained
to serve under the Ensign and government of such a Captain, prepare
themselves to be in readiness, with their armor and furniture the next day
following in the morning, which usually is at the dawning of the day* because
the company may march forward a reasonable journey.

How such a company of soldiers, should be provided with furniture necessary.
Cap. 2.
THe night before their departure, the Sergeant of the Band, by commandment
from his Captain or Lieuetenant has to deal with the Rulers of the City,
Town or Village where they are lodged, that they prepare such necessary
Baggage as the company shall want. In the provision of which furniture, the
Corporal of every Squadron, shall make inquiry among his company of their
present want, and then to keep an account or reckoning, what is delivered over
and beside the necessaries, delivered to the Captain or his Lieuetenaunt.

The which provision shall be brought to a place or house in the Town, and
there particular repetition to be made, in such sort, that no Officer take
without order, more then justly does appertain unto them, and that equally to
be divided unto every Squadron. A Squadron properly is the number of xxv. men,
of which number each Corporal has charge, and every under Corporal shall
have the like charge of such numbers, as shall be committed unto them.

How the Soldiers shall join or come together, and in what order. Cap. 3.
IN the morning after repertition of their Baggage, whilst the Soldiers
prepare themselves for their departure, the drum player ought to repair to
their Ensigns, to the house of the Ancient Bearer, which is the place of
meeting. And then the Sergeant of the Band, as his Soldiers repair and come
together, shall march in a round or Muster to see if any want, and daily to
accustom themselves to attend upon their Ensign or Aunntient.

Of the order and manner how they shall depart from the place where they were
lodged. Cap. 4.
AFter the greatest part of the company are joined, the Ensign shall march
out of the Town or lodgement with the soldiers in good order, and when they
are passed a reasonable space from the Town, they shall there stay. And the
Sergeant of the Band shall return back again to the Town, to see if any of
his company remain behind, and finding any, to compel them to follow and
repair to their Ensign, and to rebuke or reprehend them for their delay and
slacknesse: in such wise that they may understand, that they ought to be in
subjection to their Princes Officers.

How the Baggage must pass, when the company is commanded to march forward.
Cap. 5.
THe Officers has to command ye Baggage to be placed in the Vangard, before
the Ensign. This is to be understood, where there are no enemies. But where
the enemy is expected, there shall ye baggage be placed either in the Vangarde
or Reregard at the discretion of the Officers. But if it happen to be appointed
in the Vangard it shall go about the length of a Crossebowe shot, before the
company, so that always they keep in their sight for the sauegarde of the
carriage. Provided always, that one Squadron, of Hargubusiers, or Pike men
shall go jointly in defense of the baggage, as by daily lot ought to be
appointed for that purpose, and the officer that has the charge of the
Squadron, which commonly is called Cabo de Squadra, shall have respect when the
Ensign does stay which is meant only to tarry for such Soldiers as come
dragging behind with weariness in the Reregard. The like must be done with
them yt has the charge of the baggage. And then seeing ye maine company begin
to march they then ought to march also, until they come to their alodgment. But
before the company overtake them, they shall stay and abide with their baggage
about ye length of.2. or.3. shot of a Crossebow, before they come to ye
appointed place of lodging, to be advertised in what part of the Town, City,
or Village, they shall enter, following their Ensign.

How, and in what order they shall enter to the alodgement. Cap. 6.
AS soon as the maine company are come to the place where the baggage abides
their coming, all such Soldiers that have Horses, shall alyght from their
horses, and accompany their Ensign, entering into the Town in good order. The
Captain ought to have special care that none of his company presume to take
up lodging without a brief or billet from the Harbinger: for otherwise should
appear small duty or regard of the Officers, and among the principallest and
chiefest soldiers, this rule ought first to be observed, for an apparaunt
example to all the rest, to the intent, utterly to banish disorder.

How and in what order a company of Hargubusiers ought to enter into the Town.
Cap. 7.
IF the company be Hargubusiers, they shall enter in this sort. First, the
Corselettes shall be placed in the Vangard, with a Drum player. And if the
order be that they shall go three in a Rank, the Drum player shall go
after the third Rank. But if the order be by five and five, the Drum shall
then go after the fifth rank, and then shall follow the Ensign with another
Drum player and a Flute. But there must be a pretty space between the
Corselettes and the Hargubusiers, by reason of the Ensign, Drum player, and
Flute, because they must be placed between the corselets and hargubuseirs, and
the corselets must each carry an ha^berde.

If the company be Pikemen, then must they observe this order in their entry.
Cap. 8.
IN a company of Pikemen, the hargubuseiers shall march in their vangard with
their drum player in the rank that he shall be appointed, in the rank of
three or five, and then shall march the Ensign with the drum player and
Fluite: before the Pikemen shall march the corslettes of the company, and in
the reregard the Cabos de squadra of Pikemen which should be corselets. And
now must the company of Pikemen go in the reregarde or else the
hargubuseirs, the baggage of each shall go near unto the camp.

The order to be observed in going to the alongement. Cap. 9.
BEfore the company depart from the place where they are lodged, the
Harbenger shall depart three or four hours, or a whole day before the army,
and have made provision of lodging before their coming. And then he shall
yield or give unto the Sergeant, a brief note according to the number that he
has in his memorial to divide them to their lodging.

How a company ought to be lodged. Cap. 10.
THe best Inn or lodging is to be provided for the Captain, and the second
is likewise to be given to the Ancient bearer, and Sergeant of the band, next
unto them must be lodged the Drumme-plaiers and Fluite, and then the Squadron
of the Captain, and after they are placed, must likewise be placed the
squadron that is appointed for the guard or watch, and then those that has
already served in that guard, and last of all the residue of the company.

The Harbenger ought always to take up lodging for a greater number then is in
his memorial, not to the intent to benefit himself, but rather that thereby
may remain, and so be lodging for other poor trauaylers.

How the watch ought to be set. Cap. 11.
THe company being come to the lodgeing of the Auntient-bearer in good order
before they depart toward their lodgeing, the guard or watch must be warned
to make them ready to attend that night on the Captain, which watch must be
of the Captains Squadron, and the next night following another Squadron of
Hargubuseires, and so consequently all the other Squadrons.

And then must follow the Pikemen in the same order, and when every Squadron
has observed his course, then must they begin again as at the first, so that
they may always keep a good order in their marching forward, and to be
experimented in their duetifull service of their Prince.

How their lodging shall be appointed for avoiding of briberie. Cap. 12.
A Vigilant care must be had that no soldier have appointed for him, more then
his needful lodgeing, and therewith to content themselves, be it either for a
special or a particular number. And because that occasion should be avoided of
chopping and changing of lodging for interest or money, and also oppressing
the Cities, Towns, or Villages where they lie. The officers' must have of this
point a special care, but principally the Captain, his Liefetenaunt, or
Ensigne-bearer, on whom the charge perticularly lies.

How the baggage shall return. Cap. 13.
THE baggage shall not be transported from one place to another without great
necessity, because one town may not be more ouercharged then another. And
when they shall return to the place where they were appointed, they shall
yield account of their receiving, to the intent that no Souldyer loyter
behind from one day to another, as many times they use to do, which is a
great disorder, and the only fault lies in the officers that ought to have
care thereof.

How poor husbandmen ought not to be oppressed. Cap. 14.
AFter the whole company are lodged, the officers appointed ought in the night
season to go from house to house to know and understand of the behavior of
the Soldiers, to this effect, that the inhabitaunts be not molested or
disquieted by their company, requiring impertinent, unlawful, or more then is
needful at their hosts hands. This charge does only apperteine to the
Ensign bearer and Sergeaunt of the band. And the Captain ought to have regard
to admonish those Officers to look to their charge, and see that it be
observed.

How the watch must be set, and the manner how to remove the Scout. Cap. 15.
EVery night watch must be kept as the company proceed on their journey,
because when they happen to come among enemies, they shall be better willing
through their former experience and practice, and also how they may know to
appoint their scout, and the same to change at their hours, in such sort that
those which are of the first watch, may call the second at his time, and the
second the third, unto the fourth, one giving advise to another with the watch
word, that the Sergeaunt shall give them, keeping the same in great secrecy,
but the watch word the Sergeant must have at the mouth of the Captain, or his
Liefetenaunt in his absence. In the Summer season they use to divide the watch
into three parts of the night, and in the winter into four. But this order is
reserved unto him that has the whole charge.

How the watch must be chosen. Cap. 16.
ONe Watch must call another, as has been already declared, so that the
Sargeant may not be over troubled with that charge, at the least not being in
place of danger of enemies. Yet nevertheless, he is not to be excused from
often visiting of the Watch, by mean whereof, he may have better understanding
to know such Soldiers, as he may best trust in time of necessity. In the
morning the body of the Guard or Watch shall come abroad with sound of Drum, by
order accustomed, if there be no cause to the contrary.

How the Watch must be charged or set, and where they meet or repair
together. Cap. 17.
THe Watch must be charged at the Ensign, and join together at the door, where
the Cabo de Squadra lies, that has the charge or lot to watch that night. And
if it happen to be the Captains Squadron, then shall the Watch meet at the
Sargeants lodging. Sometimes the Ensign bearer enters into his lot of
watching: But it is no ordinarye thing, because it is the office of the
Sergeant.

How lodging ought to be demanded. Cap. 18.
THe Harbinger in providing of the alodgment for the company, ought to join
with the Ruler and other Officers of the City or Town, where the Army
should be lodged, and to demand of them the books of Subsidy or other
taskes paid by the Communaltie of that place, to the intent, that every
inhabitant or husbandman may supply according to their ability, and not to
burden the poor, and let the rich escape free.

How the Fruits, Vines, and Orchardes, ought to be kept from the spoiling of
the soldiers. Cap. 19.
WHen it should happen a company to march, near unto any place, where are
Vines, Orchards, or any kind of fruits, wherein Soldiers might do any hurt:
The Captain or Ensign bearer ought to be advertised of such place or places,
before their departure from their alodgment: because before the company come to
that place they stay all together, and then to march jointly together, and that
a Cabo de Squadra with certain Soldiers be sent before, to guard the place
where hurt might be. For if this order were not, great spoil would be made by
unruly persons in poor men's ground.

How every Soldier ought to content himself, with the lodging that is
allotted for him. Cap. 20.
WHen the company is lodged in any place where they pass, proclamation must be
made, how the Captain commands on great penalty, that no Soldier presume
to abuse by any means his Host, Hostess or Familye, and that they content
themselves with such things, as shall be given them, without constraining or
compelling them to any more. And that it is the Captains will, that if any man
can justly complain of any Soldier of that company, he may safely come to
the Captain to complain, and they shall be heard, and the offender punished.

This order must be observed, when one company or many marches by themselves.

How a discord should be pacified, if any happen between a company of
soldiers, and the Towns men. Cap. 21.
WHen any Town chance to fall at strife, with a company of Soldiers that are
lodged in their Town, and the discord chance to grow about or for want of
lodging, which oftentimes does happen, the Captain ought to proclaim, that
all his Soldiers forthwith repair to his Ensign, whether they be armed or
unarmed, upon good consideration there to attend and do the thing that shall
be necessary and convenient, to the service of their Prince, and in this sort
to pacify their contention with great foresight, considering that all such
alterations are against the Princes service, and being gathered and come
together, they shall retire by the Captains commandment to the place that
unto him shall seem convenient, for their greater quietness and pacification.
For otherwise the broile would not be ended, without great hurt of both parties.

Of the order that ought to be observed, to such effect that the companies may
be always prepared in a readiness to make a squadron, and where both Pike men
and Hargubusiers ought to be placed. cap. 22.
Armor and weapon being delivered to each soldier of a company, whether it be
at going on shipboord, or otherwise where they shall be received. To every company
shall be appointed one part of Hargubusiers, and two of Pike men, and if there be
any want, it shall appear by the general muster and copy of the number of
them, and being found not equal in order, the Hargubusiers that were more
then need, must be taken and placed where the want is, and the like among the
Pike men. This account ought every Captain to observe among his company, so
that in this wise they shall be to most purpose in service. And even so the
General ought to give commandment to the Camp masters in their steed, to
whom the charge does appertain in thirdes.

THE SECOND PART, De re militari.
Of the companies of Hargubusires which shall be needful in every third.
Cap. 23.
IN an host or army that is to be ordained, the companies ought to be
divided into thirds, because they may understand to what party they may
repair, and in every tierce or third, there should be two companies of
hargubusires, besides those which are resited for a third, of the companies of
Pikemen, the which shall serve in diverse sorts, as sometimes ^o run the
field, and other whiles to take victualles from the enemy, also to defend or
keep passages, as bridges, or rivers, keeping them to their use and fafetie:
also to Skirmish, give Camisada, lie in Ambush, to keep watch in the day
season, at the Gates of Cities, or other places that ought to be guarded, and
for all manner of service needful, which is not conueniet to the companies of
Pikemen, nor yet may not be served of them, as well for mountains, straight
passages, and other difficult places, because Piks are troublesome and cannot
be in such places so manuable, as speed and agilitie requires, as
Hargubusiers, who may enter into Squadron alwaias, not having other service
wherein to be employed.

Of the ways and manner that some has writ to ordeine a Squadron. Cap. 24.
SOme Captains and men experimented in the wars have written sundry ways
differing one from another in ordeyning a Squadron. And after the ordeining
thereof, they have not liked the style, or found the same profitable. As for
example, some use Triangle wise, some Cross wise, and some in a round or ring,
the which most men cannot bring to pass except the number were few, likewise
they cannot march or avail themselves, but only being firm, for if they
would otherwise march, of force they must go out of order, according as they
have written, and I my self have seen by the authors of them.

How they may be ordered touching their weapons. Cap. 25.
THere is some ways to ordeine a Squadron in square, which is, when it does
concern one sort of weaponne, which then must march in row, when the Ensigns
comes to the Artillery, or to the place which should be assigned to them
in order, according to the number of the row, and the disposition of the place
or ground, where they should join with the Soldiers, being few or many that
each Ensign has, or each Captain had gathered together, without any delay
of the Ensign bearer. They ought to have such soldiers in their company that
should be diligent at all times to attend and repair to the Ensign, for to
go unto such place as they shall be commanded to repair unto. And as the
soldiers come gathering together to their Ensigns, then shall they proceed on
row, so many on a row, as their account or reckoning does specify. The chief
sergeant according to his number of soldiers which he has, at which instant it
is not to have regard to who^ the vangard does apperteine, neither maine
battle, or reregard of every term nor company. For at the time of necessity
they cannot be ordained to assign, or give that which unto every third or
company does count the same day. In this form or manner none shall be agreeued,
because the thing may not otherwise be done by reason of the damage or disorder
that might ensue, in the delay, so that in the same manner as they go joining
together, even in the same form, they shall go ordaining the rows, and having
time, there shall be given to each tierce or company, that which pertains
unto them, either of vangard, maine battle, or reregard. The enemies not being
so nigh, yt the order may be kept as is declared.

The manner how the Tudescos ordained their Quadrant. Cap. 26.
THe nation or people called Tudescos used to ordeine their manner of Quadrant
as follows. As they went gathering togetheir Ensigns according to the number
which should be set in order, understanding how many perteined to a rank, but
whilst the rank was not equal according to the number, they abide in form
of a bow, which does signify that the ranks are not furnished. And this
foresight or account had the first men that came to the Ensign, and when the
ranks were repleat or full, they staide: and even in ye same manner, the
residue or others that came afterward to furnish their Quadrant, until they
were fully repleate.

But this seems not unto me a good style or use, because the trust was
reposed in the order of the first that joined together, without consideration
whether they were men expert, or no: notwithstanding the ordeining of a Quadrant
ought to be done by the officers, which for that purpose should be appointed,
for otherwise it should be a disorder.

Of the difficulty that is in the foresaid manner of order. Cap. 27.
THere is another manner of ordayning in the number of five or, seven, more or
less, which is, that they must go dubling the ranks in this wise. That is to
say, to place the second row in the first of the Vangarde, and the fourth in
the second place, and the sixth in the third, and in this sort to ordain all
the rest, til the number be finished. And doubling once, must redouble again,
until the number be equal, to make a Quadrant according to the account of
number that is kept of the infanterie or footmen.

The Ensigns and Drum players shall go at or in the rank, that the number
requires, which hereafter shall more plainly be declared according, and of
the manner, as need shall require, where the same shall be ordained.

But when occasion shall serve to double and redouble the ranks, as often as
the number is convenient, there is found two inconveniences.

The one is, for to double a rank, they go dividing, leaving a great and void
place or spaces between the one rank and the other, so that they should run
with speed to reach unto the rank that marches, into the which they should
enter.

And in this wise if at that instant they should be encountered, they go in
great danger to be lost, because they go wandering out of order. Besides
this, there is another inconvenience in the manner of ordaining in doubling and
redoubling, which brings the number unto order. And for so much, that this
thing may be understood, it is on this sort. That if a number of Soldiers
amount to 400. being ordained by five and five, doubling the ranks once, from
the second to the first,, and from the fourth to the third, till the number be
finished, remaining 10. in a rank, so that in this little number of 400. men,
is to be understood the like in a greater number. But redoubling again which
is the second order, and shall remain by 20. and 20. for front side and
reregarde, which for the number of 400. is well ordained, because there does
remain by 20. and 20. for Front side and Reregarde. But if the Soldiers were
300. in number, this should not be a good way of ordenaunce, for if they deal
but only once in rank it shall remain evil ordained, because the Front
shall be too little, and the sides over large, and even so being redoubled, it
shall be greater in front then large in quantity, and so shall remain evil
ordered.

And if the Soldiers were 600. it should be the like, but to ordain of this
sort, the number ought to be equal to come unto reason. And not being equal,
should be to ordain of an evil style, beside the spaces which should be made, as
has been declared.

Of the account or care, that the chief Sergeant ought to have, that the thing
may be well ordained. Cap. 28.
(...) of the Battle, the Pikes of the Companies of the Vangard, and after
the bare Pikes of the companies of the Vangard, the Pikes of the Companies of
the Battle, And after the Pikes of the companies of the battle, must follow
the Pikes of the Companies of the Reregard, and after the Pikes of the Reregard
must follow the Corselets of the Companies of the Reregard. And in this sort
shall be given to every Company, or companyes the Vangarde, Battle or
Reregard, when their turn falls.

Of the order that does appertain to the company or companies of Vangarde,
Battle, or Reregard. Cap. 32.
Unto the Tierces or Companies of Vangard, Battle or Reregard, does
appertain to have consideration, that to those that were one day of the
Vangard does belong the next day the Reregard, and unto them that were of the
Reregarde this day, to morrow does appertain the Battle, and in this sort
shall they march from day to day, or in making Squadron, so that in this wise
no tierce shall be agrauiated. And the self same order that ye Sergeant Mayor
shall keep in all the Tierces, which by him shall be ordained, the other
Sergeants shall keep among their Company perticularly. For when they shall
ordain, they may know the place, that unto each Company does appertain,
either of Vangard or Battle.

How it is not a thing unmeet, for the footmen to march in Tierces. Cap. 33.
SOme will say that it is a great incouenience to march in tierces, of whom
squadrons are to be made in place where the ^nimie is at hand: because it
should appear that they go out of order, for so much that every Squadron, that
should be, goes in tierce and not full, wherefore if in case the contraries
should come and find them out of order. Certainly by this mean could not
come any prejudice or hurt, but rather profit. For if the contrary comes in
Squadron, they cannot so soon overtake the infanterye called Footmen, which go
in tierces, because they have no place to ordeine them. And if he would
overtake and make have, yet shall they stray out of order, and coming in such
sort, any of the tierces may resist them and put them to the disorder, although
the Squadron be not formed. And he that were in such sort set upon, might
think himself happy.

Of the manner and order, and in what place the Ensign shall go. Cap. 34.
But now returning to ye purpose, to make an end to ordeine our Squadron after
the last manner. The Ensign should be placed in the first tierce of the Pikes
on this wise, if they be.45. on a rank, ye Ensigns go in the 15. rank, and
the same order shall be kept both in the great and small number.

Before the tierces join, every Sergeant shall place his Ensign, according to
the account particular, so that they may all fall in rank after the Squadron
is ordained.

Of the manner how every Tierce should be ordained by it self. Cap. 35.
IF every tierce should be made a Squadron, and also being disposed to make
of foot men two or three Squadrons. Then each should be ordained by himself
by the same order yt they may go according to the reckoning a fore said to
make a Squadron dividing them before they join in tierces.

And if of the whole number a Squadron should be made, alone ought every
tierce to come in order, on this wise, wating three parts of the foot men side
wise, and ^o^e part of the third, forefront, taking out the Hargubus^^ers of
every tierce, for to place the^ again at their due time, so that this order
ought to be kept as well in great number as in small, so that the joining of the
tierces may be equal both by sides and reregard, and in this s^ete although
they go marching^, or abide firm or still in a place, if they should be
disposed to form the Quadrant. Then shall the tierce of the vangard stay, and
the tierce of the battle shall march on the one side, and the tierce of the
reregard on the other side, and in this wise shall remain ordenied. And the
Ensigns shall be placed in one of the ranks, according to the reckoning as
has been declared, in much or little quantity of Soldiers. But it shall be
necessary that when the tierce of the Vangard stays, and the tierce of the
battle marches on the one side, and the reregard on the other side with the
Sergeant mayor, and minors unto whom that day the order does belong. That then
the Captains which shall be found in the vangard as the tearces does approach,
they shall go ordeining the first ranks as they come and join them with this
of the vangard which are already in order. And the Sergeant or Sergeant majors
shall stand near to the rank where the Ensigns are placed, to have special
care that there pass no more ranks of the tierces then those which were
appointed in the tierce of the vangard. And likewise they shall cause to stay
the residue that comes, as unto the acceant does apperteine.

In the first rank which stands behind the Ensigns they shall march each
in order without exceeding the one, nor wanting the other, for if any rank
should sober or want of those which ought to pass of the Ensigns until the
vangard, the error should be evil to mend, because those of that tierce
should return back again, retiring to seek the rank in the which each should
reform. And likewise should remain perticularly some officers in the
reregard, and should put in order the last ranks of that tierce, causing every
one to abide in the place which to him or them belongs.

Of the order which ought to be observed if any Soldiers sobre at the joining
of the ranks. Cap. 36.
IF at the joining of the cohorts commonly called companies of foot men, there
sober some Soldiers of the tierces, so that they may not march equal,
considering that it is ordinary to sover in one rank or other. Then the
Sergeant mayor with diligence, if among such be a rank, with speed shall put
them in order and they amount to more then one rank he shall do the like, and
if there be not enough to make a rank, he shall place, one, two, or m^
soldiers in the ranks that unto him shall seem convenient, where most need
shall require, until they be all placed, and so shall they be well ordained.
But this must be done before the Squadron be garnished of Hargubusiers.

The order how the Hargubusiers shall issue out from among the Pikemen, before
they begin to ordeine. Cap. 37.
BEfore the tierce of Pike men begin to be set in order, the Sergeant mayor of
every Tierce shall command each tierce that should be ordained by it self.
That all the Hargubuseirs issue out from among the Pikemen round about them, by
that part where most space shall be found, after the Captain or Captains of
Hargubuseirs, which unto each apperteyneth. The which Captains with the
Hargubuseirs of their company, and with the rest that were of the companyes of
Pikemen that should be ordained into squadron. They shall march following
their Captains in order by three or five in rank, according to the number that
is among them. And in the mean while that the Hargubuseirs does march and give
a turn, the Sergeant shall ordeine by their Tierce the Pikemen, by the account
in each rank that the Sergeant mayor has appointed. And having joined the
Tierces as is declared, the Hargubuseirs shall enter Front unto Front of the
Squadron by the least side, and so shall give a turn by the reregard,
following always after their Captain or Captains, and so shall proceed and
march on unto the Vangard of the right side. So that in this sort the Squadron
shall remain garnished by both sides and reregard in good order.

How the Hargubusiers shall be divided if they be not needful in the reregard.
Cap. 35.
Having no need of Hargubusiers for the Reregard, the number may be employed
in this wise: If the company be ordained by five in Rank, unto them and each
rank may be added two, so that the Rank be vij. and if they be disposed
that all the Hargubusiers remain overplus, which did belong to the Reregard,
then the Hargubusiers shall go in the first order, and the overplus may have
the benefit by dividing into the place, where best occasion serves, and also
in placing them where they deem or think the Enemy to come, or at the least
to discover with them the want of Horsemen, or to discover an ambush.

How the Ensigns of the Camp Masters, shall march. Cap. 39.
THe Ensigns of the Camp Masters, which were in the tierce or Tierces, shall
march in this order: If there be but one alone, in one only Tierce, he shall
go at the point of the right hand, and if there were two Tierces of two Camp
Masters, the one shall go on the right hand, and the other on the left hand,
because they are places of most honor, and most danger. And if the Squadron
were great, the half of the Ensigns shall go on the right side, and the
other on the left side, changing every day by the order that has been
declared, in the many or few that were, and so doing, there shall be no
division at the time of ordayning, and none shall be aggrauated.

How the baggage or carriage shall march in time of enemies, and how they shall
march when there is no danger. Cap. 40.
MArching, the Squadron or Squadrons ordained, the baggage shall go by the
Tierces on this wise. If the Enemy chance to come on the Vangarde, the
Baggage shall go in the Reregarde of every Tierce, unto whom it does
appertain, and a company of Hargabusiers, shall attend for their guard, or
two companies, if the baggage belong to two tierces, the which shall march in
sight of the tierces of Reregard.

And if the Enemy happen to come on the Reregard, the baggage shall pass to
the Vangard with their guard or company of Hargubusiers, in such order that
they may succor when need requires, not departing or seuering from the
Vangard or Reregard, whereas they were appointed to go. And having no enemies,
they shall go between ye tierce or tierces of the battle and the reregard.
This order shall be in marching, and shall be done according to the disposition
of the Country whereas they march, and the manner thereof.

How a Squadron should be enlarged or shortened after the ordaining thereof.
Cap. 41.
IF a Squadron should be made greater being of a greater number then here is
ordained, having more footmen, and also to be made of greater side then front
through the disposition of the place, the Ranks of each tierce shall diminish
in less number, that they may come just to the account that has been declared
to be ordained in the first perfection.

And if there should come as many me footmen, and to join all in one, the
Hargubusiers should be taken out of the one part, and the footmen put in order,
that shall enter into the third part of soldiers that the Squadron has in
Rank, making thereof two companies, the one shall join to the one side, and the
other company shall enter into the Reregard, crossing from the one point to
the other. The which shall have more ranks then the first conformity that the
number has in as many as were in rank ordained, and doing so they shall
remain in the same perfection, and according to the reckoning that was first
appointed.

If the half of those which were ordained come to succor, then shall they put
in Rank the first part of such as are in Squadron, and so shall they come
well ordained, and in the same form, as they were at the first. And ye Cohorts
being put with the Pikemen as has been declared, the Hargubusiers that come to
succor shall be gathered with those that were first put in order, and shall
then return to round the Squadron, increasing or decreasing in the order that
they should enter, by the account and number that the one have of the other.

How the Squadron being so ordained on all parts may make both Vangard and
Reregard. Cap. 42.
NOw the squadron being ordained, by the form and account already specified, of
the sides may be made vangard, and of the vangard and reregard, right side, and
left side, and on what side so ever that they should be set on, they may
make Front of Vangard, they may also march, set on, break, or retire, only
it shall be needful to change the Ensigns on that side where the Vangarde is
planted for to be committed to the account of the Ranks which were first. And
this is, because it may not be understood, if a Squadron should come to assault
on any side, that they should go round about for to turn to the Vangard,
considering there is no necessity of other thing, but for the footmen to
turn their face to the part where they should be encountered, or set upon, or
would encounter, and shall remain ordained with the same force as it was at
the beginning, since the order abides on the same manner. But to go round
about should be a great disorder.

How few in number should be set in order against many. Cap. 43.
IF the Enemies were more then the Squadron which should break with them, so
many soldiers should be ordained in Rank as they may get, so that they may
not girdle them in front on the part of the sides, for the vantage should be
much, and the danger greater, considering, yt the fortune or weight of the
matter depends in the first five or six Ranks, and if it happen the Enemy
seeing so great a Front in the Squadron which he held for so small, they would
imagine that some succor or aid were come, which should be an occasion
somewhat to discourage them having judged them for many less, then those that
the order did manifest.

How vigilant care is to be had, in giving the onset, whether the Soldiers
are willing or unwilling. Cap. 44.
IT is necessary, that a battle having order to be given, the Soldiers
showing themselves either willing or timorous, and without hope to obtain
victory, the which in their countenance or apperaunce may appear, after that
they are set in order. This foresight or knowledge does appertain to the
general of the Host, and camp masters, which were known to be most expert,
and to give great charge unto the Sergeants majors, that they may see and
consider what they ought to do, according to their knowledge.

And the weight of the matter being found not inconvenient term for the
purpose. The giving of battle ought to be excused, being in his hand at
that instant which was appointed. And doing so it shall be well done, either
to give them present pay, or else to promise it them, and to content and please
them in all their desire.

But if of force the battle must be given. Then it shall be needful to
encourage them, and to give them to understand, that the victory is certain
and sure on their side, trusting under God in their strength and valor,
representing unto them the like things and successes that has happened in like
sort, and this must be declared unto them according to the wisdom and
courage of him that has the charge to govern them.

Of the manner that the Hargubusiers should issue out of the Squadron to
skirmish. Cap. 45.
IF the Hargubusiers should come to skirmish being in the Squadron, it shall be
on this wise. The one sleeue or wing of the one side, on that part where they
shall give the onset, or else be set upon shall begin to discharge the shot,
having ear the one to the other, keeping time in the discharge as shall
appear most needful, and before the shot make an end the Captain or
Sergeant which was appointed for that purpose shall regather his company. And
then shall issue out the sleeue or wing on the other side, to receive those
that retyreth without hurt, to have them prepared in readiness for the
skirmishe, and when those that issued out first have retired, then shall the
second go out to do ye like, and then the third in order, staieng one for the
other. So that whilst the one shot, the other should retire, and in this
order they shall be able to maintain themselves with continual shot until
they be commanded otherwise all in good order.

Of the order how to put a sunder or undo a Squadron that should be lodged.
Cap. 46.
A Squadron having no need to remain in form, and being in term to be
lodged, according as time gives place, they shall come out in this wise. The
Captains of the Hargubusiers shall march by the same order as they entered in,
or their Liefetenaunt in their steed, following them all the Hargubusiers, and
then every tierce by himself, their Ensigns join together, as in the same
tierce was ordained, accounting them their Soldiers which apperteine unto
them. And then shall every Ensign stand aside in his due place, and the
soldiers of every company to follow their Ensign, and even in the same order
shall the Hargubusiers follow their Ensigns, after that they are out of the
Squadron, and then to take their lodging, according to the appointment of the
order of the Officers.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART, De re militari.
How it is needful to have account among the Pike-men and Hargubusiers to make
a Squadron. Cap. 47.
Here before has been declared the order how to plant a Squadron to march
well ordained, and the difficulty to ordain. Now it is needful according to
the number of Hargubusiers or Pike-men that in every of the Squadrons should be
ordained, to have account of the number that were, of how many comes in
rank, from the number of 500. footmen with Pikes, unto the number of 3000.
and the hargubusiers that were needful for that number to be girded to the
sides and reregard as before has been declared, having one tierce of
Hargubusiers and two of pikemen, some more or less according to the order as
is declared, who shall not let to enter into the number of the reckoning that
goes before, considering that they may reach to the mo, and to the less, and
may not want many, nor yet sober by the third part specified. The companies
being referred unto them.

Pi. IF the Squadron were of five hundred twenty and nine Pike men, there
appertains to a Rank. 23. 23 Har. 3 If there were two hundred and seven
Hargubusiers, to girdle the Pikemen both by sides and reregard, they shall
march by 3. and.3. 207 Har. If they were three hundred forty and five, they
shall march five on a Rank. 345

In this order the Sergeant Mayor shall set them in order, and the Captain
command the same order to be observed, or his Lieutenant, and so shall they
come well ordained according to the Squadron.

Pi. If the Squadron were of six hundred twenty and five Pike men, they shall
be twenty and five on a Rank. 25 Har. 3 And if the Hargubusiers were two
hundred twenty and five, they shall march by 3. and 3. 225 Har. 5 And if they
were three hundred twenty and five, then shall they march by five and five on
Rank. 325 Pi. If the Squadron were of seven hundred thirty and nine Pike
men, then does belong 27. to a Rank. 27 Har. 3 And if the Hargubusiers which
should enter into Squadron, were two hundred forty and three, then shall they
march by 3. and.3. 243 Har. 5 And if they were four hundred twenty and five,
then shall they march by five on a Rank. 425 Pi. If the Squadron were of eight
hundred forty and one Pike men, then belongs 29. to a Rank. 29 Har. 3 And
if the Hargubusiers were two hundred sixty and one, then shall they march by
3. and 3. 261 Har. 5 And if they were four hundred thyrtie and five, they
shall then march by five and five. 435 Pi. If the Squadron were of nine
hundred sixty and one Pike men, then belongs thirty one to a Rank. 31 Har.
3 And if the Hargubusiers were two hundred seventy nine, they shall march in
order by 3. and.3. 279 Har. 5 And if they were four hundred lxx.v. they shall
march by five on rank. 475 Pi. If the Squadron were of one thousand eight
hundred and nine Pike men, then belongs to a Rank.33. 33 Har. 3 And if the
Hargubusiers were two hundred ninety and five, there appertains 3. to a
Rank. 295 Har. 5 And if they were four hundred ninety and five, then shall
they march by five on a Rank. 495 Pi. If the Squadron were of one thousand
two hundred twenty and five, then belongs 35. to a Rank. 35 Har. 3 And if
the Hargubusiers were 325. they shall march by 3. on a Rank. 325 Har. 5 And if
they were five hundred twenty and five, then shall they march by five on
Rank, and keep good order. 525 Pi. If the Squadron were of one thousand
three hundred sixty and nine, then belongs 37. to a Rank. 37 Har. 3 And if
the Hargubusiers were three hundred thirty three, they shall enter by three
into a rank. 333 Har. 5 And if they were five hundred fifty and five, they
shall march by five and five. 555 Pi. If the Squadron were a thousand five
hundred twenty and one Pike men, then belongs 39. to a Rank. 39 Har. 3 And
if the Hargubusiers were three hundred fifty and one, they must march by 3. on
Rank. 351 Har. 5 And if they were five hundred eyghtie and five, then shall
they go by five in order. 585 Pi. If a Squadron of Pikemen were in number one
thousand six hundred eighty one, then belongs 41. to a Rank. 41 Har. 3 And
if the Hargubusiers were 369. they shall be 3. on Rank. 369 Har. 5 And if they
were 615. then shall the order be five on Rank. 615 Pi. If the Pike men were
one thousand eight hundred forty nine, then belongs 43. to a Rank. 43 Har.
3 And if the Hargubusiers were 387. they shall march by 3. and 3. 387 Har. 5
And if they were six hundred forty and five, then shall they march by five on
Rank. 645 Pi. If the Pike men were in number two thousand twenty five, then
belongs 45. to a Rank. 45 Har. 3 And if the Hargubusiers were four hundred
and five in number, then shall they march by.3. 405 Har. 5 And if they were
six hundred lxxv. they must march by five on a rank. 675. Pi. If the Squadron
of Pike men in number two thousand, two hundred and nine, then apperteineth 47.
to a rank. 47. Har. 3 And if the Hargubusiers were four hundred twenty and
three, they must march by 3. 423 Har. 5 And if they were in number seven
hundred and five, they shall march five on a rank. 705. Pi. If the squadron
were in number two thousand four hundred and one, then belongs 49. to a
rank. 49 Har. 3 And if the Hargubusiers were four hundred xli. then shall
march three on a rank. 441 Har. 5 And if they were seven hundred thirty and
five, then belongs five to a rank. 735. Pi. If the Pike men were two
thousand six hundred, and one, then belongs 51. to a rank. 51. Har. 3 And
if the Hargubusiers were four hundred lix. they shall march by three on a
rank. 459 Har. 5 And if they were in number seven hundred lxv. then shall
enter five in a rank. 765 Pi. If the were Pike men in number two thousand,
viii. hundred and nine, then liii. belongs to a rank. 53 Har. 3 And if the
Hargubusiers were four hundred lxxvii. they shall march by three on rank. 477
Har. 5 And if they were seven hundred lxxxx. and five in number, then shall
enter five into a rank. 795 Pi. If the Pike men were in number 3. thousand
twenty and five, then must 55. enter into rank. 55 Har. 3 And if the
Hargubusiers were four hundred lxxxxv. then shall three enter inot rank. 495
Har. 5 And if they were eight hundred twenty five in number, then must they
march by five on rank. 825

And the like as well in the former number as in the rest must be observed, and
by the same order the Squadron may be room both by sides and reregard.

In this number of Pike men and Hargubusiers which in the reason and account
has been declared, and coming just therewith the thing should be perfect, and
the squadron well ordained. But although there were found more or less in small
quantity, they disturb not ye order, nor yet therefore shall it let to be of
purpose for to serve. And because by these rules it may be the better
understood, and the Sergeant mayor thereof avail himself, joining the number
to the nighest.

How the victuals should be distributed. Cap. 50.
IN an host or army although they be of sundry nations, being in camp and
in necessity to be provided with victuals of the Princes puruaiour general,
or of such person or persons as for that purpose were appointed, this order
ought to be observed, proclamation general must be made, to the intent that
all the officers unto whom does apperteine the charge to provide for each
nation, repair to the place of distribution. And every nation having received
his due part, proclamation must likewise be made among each nation, that the
same provision may be equallye distributed to the tierce of every camp
master, and to all other tierces by their companies, and of the companies by
the Cabos de squadras, the number being known that every of them has, and
from them to each particular company called a mess or Camasada.

The like order must be observed in all kind of provision that should be
divided being necessary for the wars, as well of Biskuit, salt meats,
Cheese, Wine, and fish, as also of all other kind of victuals yt were
appointed to be distributed, and in the same manner, Gunnepowder, Lead,
Pellets, Baskets, shouells, Pikes, Pike-axes, and other necessaryes for the
service of the Prince, that does apperteine meet and convenient to such a
journey: provided always, that the first distribution ought to be among the
foreign Nations, by the Tierces of every Nation, and of the Tierces for the
Companyes, and from the Companyes by the Squadronnes, and by the Squadronnes to
the Messes, and by them to every soldier, giving always the advantages to the
Captains, Ensign bearers, and other officers and soldiers to whom it were
due.

I do well understand that if it were not to such as were affectioned to the
exercise of arms, this small treatise would give but small delyght, but rather
will reject it as a thing unprofitable, having no respect but only to their
pastime. But I for my part cannot give unto them any other advise, but only
such as I have learned in this art. And if the style of proceeding shall seem
rude unto them, yet I pray them to dissemble it. For our office is more to give
order how to work with weapon, and to ordeine infanterie or footmen, then
eloquently to write with pen: yet there are wits I do know which want not
eloquence in speaking like Orators, and excellent courage in fight like
soldiers. The works of the which as well past as present are manifest for
their perpetual memory, without necessity of other phrase more then their
public fame has proclaimed.

And if any error have escaped in this treatise touching the Art herein
specified, I heartely pray unto him that understands it to advertise me
thereof, and I shall be always ready to amend the same, considering that we
see man's wit and judgment how often and sundry times it does err, and also
how there is nothing in this life so perfect and pure, but that some defect may
be put thereto.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East. 1582.


