A MANIFEST DETECTION OF THE notable falshed of that part of John Frithes
book, which he calls his foundation, And bosteth it to be invincible: newly
set forth by John Gwinneth Clerk.

LONDINI. 1554.

Capitulo. 1.
CATHOLICVS, Ah country man, thou art I perceive, a good riser in a morning,
for I thought little to find thee here so soon.


HERETICVS, Sir, if you had slepte this night no more then I did, ye would have
been here perchance as soon as I.


CATH. why, thou see I keep mine hour, and somewhat before.


HER. No sir, that I dare say ye do not. For eight of the clock was your
hour. And now it is almost nine, or nine all together, if it be not more.


CATH. Not of any clock in London I am sure.


HERE. Naie then are ye well, if ye trust to the clockes of London.


CATH. Why not?


HERE. Ye know right well, they never agree together. And therefore we may be
sure, they go not true.


CATH. Then be they wonderful like unto heretics: and nothing so evil to
be trusted as they be: which do alwaie deceive, as the clockes do not.
for there is few or none of the clockes, but are sometime in truth, and so
are theretikes never, as thou may well perceive, by that I said yesterdaie,
if thou bear it in mind.


HERE. Well sir, I pray you, let all that pass, and now to the purpose we
come for.


CATH; Ye but first tell me how it chaunsed, that thou sleptest no better to
night.


HERE. Shall I therein be plain?


CATH. What else?


HERE. In very deed it was even long of you.


CATH. Of me? how so?


HERE. Ye gave me such a banquet to bedwarde yesternight, at our partynge, as
has not a little troubled my head ever sense.


CATH. What was that?


HERE. Even the same that ye said of mine old friend John Frith.


CATH. What said I of him?


HERE. Ye said he was as subtle, foolish, and false as ever was any man,
that ye have read or herd of.


CATH. And call thou that, a banquet to bedwarde?


HERE. I may so call it well enoughe. for it was and yet is unto me, a bitter
banquet in deed.


CATH. Why so?


HERE. Ye will not think how much it greueth me, to here him so reported?


CATH. Then consider therewith ageyn, how little it will grieve thee, to here
him so proved.


HERE. How little? Naie how much ye may say.


CATH. How much? thou wotest nere what thou say. For will thou be more
grieved, with the dew proof, then with thonly report of his falshed, by whom
thou art not a little deceived? when, for all the report, thou may yet
remain, other in doubt, or clean out of credence thereof, and so be deceived
stille, where as by the dew proffe, thou may be certain and sure, and no
longer deceived, except thou will thy self. And therefore with the report,
thou can not be so much grieved, as with the dew proffe thou ought to be
glad and well pleased.


HERE. No sir not so. For although I do here my friend evil reported, yet
because the report may chance to be false, it can not grieve so much, as the
dew proffe thereof, which does assure me, that it is true. Wherefore the
proffe must needs be more grievous, then the report, if I take it right.


CATH. That is in respect of him, and not of thy self, that is to say, for
his sake, and not for thine own. To be sorry for thy neighbors falshed, in
that he should chance to be one of that sort, is very well done, whether
thou have it by proof, or report other. But of the other side, as touching
thin own part, to be sorry for that thou art by a dew proof brought to the
knowlage thereof, were more then extreme foolishness: since by that, thou can
take no manner of hurt, but rather the great commoditee of escapynge all such
displeasure as might chance to ensue of the contrary. And therefore what other
thing is it, not to be glad to know the falshede of a deceiuer, But even to
be wilfully and worthily deceived, as many a one is? And therefore if thou be
one of that sort, which are so grieved with the report of Frithes falshed,
that they can not be pleased with the dew proof thereof, it will be as hard
for the, as it is for them, to take any profit of the best probacion that is
thereof possible to be made: which unto them is far insufficient, and
nothing worth.


HERE. Why so?


CATH. Because of their own obstinate wilfulness, Which is the direct
enemy and greattest resister of all trewthe: and therefore most incurable of
all evils: Wherefore if I wiste, that thou were one of them in deed, I would even
now bid the farewell, and talk no more with thee. For if I did, my labor
were therein but lost.


HERE. Sir ye shall not find me a refuser of reason.


CATH. And thou shall not find me an offerer of any other.


HERE. Then I meruell how ye will discharge your self of this that ye say,
Frith was so subtle, foolish, and false?


CA. For that purpose I shall find matter enough, and it were but in that
part of his work, which he does call the foundation of his treatise,
wherein he thinks him self so strong and most sure.


HERE. What he says therein, I remember very well. And therefore I will show
you some part thereof.


CATH. No not yet, for I will make the first recital my self: And therein tell
me, whether I do it trewly or no.


HERE. And even so will I, by your leave.


CATH. I am well content with all.


HERE. Whether ye be or not, I will be so bold at this time.


CATH. I know it to be a part of thy profession, to lack no boldness.


HERE. I may be bold in my friends cause.


Capitulo. 2.
CATH. Spare not, and therefore take heed, and harken well to it. For in the
preface, and first lefe of his book, where he makes mention of a brother of
his (not a brother of consanguinitee, but a brother of his religious
fraternitee) his own words be these.

This brother (he seith) after much communicacion: desired to know my mind,
as touching the sacrament of the body and blood of our savior Christ, which
thing I opened unto him according to the gift that god had given me. First I
proved unto him, that it was none article of our feith necessary to be
believed under peine of damnacion: Then I declared, that Christ had a natural
body. etc.

Now for so much, thou herest what he says.


HERE, I will not deny, but those be his own words in deed?


CATH. And in these words, thou see plain, that he says the sacrament of
the body and blood of our savior Christ, is none article of our feith
necessary to be believed under pain of damnacion.


HERE. All that I grant.


CATH. Therefore if it be not under the peine of damnacion, I ask of him under
what peine then? he will not say under any peines of purgatory, which he
does utterly deny, saying there is none such? And any other peines after this
life, beside any of those two, there is to our knowlage utterly none. Therefore
what so ever he says, none other he means, but that it is none article of
our faith necessary to be believed, under any peine at all?


HER. Naie sir not so, for he would not speak it as he doothe, except he
mente under some peine.


CA. Under what peine is that?


HE: Under the peine of such laws, as be made and ordained for it here in
this life.


CA. And well said, for if he meant not that, plain it is, that he mente (as I
said) none at all. But how cowld he mean that, when he accompteth al those
laws nothing else, but even the very cruel tyranny of men, whom he calls
proud prelates and furious tyrannes of malicious minds, and vengeable hertes,
as it appears in the.xiii. and.xv. lefe of his book? And therefore he would
that men should in no wise follow them, but rather die, then obeie them.


HERE. How know you that?


CATH. By nothing better, then his own act: For even so did he him self.


HERE. Yet his death does show, that he was bownde under that peine. For else
he had not died.


CATH. Take heed what thou say, for although his death does show, that he
was bound at the least under that peine: yet it does not show, that he so
took it for all that: But it does show clearly the contrary: For if he had
thought him self bound to believe it, he would never have chosen rather to die,
then to grant it, for he was not so mad (although he were mad enough, and
to mad in deed) as to chose his own death, rather then to stand to that,
which he thought him self he was bound to. Therefore that he chose rather to
suffer death, then to grant him self, or any man else, bound to believe it:
does most clearly prove and show, that he meant it no article of our feith to
bet believed, under any manner of pain: But to be so free, and at so great
libertee, that he thought it better to die (as he did in deed) then to grant
it, or to be in any wise bound unto it.


Capitulo. 3.
HERE. Then if he meant, under no peynes at all, why did he say, under the
peine of damnacion, secludynge no mo peines, but only that?


CATH. He did it, either because he could not tell therein, how to express his
mind but foolyshely, or else because he durst not russhe it even all out
plainly. And yet thought to wrappe it in his words so craftily, that his
adversaries should not take him with the open fault directly, nor his friends
belefte ignorant of his meaning, if they weighed the sequel of his words
thoroughly. Wherefore since it is clear, that he would have this sacrament none
article of our feithe, to be believed under any peine at all, what follows,
or what other thing is it, but that he would have no man bound to believe it?
For under no pain, and then under no bond. And under no bond, then at our
free libertee. And there he would have it, as it does well and plainly apere.
Therefore now let us see the deep lernyng of this wise man, whereby he has
drawn so many disciples after him, as he has done: first if we be not bound
to believe it, why is it an article of our feithe? for an article of our feith
he does confess it, as it apereth in the.xxvi. lefe of his book, where his
own words be these: Though it be (he says) an article of our feith, it is
none of our creed in the.xii. articles, which are sufficient for our salvation.


Capitulo. 4.
HERE. Marry sir this does open all the matter?


CATH. How so?


HE. He says it is an article of our feith, but yet it is none of our Creed
in the xii. articles.


CATH. A, very well, and therefore we are not bound to believe it? a blessed
doctrine: It is likewise none article of our Creed in the.xii. articles another
(as he does take them) that ever Christ preached or taught a monges the
Jews. Therefore we are not bound to believe it: It is none article of our
Creed in the.xii. articles another, that Christ had.xii. Apostles, or that
there was any such Peter or Paul, as we speak of, or that our Lady lived
after the death of Christ. And therefore we are not bound to believe it.


HERE. Yes sir, for all those things apere plain in the gospel, and therefore
we are bound to believe them.


CATH. I tell thee, the gospel it self, is none article of our Creed, in
the.xii. articles another. And therefore, we are not bound to believe any more of
that, then does apere in the.xii. articles of the Creed, if we believe Frith,
as to many do: wherefore, is not this a gaie teacher, that would so shut and
lock up our feithe within the.xii. articles of our Creed, that we need not
believe any of these things, nor many mo beside, as great as these be? And
further more, If this sacrament be an article of our feith, and we not bound to
believe it, why is it a sacrament?


HERE. Because Christ him self did so institute it.


CA. Then by Frithes doctrine, we are not bound to believe Christ's own
institucio^, when that, which, our savior Christ did institute, is left at our
libertee to choose whether we will believe it or no, as Frith does hold it is.
And therefore is there any man, but only Frith, and his adherentes that would
think our savior Christ to institute any article of our feith so, that we
might chose (without parill) w^^^her we will allow it or no? we do not allow
it, if we do not believe it: and we need not believe it, if we be not bound to
it: and we are not bound to it, if it be under no peine. it is under no peine
says Frithe.


HERE. Under no peine of damnacion he says.


CATH. Under no peine at all he means. But nevertheless let it so be, as
thou say in his most favor, And yet that way, because there is no bond (as
he says) under that peine: we may at that gappe, (as close as thou kepest it)
without any parill of damnacion (after his mind) clean thrust out the
credence and alowance of this holy sacrament, notwithstanding that it is of
the very ordinance and institution of our savior Christ him self. Therefore
how does Frithe handle this matter, but even as though our savior Christ, at
his institucion hereof, had said, Here I leave it among you, those whether ye
will believe it or no? if he had so said: what might Frithe do more, to the
fortifiyng thereof, then he does? wherefore since it is plain, that our savior
Christ never said so: Nor yet, as all true christen hertes do know, never
meant so: what a thing is this of Frithe, that he would yet make us believe so?

Farther more, if it be a sacrament, then is it an article of our feith: as
both the one and the other, Frithe him self does confess and grant.
Therefore if it be an article of our feith: Then the truth that is in it, must
needs be of Christ: for what so ever has not in it a truth of Christ,
without fail can be no article or part of his feith. Now because a thing can
not be believed or not believed, but that the truth thereof, must needs therein
go withal, Mark what follows: This article (he says we are not bound to
believe: And the truth of this article, is the truth of Christ. Wherefore we
are not bound to believe the truth of Christ, if we believe Frithe. For, to
believe, or not believe this article, without the truth thereof, or the truth
thereof, without the article, is not possible, because they be inseparable, and
can not be believed or not believed, but both together: Beside this, if there
be any one of the sacraments more excellent then other, doubtless this
sacrament of the blessed body and blood of our savior Christ must needs be
the chief. And therefore if we be not bound to believe this sacrament: plain it
is, that we are not bound to believe any: for bound to any and bound to the
chief: of the other side, not bound to the chief, and bound to none.
Therefore what must follow, but, after this doctors mind, we may be bold,
without any parill, to shake hands with them al, and bid them clean far
well. As they but late went very nere it, which retained but even bare two of
them. And that was perchance, but even for a while another.

Wherefore, thus thou have now a sufficient proof of the first stone, that
this blind builder has laid in his foundation: which is so evil fauordly,
and untruely wrought, that it can not couch or well lie of any side, but so
sotteringe and far out of square, that it can never be able to bear any good
piece of work, as even now it may, and here after shall much more largely
apere. For if a stone well wrought and evil laid, can not make but a shrwed
piece of work: what does a stone evil lated and wors wrought, but mar all
together? Therefore how Frithe laid this stone (beside his wrong working
thereof) thou may perceive, was after this sort: It is a sacrament he
says) and an article of our feith, and yet we need not believe it: would any
man think, that it could be laid any wors then so? yet to see, whether it
will lie any better an other way, let us turn it, vpset down.


HERE. As how?


CATH. Even thus, If we need not believe it, it is none article of our feithe,
nor yet no sacrament another. And therefore, how likest thou the leiynge of it
now?


HERE. It lies wors this way, then it did before.


CATH. That is long of the workemanshipppe. For Frithe wrought both, that is
to say, as well the one side as the other: and of the two evil he laid the
worste underneath out of sight, whereby it might the more easly and sooner
deceive.


HERE. How so ever Frithe laid it, yet am I sure, that he never so wrought it,
as you have now laid it.


CATH. How know thou that?


HERE. Because he another says, we need not believe it, nor that it is none
article of our feith, nor no sacrament, as ye lay now all three to his charge,
but he does say, the contrary, and that in plain words directly. And
therefore the laiyng of it, as ye lay it now is of your own head, and not of
his.


Cap. 5.
CATH. Because thou go so far in the matter, does he not say in plain
words, that we are not bound to believe it under peine of damnacion? And of
that, have I not proved unto the, that he means under no pain at all? and
thereby consequently, that we are not bound. Therefore all this remembered, what
other thing is it to say, that we are not bound to believe it, Then to say, we
need not believe it? for we need not to do, that we are not bound to: and what
other thing is it to say, that we need not believe it, then to say, it is none
article of our feith? for if it be an article of our feith, we are bound to
believe it, or else we are not bound to the belief of the whole feith, when
there is nothing else, that makes an heretic, but the lack of some part of it.

Wherefore, if we be bound to the belief of the whole feith, we must needs be
bound to the belief of this article, which is a part of it, by Frithes own
saiynge.

Of the other side, if we be not bound to the belief of this article, as he
does say we are not, then it is none article of the feith at all: If it be
none article of the feith, then it is no sacrament another. For all though every
article of our feith be not a sacrament, yet for all that, every holy sacrament
is an article. Therefore why is it called an article of our feith, but because
our feith ought so to receive it? If our feith ought so to receive it, why
does Frith say, we are not bound to believe it? if we be not bound to believe
it, why does he say, that it is an article of our feith? which he does
clean cut away again, in that he says, we are not bound to believe it.
Therefore say not (as thou said) that I lay this of mine own head, for I lay
herein nothing else, but only the same, that was in effect, wrought and
conceived in Frithes head, as it is now proved by an inevitable consequence of
his own words before recited: wherein, whether he do now apere, more
foolish then false, or more false then foolish, judge thou, if thou can:
for crew it is, that I can not.


Cap. 6.
HERE. Well sir, yet I pray you here farther of his mind, and then will I tell
you more of mine.


CATH. With a good will.


HERE. In the second leaf of his book his words be these.

The foundation (he says) of that little treatise was, that it is none
article of our feith necessary to be believed under peine of damnacion, that the
sacrament should be the natural body of Christ: which thing is proved on this
manner.


CATH. Soft, stay there awhile: for it is mete and conueniente, that before we
enter into the proof of a matter, we should first perpende, weigh and consider
the matter it self, and be certain thereof, less otherwise, we should go
about to prove, we can not tell what. Therefore the matter (as I take it) is
this, that he says, it is none article of our feithe, necessary to be
believed under peine of damnacion, that the sacrament should be the natural
body of Christ.


HERE. The same is it.


CATH. And this he calls his foundation.


HERE. All that is true.


CATH. Then has he leid two foundacions. For this and the other before, which
we have tried all ready, are not both one, but far unlike, and differs
much. for that before was, that the sacrament it self, is no article of our
feithe necessary to be believed. etc. And this now is, that it is none article
of our feithe necessary to be believed, that the sacrament is the natural
body of Christ. Wherefore these be two foundacions.


HERE. Sir that same other before, he did not lay for a foundation.


CATH. That is not so, his own words doothe prove the contrary. For, in
satisfiyng the request of his brother in Christ, as touching this sacrament,
his own words (thou know) be these.

First I proved unto him (he says) that it was none article of our feith
necessary to be believed. etc.

Here thou see no less, but of all that buildyng, this part he laid
first, as he says him self. And in all buildings, that is the foundation,
which is first laid. Therefore other he laid that, for a foundation, or else
thou must needs grant, that there he builded without any foundation at all: as
the most foolish builder never does. And therefore although he does not
proprely name but one foundation, yet two (as I said) he has laid for all
that, whereof since we have tried the one alredie, let me now here what proof he
makes of this other?


Capitulo. 3.
HERE. His proof is this?

First we must all acknowlage (he says) that it is none article of our
feith, which can save us, nor which we are bound to believe under the peine
of eternal damnacion. For if I should believe, that his very natural body
both flesh and blood, were naturally in the bread and wine, that should not save
me: seeing many believe that, and receive it to their damnacion. for it is not
his presence in the bread, that can save me, but his presence in my heart
through feith in his blood: which has washed out my sins, and pacified the
fathers wrath toward me.

And again, if I do not believe his bodily presence in the bread and wine:
that shall not damn me: but the absence out of my heart thorough unbelief.

Now sir, here ye have herd his proof, what say ye to it?


CATH. In very deed, with some of his own words, I say to it this. First we
must all acknowlage, that he is the most subtle, crafty, and wily
solititour of his masters cause, that ever traueled in this matter, so far as
I have read. For if the devil him self were incarnate, and so should come
among us, to see what he could do against the faith of this holy
sacrament, what might he invent or imagine therein, more subtly, more
craftily, and with more wiliness for the purpose, then this man of his, has
done alredie? For he does not directely deny it a sacrament, he does not
directly deny it an article of our feith: he doothe not directly deny, that
we are bound to the belefe of it another: But he goes anere way to work then
so. For all these ways, or any of them, he knew right well, had been of such
a sort, to swade at the first, that men would have been therein, more ready to
spette at him, then willing to here him. Wherefore he thought to begin an
other way, that is to say, with no more, but only the denial of the peine
of damnacion, dew for the not beleueinge thereof. And that because he
considered, how prone, reddie, and glad all men are, to be rid of the
peril and danger of peines, specially the peines of damnacion. And therefore
to creep the more easily into their favor, he thought to enter with that,
which they had most lust to here: Being well assured, that if he prevailed
therein (as it seemed to him most like) all the rest of his purpose, should
easly follow: as to plain it is, that it has done, in a great sort. For if
I should intend to allure thee from the belefe, that Christ was borne of a
virgin, how could I so craftily, and so easily bring it about by any means,
as by this persuasion, that there is no peril of damnacion therein? For let me
once bring the out of the fear of that peril, And then, who does not see,
how easy a matter it were, to bring the out of thee fear of all other perils,
which are nothing in respect of that, since thou might keep the from them,
with not bewraiyng thy self? And when thou art once therein, throghly rid
and paste the fear of all perils, what case art thou in then, with thy feithe
of that article, but even clean careless? for no man cares, but for fear of
some displeasure that might ensue. Therefore when thou art careless, whether thou
believe it or no, what need any farther persuasion to move the from it? specially
when the propretee of the thing is such, as will never abide with him, that
cares not for it: for he that cares not for it, sets nothing by it. And he
yt sets nothing by it, other has lost it, or will not long keep it. And
therefore, when it is once come to be nothing set by, To what comes it farther,
but even to contempt and extreme hatred? whereof there can be no greatter
proof, then the lamentable experience thereof, to great and openly known? For
has not this wily Reinarde, by the means of this his diabolical persuasion
of no peril of damnacion in the like case, brought many a one to the same
point, with this holy sacrament which we now speak of? as it may most
plainly apere, by the shameful approbrious words and behavior of his own
disciples. which stick not, some in the pulpet, and more in the ale house, to
call it jack in the box: A god of.xxiiii. a penny: A god of the bakers
making: A great idol, a sacrament of the halter, in dirision of it, and of the
holy alter: with such other most shameful, both sayings and examples, so
horrible and odible, as can not but abhor all good Christen ears to here
them. Therefore in this point to conclude (as I began) First me must all
acknowlage (if we do well) that he is (as I said) the most wily, subtle,
and crafty solititour of his masters cause that ever meddled in this matter.

Secundarily, we must all acknowlage likewise, that he is not so wily,
subtle, and crafty one way, but that he shewth him self as fond, and
foolish an other way, as it does partly apere even now, and much more
shall here after. For here thou see, he takes upon him (as a matter of great
weight) to prove that, which no man learned will deny.


HERE. What is that?


CATH. That the sacrament is not the natural body of Christ. For who knowth
any thing, and knows not that? although it be commonly called the body of
Christ, as right well it may for diverse causes, which here after shall well
apere.


HE. Sir of this folly, I dare well excuse him. For although it be known to
the^ that be learned, that the sacrament it self, is not the very natural
body of Christ, as it is co^munely called, yet he does well to make a proof of
the trewthe thereof, for the unlearned sake, to whom it is otherwise, or not so
well known.


Capitulo. 8.
CATH. Then yet thirdly, we must all acknowlage once again, that it is hard
to say, whether he be herein more foolish, or false. For plain it is, that
here he doothe promise one thing, and clean omittyng the same, gothe about to
perform an other.


HERE. How so?


CATH. Dooest thou not see it plain, that he does here promise to prove,
that the sacrament is not the natural body of Christ? And for the
performance thereof, do thou not see again that he goes a bowte to prove,
that the natural body of Christ, is not in the sacrament? As though it were
all one to say, that the sacrament is not the natural body of Christ, and
to say, that the natural body of Christ, is not in the sacrament: Even as I
might say, thy soul is not thy body, and for to make the believe the same,
go about to prove, that thy soul is not in thy body: as though to be, and
to be in, were all one, that is to say, as though to be the house, and to be
in the house, were without any difference. Therefore because Frith, in diverse
places of his book, doubtyng of men's sightes, does say in the fourth lefe
(this might expound our matter, if men had eyes to see,) other he him self,
had eyes to see this much as I say, or else he had not: If he had not, but
spoke blyndly he wiste nere what, how foolish does he apere? If he had, and
saw what he did, how plain false does he show him self, which is far
wors? wherefore since his posicion and his probacion, are here of such a
degeneracion, that they are without all possibilitee, of any agreement to
gether, let us therefore help him to change his posicion, and frame it somewhat
acordyng to the pretense of his probacion, to see what it will prove then,
because it is nothing to the purpose now.


HERE. How shall we do that?


CATH. Thou see his posicion in effect is this, that the sacrament is not the
natural body of Christ: And his pretended probacion re^neth, not upon that
but upon this, that Christ's natural body is not in the sacrament. Therefore
let his posicion be even so, to see whether his pretended probacion will reach
unto that or no.


HE. Yes I doubt not thereof?


CA. Whether thou do, or not, yet we must all acknowlage once again (as it
does plainly apere) that he has in this pretended probacion, brought for him,
none authoritee of holy scripture, none of old holy doctors, nor yet so much
as any one spark of reason or truth other. For all his great pretense of
defe^dyng him self by those three authoritees, as it apereth in the third and
fourtenth lefe of his book, if thou markeit well.


HERE. Yes sir, very good reason he brings here, for he says, If I should
believe that his very natural body, both flesh and blude: were naturally in
the bread and wine, that should not save me, seeing many believe that, and
receive it to there damnacion.

How say ye now?


CATH. If thou call this good reason, thou haste but a little wit. For
beside, that he doothe here call it bread and wine, of a spite against the
contrary: as though it were bread and wine in deed, which is most false, as
hereafter it shall well apere. And beside his foolish speaking in this that
he says, If I should believe that his very natural body were naturally
therein, as who say, because we do believe that Christ's very lively body, is
presently and verily in the sacrament, we believe it to be therein naturally:
when we do not believe it to be so in heaven. And yet we believe it to be
verily there in deed, for all that. But this man does speak, as though it
were alwaie a general rule, that where so ever any thing is presently, it were
there also naturally. As who say, when an arowe is shot up in to the air,
it were there naturally, or a bladder blown full of air: and conveyed by
violence down to the botome of the water, it were there naturally. Or as who
say, when god took Helias from the societee, and company of mortal men, and
did lift him up into heaven, he passing through the air, was there above
naturally: Beside (I say) all this, very false, foolish, and nothing to the
purpose, what is there in it else, which doothe prove it none article of our
feith, that we are bownde to believe? For there about he goes.


HERE. That many believe it (he says) and receive it to their damnacion.


CATH. What means he by that? are we not bound to believe it, because they
believe it.


HERE. Naie not therefore*


CATH. What then? Because they receive it?


HERE. No another.


CATH. Then, is it because they believe it, and receive it to?


HERE. He means not so another.


CATH. How then?


HERE. As Paul says, 1. Co. 11
He that eats and drynketh it unworthily, doothe eat and drink his own
damnacion.


CATH. A then he groundeth him self herein upon saint Paul.


HERE. What else?


CATH. In deed it were else but even his own dream, as I wene we shall find it
nevertheless. Therefore if the cause why, that we are not bound to believe it, be
another because they believe it: Nor because they receive it: nor yet because
they believe it and receive it both, but because of that, which follows, that
is to say, to their damnacion. Then, why is it to their damnacion?


HERE. For their unworthiness.


CATH. Therefore when Frithes reason is either nothing, or else this that we are
not bound to believe it because many receive it to their damnacion. And they
receive it not to their damnacion, but because of their unworthiness, how
clearly doothe it follow, that their unworthiness is the cause why, (by his
reason) that we are not bound to believe it? And how mad a wit has he,
which will think, that any other men's unworthiness can set us, of or on,
with the bond of our belefe, in any point of our feithe?


Capitulo. 9.
HERE. Sir yet ye take him wrong still. For he does not mean that their
believing, or unworthy receiving of it to their damnacion, is the cause why,
that we are not bound to believe it.


CA. How then?


HERE. He does mean no more, but that it does show, that we are not bound
to believe it.


CATH. Aha, then it is come from a proving, to a showing, and that full wise:
for that they do believe it, does rather show, that we be bound, to do so
to, rather then the contrary.


HERE. What, when they receive it to their damnacion?


CATH. Yea for all that: for why do they receive it to their damnacion:
because they believe it?


HERE. Nay that is not his mind another, for then he would not have said, we
are not bound to believe it.

But he would have said, we be bound not to believe it.


CATH. Therefore what is this to the purpose of our bond of belief? If he
counde have proved, that such as do not believe it, were in no dainger
therefore, it had been then an other matter. But to say, seeing many believe it:
and as who say, therefore we may laufully chose: what noddy would so say or
suppose, but he?


HERE. Sir it is not that another, which Frith intends to show it by.


CATH. What then?


HERE. That they receive it to their damnacion.


CATH. Does that show, that we be not bound to believe it?


HERE. Clearly me think.


CATH. Even as though the bond of believing, were enough to put away, the
danger of unworthy receiving: but yet I pray thee look better upon it. And
tell me in good ernest, whether it does not seem rather to show, that we be
not bound to receive it, then not bound to believe it?


HERE. Receive it? what we be bound thereto, by the plain words of the gospel.


CATH. That I grant to be true: And therefore tell me whether of them both,
do Frithes words seem rather to show, for although bare words of showing
be far from the strength of dew proving, yet if there be any thing in his
showing, that might sound herein against our dewtie of believing, dowtles it
does sound ten times more against our dewtie of receiving, then against that.
And yet between the duty of receiving, and the deutie of believing herein, the
difference is such, that unworthiness of manners, may and ought for the time,
exclude the dewtie of receiuinge: But so it can never do the deutie of
beleuinge at any time. Wherefore in this much, hitherto, we have found, under
the only pretense of a great worthy prouinge, nothing else in deed, but his
only bare, lean, and naked saying, without reason, truth, wit, or learning.


Cap. 10.
HERE. Ye but yet ye must take that follows with all, and then judge as ye
see cause. For ye know he adds unto it this, It is not his presence (he
says) in the bread, that can save me, but his presence in my heart through
feithe in his blood, which has washed out my sins, and pacified the fathers
wrath toward me.

Now sir weigh this and the other together.


CATH. Nay the other we have weighed well enough alredie And therefore what
shall we weigh in this, but that it is none article of our feith, which we are
bound to believe under pain of damnacion, that the very body of our savior
Christ is presently in heaven?


HERE. I marvel that ye will so say. For Frith has here no such words.


CATH. No, it is enough for him so to teach, although it be in other words.
For when he does say it is not his presence in the bread, that can save him,
what does he else intend, but thereby to prove that we are not bound to believe
it?


HERE. That I grant.


CATH. And does it not even as much against our belief of his very bodily
presence in heaven?


HERE. I think not.


CATH. Then harken well what I shall say, for the self same words, that he
speaks here, of Christ's bodily presence in the sacrament, I will speak of
his bodily presence in heaven, and then tell me thy self, whether it be as I
say or not.


HERE. With a good will.


CATH. Then this. It is not his presence in heaven, that can save me: But his
presence in my heart, through feith in his blood, which has washed out my
sins, and pacified the fathers wrath toward me. Wherefore it is none article
of our feith, which we are bound to believe under peine of damnacion. How say
thou to it now?


HERE. I say the plain words of the scripture do bind us therein to the
contrary.


CATH. And therefore I say, the plain words of the scripture is against this,
which Frith does teach. And for a more clear understanding thereof, when he
says, it is not his presence in the bread, that can save me, but his
presence in my heart through feyth in his blood, and thereof would have it follow,
that it is none article of our feith, which we are bound to believe under peine
of damnacion, I ask no more of him, but what of his preseece upon the Cross?
what of his presence in the Sepulcre? what of his presence among his disciples?
what of his presence now in heaven? with his presence in many cases more? do
thou not clearly see, that this lesson of his does run directly even as well
against the belief of al these, as against the belife of his presens in this
holy sacrament? Therefore if his seiyng make any thing against this, it makes
as much against all the rest: If it make nothing against all the rest, then it
makes nothing against this:


HERE. Sir the presence of these things, that ye speak of, are all gone and
paste, saving his presence in heaven.


CATH. Ye but the feithe and belefe of them all among us, is another gone nor
paste, for we stand bownde to that nevertheless. And that is it, which
Frithe attempteth to oppugn and overthrow. And therefore what so ever he
doothe (as I said) against the belefe of one of them: without fail he does
against the belefe of them all.


HERE. Sir ye may make of every man's tale what he lust, if ye be so disposed.


CATH. Why say thou so. Thou may easily perceive, that I make none other
of his tale, then thereof must I needs follow. And therefore where he goes
farther and says of the contrary part.

If I do not believe his bodily presence in the bread and wine: that shall
not damn me, but the abcence out of my heart through unbelief.

Look now thy self, if he might not as well have said, If I do not believe
his bodily presence in heaven, that shall not damn me, but the absence out of
my heart through unbelief? How say thou? Is it not well proved of him, that
Christ's bodily presence in the sacrament, is none article of our feith, which
we are bound to believe under peine of damnacion, when he proves utterly by
the same reason (as he did before) even as much and no less of his bodily
presence in heaven? But where he says, If he do not believe it, that shall
not damn him, how will he prove that? or why does he not so much as pretend
or seem to go about it? But without fail, because his heretical lie therein,
is so great, that it will with no manner of thing be covered, but only with his false feith, which hides it from him, and such other as he is, and from no
man else. And therefore I pray thee, mark well what he says immediately
following in the same lefe for his words be these, Now if they would here
obiecte (he says) that though it be truth, that the abcence out of the bread
could not damn us: yet are we bound to believe it: because of gods word, which
who believes not: as much as in him lies, makes god a lier. And therefore of
an obstinate mind not to believe his word, may be an occasion of damnacion.

How say thou? do thou not see what a foolish fantastical objection he
has here feigned of our behalf? as though we would hold and obiecte, that the
absence out of the bread (as he calls it) were a truth, when that is his
part, and not ours. For he plaieth that part him self, and so do not we, but
the contrary. And again, as though we would object, that we are bound so to
believe it, and that by gods word: but where or which of gods words that is,
he tells us not. Wherefore this propre objection, of his mad fantastical
feignyng, I will pass over, lest I should with more talk, rather hied, then
disclose the foolishnes of it. And therefore behold it well thy self, for I
leave it unto thee, even as it is, because it appears more foolish of it self,
then I can declare with all I can say. And yet because his solucion thereof,
does answer it so well, as though thobiectio^ it self had never been
imagined, thou shall here it, to the intent thou may perceive, what a color
he does cast upon the matter, under the only pretense of an answer, and
nothing else.

To this we may answer (he says) that we believe gods word, and knowlage
that it is true: but in this we dissent, whether it be true in the sense that
we take it in, or in the sense, that ye take it in: and we say again that
though ye have (as it appears unto you) the evident words of Christ, And
therefore consiste in the bark of the letter: yet are we compelled by the
conferryng of the scriptures to gether within the letter, to search out the
mind of our savior. which spoke the words. And we say thirdly, that we do
it not of an obstinate mind. For he that defends a cause obstinately
(whether it be true or false) is ever to be reprehended. But we do it to
satisfy our consciences, which are compelled by other places of scripture,
reasons, and doctors so to judge of it. And even so ought you to judge of your
party, and to defend your sentence not of obstinacy, but by the reason of
scriptures, which cause you so to take it, and so ought neither party to
despise other. For each seeks the glory of god: and true understanding of
the scripture.

I doubt not, but here thou see a wonderful charitee in this man, which
swadeth so sore, to such a concord to be had between truth and falshed, that
he would have neither party despise other: for each (he says) seeks the
glory of god, and the true understanding of the scripture. And therefore I
would yet know of him, when, or where, that party should find the glory of
god, and the true understanding of the scripture, which seeks it in falshed?


HERE. what speak you of that, when Frith means no such party?


CATH. Will thou say so? is not that one of the parties, that Frith speaks
of, which holds with Christ's bodily presence in the sacrament, and that to
be believed under peine of damnacion, and the other, which holds directly the
contrary? And therefore if the one be true, the other must needs be false: yet
each (he says) seeks the glory of god, and the true understanding of the
scripture: And I say then, the one in trewthe, and the other in falshed,
speed as they can, for so it is, when they be in two direct contraries. But
where our savior Christ says unto us, Math. 7.
Querite, and inuenietis, that is to say, seek and ye shall find, although he
meant therein none other thing, then apperteigneth to the glory of god, and the
true understanding of the scripture, yet because he did not there apoynt us
dir^^^ with apert and special words, wherein we should seek it, Frith
perchaunte took him to mean it indifferently, as well in falshead as in
truth. And that may well be the cause why, that he for his part, sought the
glory of god, and the true understanding of the scripture, in falshed: And
left us to seek it in truth, where withal he would not meddle: how be it
little need he had so to do, for therein found we it, long before. And that is
the cause, he liked us so much the wors. And therefore yet mark the wily
Raynard, where about he goes.


HERE. where about?


CATH. Even to bring both the parties to such an indifferency, that neither
should despise other, while his part might have a quiet leisure to creep in,
and clean thrust out the the other: for well he wost, (for all his false
dissimulation) that they could not continue together. Therefore as touthing all
the rest of his answer beside, weigh his objection and that well together: And
as in folly and falshed thou shall not find them a sonder. Even so in any point
else, thou shall not bring them together. wherefore now because we have hitherto
spent some more time then neded, in an error so plain, and yet not half so
much, as the foolish falshed thereof would require, if it should be fully
declared, look if he have ought else, that seems to the any thing more to
maintain or make for his evil purpose then this, bring it forth, and thou
shall here what I will say to it.


Cap. 11.
HERE. Me think sir, he has, for all this, in a certain place, such a strong
reason for his purpose herein, as all the world can not avoid.


CATH. what so ever it be, thou may yet, by this that is pass, be sure of
one of these two, that either it is not true in deed, or else although it be,
yet it makes nothing for him.


HE. By that reason, it can make nothing for him, whether it by true or false.


CATH. That can be no lie, for there is no truth, that can trewly make with
falshed.


HERE. Yet ye shall here what it is.


CATH. With a good will.


HERE. In the.iii. leaf of his book even these be his words,

And first that it is (he says) none article of our feith necessary to be
believed under peine of damnacion, may thus be farther confirmed. The same
feith shall save us, which saved the old fathers before Christ's incarnacion:
But they were not bound under peine of damnacion to believe this point. Therefore
it shall follow, that we are not bound thereto under peine of damnacion. The
first part of mine argument, is proved by saint Austen ad Dardanu^: And I dare
boldly say almost in an hundredth places. For there is I think no proposicion,
which he dothmore often inculcat then this, that the same feith shall save us,
which saved our fathers. The second part is so manifest, that it needs no
probacion: for how could they believe that thing, which was never said nor done?
and without the word they could have no feith, upon the treuth of these two
parts must the conclusion needs follow. Now sir, how say ye to this gere?


CATH. Countreiman, as thou say, it is perchance after the judgment of
some, a great and sore reason. But yet I promise the one thing, it seems to
the no more true, then it is well known to me, to be very false, specially as
he does understand it, and as thou shall find it, if thou harken well to me.
And for the sure and perfect trial thereof, Thou must first consider this, that
Logike is a certain.


HERE. Nay then we have it, and ye come in with Logike*


CATH. What soft, thou do interrupt my tale, as though thou might not
abide the hering of it.


HERE. Tushe sir Logyke, what should Lohike do here*


CATH. A, I know what thou meanest well enough. And therefore hold thy peace a
while, till I have told the, Logike.
what I mean. For Logike (I say) is a certain art, which does teach a
compendious way to discern the veritee of a thing, from the falsitee, and
that can not be done, except both be known. Therefore among all other
things, there is for the purpose invented a certain argument, which is made
and formed of three parts. And of the which three, the first and the second
are called in schools, two proposicions, the more and the less. And when
those two, in their convenient kind be both true, and trewly knitte together,
then the third part, which of them both, must needs follow, and is called the
conclusion, can never be false. And again, when any of those two proposicions
be false, or not trewly knit together, the conclusion, which should follow, can
by them, never be true. This argument also, when the first part, and the second
is true, whereof their necessary conclusion must needs be true also, it is
called the^ a Syllogismus. Sillogismus. Sophisticacion.
And when any of the^ both be false, for the which their intended conclusion,
can by them never be true, it is the^ called a Sophisticacion. So that between
Logike and Sophistry, there is in this case no difference, but under one
aparent manner and form, the one holds the veritee, and the other the
falsitee. Therefore this facultee, art, or cunning of Logike, I dare well say,
there is no just lover of truth, but will judge it very necessary to be had,
when it is but the just trial of truth it self. And yet is it a thing, which
in special, some teachers do utterly forbid, and cry out upon. But that would
they never do, if their teaching were good and true. For who be they, that
teach a doctrine, and forbids their disciples the judgment of such, as can
best skill to discern what it is, but only falls harlotes, which go about to
deceive.


HERE. Sir wherefore speak you all this?


CATH. Trewly even for the school, that thou art of. For have you not brought
the name of Logike and philophie so far in sclander of subtle and crafty
deceit, among no small sort of such as knows it not, that they do now
suspecte, and refuse the judgment of a man so much the more, as they think or
hear tell, that he is learned therein. But (...) this your (...) doiyng, how
great is your shame, in the judgment of such, as do well perceive it? And
yet how like is all that shame, in respect of this, that the very same may
well be found and proved in you, which ye try so sore upon all your
disciples, most cheiflie to shun and beware of in other? that is to say,
sophistical subtiltee, as though ye meddled nothing withal your selfs, when ye
practice and use almost nothing else? And that is the cause why, that ye forbede
your scholars the hering of such as know it, lest by them they should learn to
epsy and perceive your falshed, which ye would have run and ^eepe still in
the dark, unto the time it might put out all the light.


Cap. 12.
HERETICVS. Sir I pray you give me leave, we go about the (...) of Frithes
matter, therefore, what is all this to that purpose?


CATH. Do thou not perceive?


HERE. No trewly. For he never used any such thing as ye speak of.


CATH. No did? Shall I need to rehearse unto thee (which do know it so
well) how he doothe exclame and cry against sophisters and sophistry almost
in every corner of his book, and yet plaieth none other, but the same part
him self? For inquire thou of any ^^n, that can shall thereof, and if he do
not say, that this, which thou have now rehearsed of Frithes own words, is
the self same scholasticall and sophistical argument, which I have here
discribed unto thee, and is daily used in the schools, take me for no better
then, (I say) he is. How be it, I do not mean, that it is the same
argument, which is daily used in schools, when it holds the verite^: but
utterly the same, when it holds the falsitee, only with these two
differences, that in the schools it is put in latin where he puts it here
in english and again them it is but a feigned falshed, to teach me^ to be
were of it: And here it is an ernest falshed, to teach men to be deceived with
it. And to prove this that I say to be true, First I shall not need to bid
thee, bear his argument well in mind, which have here rehearsed it unto me thy
self. Therefore if thou mark it well the whole pith of it, does rest upon the
saiing of saint Austen, which as (...) does allege him, is this, (The same
feith shall save us which ^aned the old fathers before Christ's incarnation
Now if saint Austen had not said, the same feith, but an other feith shall save
us. etc. it had been utterly nothing for Frithes purpose. Therefore thou may
plainly see thy self, that all the weight of the matter, does lie in this
word. The same. Wherefore let us now ^^e ^^rder, what manner of word this is,
and whether it be apt to build a good argument upon, or not.


HERE. That is but reason.


CATH. then tell me trewly, what thing thou art.


HERE. What thing am I? what should I be but a man?


CATH. And am I any other thing then that?


HERE. No that is plain.


CATH. Then am I the same that thou art, and thou the same that I am. But what
so ever the same that I am, does, I do: And what so ever the same that thou
art, does, thou do. Therefore it must needs follow, that what so ever thou
doste, I do, and what so ever I do, thou dooste, because thou art the same
that I am, and I the same that thou art.


HERE. Naie sir, that will not follow.


CATH. Why so?


HERE. Because you take this word (the same) other wise then I meant. For
although we be each the same that other is in nature, we do yet differ in
person: for ye be one person, and I an other: And not the same that you be,
nor you ye same that I am. Therefore your arts be not mine: nor mine yours.


CATH. Yet thou thy self, when thou were first borne, were the same in nature,
and the same in person then, that thou art now, and the same now that thou
were then.


HE. That I grant.


CATH. But thou were then, not one yard long. Therefore no more thou art
now, when thou art now the same that thou were then.


HERE. What sir yet again? It is two things to be the same in nature and
person: and to be the same in quantitee. Therefore ye may be sure, that I meant
not so another.


CATH. Then thou or I, were deceived ageine in this word (the same).


HERE. That is true.


CATH. Yet that quantitee of thine except, thou will grant thy self to be
now, the same that thou were then.


HERE. Yea that except.


CATH. And then thou coudest another speak nor go. whereof it follows, no more
thou can do now, while thou art now the same that thou were then.


HERE. Tushe, sir after this manner, ye might reason also of mine age, and my
knowlage, with all other powers and qualitees beside, when ye may be sure, I
do not so mean.


CATH. Then tell me this, were not all english people an hundredth years paste,
bound to the law of this land, and we now living? also to the same.


HERE. That is no doubt.


CATH. Go to now, and take heed what I say: we be bownd to the same law now,
that they were, which lived an hundredth years paste. But they that were living
an hundredth years paste, were not bound to the statutes and arts of the last
parliament. Therefore it follows, no more be we now: except thou will say,
they be no parts of the law: and then we be not bound to them another.


HE. Sir we be bonnde to the law that our elders were, and they to the same
that we be. But this is understand the same in general, that is to say, the
law of England, without any respect of parts. For it was none other, nor no
less, then the law of England, which they were bound to: nor it is no
other, nor no more then the law of England another, which we are bound to.
Therefore when it is no more, nor less, nor yet none other, it must needs be
the same (as I said) in respect of the whole generally, and not the same in
respect of the parts specially, by as many acts and statutes as has been
sens, for considerations added unto it mo then was than. Therefore your argument
is false, and can not hold.


Cap. 13.
CATH. Country man, I can thee thank, for without question thou speak
herein very well: and therefore mark what I shall say unto thee, when it is
so, that this word (the same) is of a significacion so ambiguous and
incertaine, that a thing may be said the same in nature, and not the same in
person, or the same in them both, and not the same in quantitee, or the same in all three, and not the same in power, or the same in one qualitee, and not the
same in an other: or the same in general, and not the same inspeciall: or the
same in all these, and yet not the same in many cases mo beside: when a thing
(I say) may be called the same, and yet not the same, in so many respects,
why did not Frith with all his sophistry (ageine the which he barked so sore,
and yet used nothing more) why did he not consider all this in the word, and
put away the doubtful understanding, and ambiguite thereof, before he made
thereupon his argument? Seeing it might chance to be (as of him it is) taken
otherwise, then the author of the word, did mean or intend? for either he
knew, or he knew not, that he should so do, or else take it for no ground or
principle to dispute upon: if he did not know it, that is to sai, if he did not
know, that a conclusion can not be proved by any principle, which is
incertaine: doubtless he was the^ to blind a teacher, to be believed of any man,
specially in so great and weighty a matter as this is. For all men know, it is
against both nature and reason, to come to suerte, by incertitude. Agein of the
other part, if he did know it, and yet would (as he did) tumble forth his
argument nevertheless: what other thing could move him so to do, but only wilful
malice and falshed. For be it in case, that I perceived a word or a sentence,
the sense whereof: were doubtful and incertaine (for the which no treuth
thereupon were probable) and yet before the ambiguitee thereof were put away,
would ground mine argument upon the same: what could cause me so to do, but
only to make me^ think, I prove that I prove not, And so make them believe,
that they ought not. For the intent of eueri ernest argument, is alwai to cause
the conclusion to be granted, whether it be true or falls. Therefore what motive
thereof can thou find, in who so ever so does, but even a malicious intencion
to deceive other? Wherefore, whether blind ignorance, or else this wilful malice,
were the cause why, that Frith did build his argument upon this flitting
foundation, I leave it partly for this time, to thine own judgment. For of
the one, or the other, I am sure thou can not excuse him


HE. Yes sir, he might chance (as many men do) purposly put forth an
argument, taken of an incerteine principle, to here what would be said unto it.


CATH. Nay nay my friend, that is not it, that ca^ excuse him. For although
that, be sometime used in schools, to the intent it might by that, be learned,
where the falsitee of such arguments does rest: yet questionles Frith had here
no such purpose. For he did not put it forth, to see what would be said to the
contrary, or that it should be learned, where the deceit of it lay. But his
intent was only by the craftines thereof, to draw men into his false and wicked
opinion. The which he held so vehemently to be true, that he laid thervpo^, no
les wager, the^ his own self, both body and soul: the loss of the which,
without fail, is no les like in both, then it is well known, to be sure in the
one: how be it that shall pass, to come to our purpose again, which is to
show, the great falshed of him in his argument.

For who but he, would as who say, so hedlyng at a venture judge saint Austen
(when he says, the same feithe shall save us, which saved the old fathers)
to mean the same feith in respect of every particular point distinctly, and not
the same only in respect of the whole together confusely. For these two
consideracions do much differ in every thing. And that wondrous plainly in
the law, as thou did even now declare thy self. For in the consideracion
and respect of the whole, confusely to gether, it is even the same now, that it
was an hundredth years past, and was even the^ the same that it is now: that is
to say, the law of England now, and none other then: the law of England
then, and none other now. which word does signify, all the whole thing
to gether more or less without any difference or respect of any special
parts at all. For when thou hear it spoken, it does put the no more in
mind of any one part, then of any other. but of the unity of them all
together, which, the name does only signify. But the consideracion of the
same in parts distinctly, does differ far from that. For in respect
thereof, it is not even the same now, that it was an hundredth years paste, nor
the same then, that it is now, by all the acts and statutes, which has been
added unto it since, and yet can it not follow but that it is the same law in
general still, for all the new parts, which it had not before. Also a tree,
being full of new leaves, twigges, branches, and bows, is yet the same tree,
that it was, years past before they spro^ge out of it: but how the same? the
same in respect of the whole, which is but one. And not the same in respect of
the parts which are many. For some parts be new, but so are not al. yet
before the new parts were sprung out of it, it was none other, nor yet no
less then the same tree, that it is afterward: and afterward none other nor
yet no more, then the same tree, that it was before. Therefore as the tree, full
of new parts, is even the same tree, that it was before: and yet not the same
in every point. And as the law of this land, is even the same law now, that
it was an hundredth years paste, and yet not the same in every point. Even so is
the feith of Christ now, the same that it was before his incarnacion, that is
to say, the feith of Christ then, and the feithe of Christ now, all one and
the same, in respect of the whole (whereof it bears the name, without respect
of any nu^bre of parts more or less) but yet not ye same in respect of every
point, without any manner of difference perticularly. Wherefore suppose thou in
it, but even one particular difference, and tell me then, where is all Frithes
argument become: When, for any thing that is in it else, even the feith of this
blessed sacrament, might well be the same, which he labors so sore to
overthrow.


Cap. 10
HERE. An argument sir ye know right well, is not to be avoided by
supposicions or conjectures, but by probable and manifest reasons. And therefore
if ye can prove any such particular difference between the old fathers feith
before Christ's incarnacion and ours now, whereof it must needs follow, yt saint
Austens words can not be so understand, as you say Frith does take them, I
wot then what I have to do.


CA. Without fail there be diverse differences, not only to sure to be doubted
in, but also to manifest and open to be inquired of. For had the old fathers
before Christ's incarnacion believed in every particular point of the feithe as
we do: that is to say, believed his blessed birth, passion, resurrection, and
ascencion to be done and paste, as we do: and we to come as they did: Even
so far differ we each from other, that it had else ben damnable, both of
their part, and ours to. Also there was contained in their feithe diverse
sacraments, which we have not in ours. And likewise in ours, which they had
not in theirs, and that the chief of each part. Again, their feithe, being
much hid, and covered with so many figures, dark shadows, and mystical
prophecies, as in manner the whole course of scripture does testify that it
was: who therefore would not see it to be then, but obscure, gross and confuse,
in respect of the pure distinct clerenesse, which ours took, by the very
coming of our savior Christ him self, and the predicacion of his gospel?
And what was that same obscuritee, but as who say, a coueryng of many points
together confusely, which the new bright splendor of Christ, did open and
show distinctly? whereby it may well appear, that their feithe and ours,
could not be thoroughly like and both one, in every point perticularly. More
over there is no doubt, but that there were many good and faithful folk, of
the commune people of the Jews, beside the prophets. Nevertheless, we may not
think, that they had the feith in such manner as the prophettes had them
selfs (which were therewith immediately inspired of god) that is to say, not
so clearly, so specially, and so distinctly as they had, but much more
obscurely, grossly, and confusely: By reason whereof it is plain, that their
feith contained many things more then they were ware of them selfs, the which
things were yet not so hid and unknown to the prophettes that taught them.
Furthermore it is not to be thought, that each of the prophets had it like
distinctly another. When some of them be called more, and some less, as the
cause whereof, does well apere by their works, of the which, some one is
far more large then diverse of the rest together: God showed not distinctly
and apertly, all to each of the^, but some to one, and some to an other. Yet we
may not say, yt he, or any of the common people, which were feithfull, had
for all that, any less then altogether co^fusely. For who so ever, at the
least way, has it not so, doubtless has rightly thereof, nothing at all:
because the trewthe of the whole feithe (as I showed the yester day) is
privily hid and contained in every part of it. Finally, as the manner of
having the feithe, differd between the prophets and the common people of the
Jews then: so does it not only between their time and ours, but also between
some one sort, and an other, of us even now. For there is no doubt, but the
plowman has now the same feithe, which has the doctor of diuinitee, and the
doctor, the same that he has, that is to say, the feithe of Christ: but yet
far unlike. For where the plowman has it in manner but grossly and confusely:
the doctor has it more specially and distinctly. And therefore in the plowmans
confuse feith: doubtless there be many mo special articles and mysteries
contained, then he is ware of him self, which be not unknown to the doctor:
Yet nevertheless, unto the belefe, as well of them, as of the residewe, the
plowman is no less bownde, (for all that he is not ware of them) then is the
doctor of diuinitee with his presise knowlage. For the same feithe shall save
the one, which saves the other: Although they have it not both like, but with
great difference. Therefore when the feith between the fathers and us, has by
reason of time, taken one difference, and that such as they could not have
been saved, beleuyng in every point as we do, nor we beleuyng as they did. And
when it has also taken an other difference in things, no less then very
sacraments, and that of the chief of both parts. And beside all that, when
there is between their feith and ours such a difference in the manner of having
of it, that it may be said, they had the same and not the same that we have:
and we the same and not the same that they had, because that, which they had
more grossly confusely, and obscurely, we have it more particularly, distinctly
and manifestly. Saint Austen (thou may well know) when he says, (as Frith
does allege him) the same feithe shall save us, which saved the fathers,
never meant (as Frith does falsely understand him) the same feithe in every
condition perticularly, but the same, in respect of the whole confusely, that
is to say, the feith of Christ generally, without any distinct consideracion
of parts. As a man does often times speak or think of money, without any
consideracion of this coin or that, or how many diverse coins be contained
under the general name of moneie. As there has been sometime fewer, and
sometime mo, and yet the general name thereof, no more, no less, nor none
other, but always one and the same.


Capitulo. 15.
HERE. Sir yet still, I do somewhat marvel, how ye know, that Frith (as ye
say) does understand saint Austen to mean the same feithe in every
condition perticularly.


CATH. And I do marvel also, how thou cowdest else find which way saint
Austens words might so much as seem, any thing to sound to his purpose. For
if he had understand saint Austen to mean, the same feithe, with any
difference, Then the same difference might have been in this holy sacrament, as
well as in any thing else. And where had Frithes purpose ben then? Therefore
thou may easily perceive, that he understands him to mean, without any
difference at all. For if he had understand so much, and no more difference,
between the fathers feithe and ours, but even only as is in the diverse manner
of having thereof: that is to say, of our part, the particular, distinct, and
pure clerenesse of it (which it took through the blessed coming of Christ,
and of their part, the gross and confuse obscuritee of it (wherein it was
before that same light of the world came forth and showed his beams abroad)
there were no doubt, but it would thereof well follow (as the trewthe is in
deed) that this holy sacrament, as well as the sacrament of baptism, with
many other things more, was then in their feith, although not manifest, as
now in ours, but obumbrat, covered and hid, with the shadow of that clowdie
season. According to the words of the apostle, saying: ^. Co. 1^
Our fathers were al under a cloud: which clowd had been to the^ no cloud at
all, if every particular part of our feith, which was contained in theirs,
had been so distinctly had and known of them, as it is of us: yet they had the
same feith that we have: how be it (as I said) after an other manner. For if we
should be bownde to the belefe of no mo things perticularly, then were open
and manifest to them before Christ's most glorious incarnacion, because the
same feithe shall save us, which saved them then: it must thereof clearly
follow, that either our savior Christ him self brought with him no more light
of the feithe, that is to say, he reveled no mo secrets thereof, necessary
for our salvation, then were open and known before. Or else if he did (by
Frithes no reason) we are not bownde to believe them: what wicked person would
believe or think any of them both, beside Frith? I must needs except him,
because it so follows of his own doctrine. Therefore where the manner of
schools is this, that he which makes an argument, must to confirm the same,
prove the parts thereof particularly by them selfs, which form and manner
Frith does here sophistically pretend to imitate: And for ye proof of his first
part, he has no more but his allegacio^ of saint Austen falsely understand,
which makes for him even thereafter, as thou have herd, I will now to the
second part of his argument, to see what proof he makes of that: except thou
have yet any thing else to say more in this.


HE. Nothing sir, that I will yet declare, till I here what ye will say to the
rest.


Cap. 16.
CATH. Then the second part of his argument (thou know) is this, yt the
fathers before Christ's incarnacion, were not bound under pein of da^nacion to
believe this point of the holy sacrament. Which part (he says) is so manifest,
that it needs no probacion, and two causes why, he does allege, whereof the
one is, that in their time it was never said. And the other is, yt it was never
done. For without the word (he says) they could have no feith. Therefore
quickly to dispatche the one of them, if he will have it follow, that the
fathers before Christ's incarnacion were not bownde to believe it, because it
was never done in their time: by the same reason it must needs follow, that
their were not bownde to believe, the birthe of Christ, his death, his
resurrection, nor his ascencion. For those things were never done in their
time another. Wherefore if they were not bound to believe those articles, it
must also needs follow thereof, that we are not bound to believe them neither,
because the same feithe shall save us which saved them.


HERE. Sir although these things were not done in their time, yet they were
done sense.


CATH. So was the holy sacrament to. Therefore what is that to Frithes purpose?
he speaks of their time, and not of any time sense. For he goes about to
take away, our bond of belefe in the holy sacrament, because (as he says)
the fathers before Christ's incarnacion were not bound to believe it. And they
were not bownde to believe it (he says) because it was never done in their
time. And I say, no more was Christ's birth, his passion, his resurrection,
nor his ascencion another. Wherefore (by his doctrine) the fathers were not
bownde to believe them. And by the same rule no more are we, because the same
feith shall save us, which saved them. Therefore is not this, that it was never
done in their time, one good cause why, that this second part of his
argument needs no probacion? as it needs not in deed.

For without fail it is plain evil enough, without any probacion at all. And
now therefore to his other cause, which is this, that it was never said in
their time: what must follow thereof?


HERE. As Frithe does say, that they were not bownde to believe it. For
without the word (he says) they could have no feithe.


CATH. Then if he will have it follow, that the fathers were not bownde to
believe it, because it was never said in their time, will it follow thereof,
that we are not bownde to believe it, when we have not only herd it said in
our time, but also have it in deed?


HERE. Ye sir, for the same feithe shall save us which saved them.


CATH. Then if we be not bownde to believe it, because the same feithe shall
save us, which saved them, and they were not bownde to believe it, because
they never herd of it: it must also by the same reason follow, that they were
not bownd to believe any of those things, which our savior Christ, and all
his disciples did preach and teach, more then was said before their coming
in those fathers days: so that in all the gospels and the epistles, that is to
say, in all the new testament, there is nothing said, necessary for our
salvation, more then was said, herd, and understand, before the incarnacion
of Christ in the fathers time: or else if there be: seeing (after this
doctors mind) the fathers were never bownde to believe it, because it was
never said in their time, and without the word (he says) they could have
no feithe, we need not believe it another, because the same feithe shall save us
which saved them. is not this a goodly reason? Farther more, how does this
doctrine agree with the words of our savior Christ him self, where, to his
disciples he says: Blessed are your ears, Mat. 13.
because they do hear those things, which many prophettes and just men,
greatly desired to hear, and yet herd them not. Therefore what were those
things, that made the ears of the apostles so happy and blessed in the
hearing of them, but the sayings of Christ? And why were those prophettes and
just men desirous to here them, and herd them not: but because they were
never said in their time? Therefore they were not bownde to believe them, and
consequently no more are we another, because the same feithe shall save us,
which saved them. Take good head, for this doctor will make thee a good
christen man, if thou mark and harken well to him. For if our savior Christ
spoke any things, of more worthiness and profit then other, doubtless those
prophettes and just men, were most desirous to here them, and yet herd them
not. But the cause why was this, that they were never said, in their time.
Wherefore they were not bound to believe the most worthy and profitable
things, that ever Christ spoke: and no more are we another, because the same
feithe shall save us which saved them. Also the chief things that ever
Christ taught, are the chief things that apperteine to the health of man's
soul. But those things were they, that made the ears of his apostles blessed
in their herynge of them. And those things were they, that many prophets and
just men desired to here, and herd them not. Wherefore those prophets and
just men were not bownde to believe, the chief things that ever Christ
taught for the health of man's soul: Because they were never said in their
time. And therefore no more are we bownde to believe them another, because the
same feith shall save us, which saved them.


Cap. 17.
HERE. Sir ye make (me think) more ado of the matter then needs:


CA. Naie then tell me how much time should I spe^de, if I should not refrain til
I had showed thee, all such abominable inconveniences, as must needs follow,
of these first two parts, of his sophistical argument? Wherefore, of the
third part, which is the conclusion, thou nedest not doubt what it is: And
therefore because thou have sufficiently herd, how well he has proved the
parts thereof: Behold now the whole together, after the same form and manner
as he does put it: And see how it will appear in an other article or two. The
same feithe (he says) shall save us, which saved the old fathers before
Christ's incarnacion. But they were not bownde under peine of damnacion, to
believe, that the sacrament of baptism is a sacrament. Therefore it shall
follow, that we are not bownde thereto, under the peine of damnacion. The first
part of mine argument is proved, by saint Austen (after Frithes understanding)
Ad dardanum. etc. The second part is so manifest, that it needs no
probacion. For how could they believe that thing, which was never said nor
done: And without the word they could have no feithe. Upon the truth of
these two parts, must the conclusion needs follow: which is this: That we
are not bound to believe that the sacrament of baptism is a sacrament. And
even by the same argument, that the blessed sacrament of ye altar, is not so
much as a sacrament another, as of his own words I proved unto thee before: so
that, although we are (as every man knows) bownde all, under peine of
damnacion, to receive the sacrament of baptism, yet we be not bound to believe
it: that is to say, we are not bound to believe the same thing, which we are
bound to receive, when the just rule is this, yt look of what necessitee the
thing is to be had, of the same necessitee, it is to be believed. But thou may
see, what a feith this man's argument techeth us, so new and strange, as I dare
well say, never true christian man was aqueinted withal, or the like. And yet
let us behold, the pattern thereof once again in an other case: and so bliss
us clean from it for ever. The same feith shall save us, which saved the old
fathers before Christ's incarnation: But the Jews dispersed now in Christendom
(as in Room, Venice, and in other places) have the same feithe, which the
old fathers had before Christ's incarnacion. Therefore it shall follow, that
the same feithe shall save us, which the Jews has now. The first part of
mine argument, (after Frithes understanding) is proved by saint Austen ad
dardanu^. etc. The second part is so manifest, that it needs no probacion:
for the credence of so many, no light persons, but of sobre wits and good
lernyng both, as has come from Room, Venice, and other places (where many of
the Jews be now abidyng) and has made report here among us, not only of
their feith to be of the old testament, which was the old fathers feith, but
also of their excedyng diligence wherewith they cesse not to keep and observe
the same, and the ceremonies thereof, so much as they may, instructyng,
teaching, and bringynge up their children in such manner therein, that they be
thought more prompte, ready, and perfect in the letter of the old testament,
at.xvi. or.xviii. years of age, then the most part of our students be at
thirty. The credence (I say) of those so many grave and sad persons coming
from where those Jews be, and reportyng these things of them, with much and
many other more concerning the same, does show an argument inevitable, that
they have now the same feithe, which the old fathers had before Christ's
incarnation, specially when in their fast holding and keeping thereof, does
consiste all their great hope, and whole trust of pleasynge god to their
salvation. Wherefore upon the trewthe of these two parts, must the conclusion
needs follow. which is even this, that the same feith, which the Jews has
now, shall save us: that is to say, without batisme, without the belief that
our savior Christ is come, or has suffered death, or has risen again, or
has ascended to heaven, of the which, they believe not so much as any one.
Judge now thy self, whether this be of true Logike, or of deceivable
Sophistry: yea rather of very true feith, or abominable heresy: Is it not a
proper argument, which can so try our dewtie in every article, from one to an
other, that without parill of damnation we may leave our belief of them
altogether? For surely, and without any doubt, look how much it makes against
this article, which he would overthrow, if he might: Even so much it makes not
only against many more directly, but also against them altogether consequently.
If it make nothing against all (as I said before) without fail no more does
it against this one: For any thing against this one, and so much against all:
Nothing against all, and as little against this.


Cap. 18.
HERE. Well sir, we have enough of this. And therefore I pray you, let us here
what he brings more of saint Austen in other places.


CATH. Some reason thou semest to require. But yet I would first wit of thee,
where he had these words of saint Austen, which he has herein thus alleged
already, and bosteth so much to make for his purpose?


HERE. He him self does tell you where, in that he says ad dardanum, that is
to say, in that epistle, which saint austen wrote to one Dardanus.


CATH. Ye but when Frith does allege saint Austen in other places, he does
allege him in his own words as he wrote them at the first in latin, and
after does translate the same in to English. And therefore why does he not
here now, even so likewise?


HERE. He does allege him in English.


CATH. And why not also first in latin?


HERE. What need that here, when thenglishe is enough?


CATH. Why needs it not here, as well as in other places, where he does both?


HERE. It needs not in any place, when thengleshe is as good, and does serve
the turn as well as the latin. Wherefore there is no matter in this. For it
was but as it chaunsed him to do.


CATH. Chaunsed him? Nay my friend thou shall not excuse him so. For I will
recite unto the, saint Austens own words of the same place my self, both in
latin and also in English. And then tell me how this Reynards allegacion
thereof, does agree withal. For the very words of saint Austen speking there,
of the sacrament of babtisme, are in latin even these.

Sacrame^tu^ porro regenerationis nostre, manifestum esse voluit manifestatus
mediator: Erat aute^ antiquis justice aliquid occultnm. Cum tamen and illi eadem
fide salui fierint, quae fuerat suo tempore reuelanda. That is to say,
certainly, the mediator made manifest, would the sacrament of our regeneracion
to be manifest For there was something hid from the old just men: when for
all that, they were saved by the same feith which was to be reveled, when the
time thereof came. Now mark how Frithes allegacion agrees with this. For he
makes it in these words: The same feith (he says) shall save us, which
saved the old fathers before Christ's incarnacion: how does this and the
other, sound and agree? does saint Austen make here any mention of Christ's
incarnacion? any mention of fathers any mention of us? as this wily pie does
chatter and clatter unto us?


HERE. Sir although he does it not directly in proper words, yet is it so
implied in his saying, that it may well be gathered thereof. For by those old
just men, he meant the old fathers. And by the same feith, he meant the feith
that saves us sense Christ's incarnacion. So that all this (I say) may well
be gathered of his saying. And according to the same, Frithe does here allege
him:


CATH. Although thou say in Frithes behalf, as much as can be said for him,
yet thou must needs grant, that the same, that Frith does here allege, is not
the very words of saint Austen, but Frithes own gathering thereof, as he him
self does take them.


HERE. What of that?


CATH. I shall tell the what, thou have herd enough to perceive, that his
gathering is not of saint austens meaning. wherefore it can not be avoided, but
he does here allege saint Austen in that, which saint Austen never said, nor
meant, when he does allege him another in his words, as he spoke them, nor yet
in the sense, that he meant them, but under pretense thereof, in his own proper
meaning, according to his false dreamyng and nothing else.


HERE. Nay sir and ye go so to work, I must needs look better upon the
matter. For where ye say he does not allege saint Austens words, that is not
so. For although he does not allege them all, yet he does allege some of them.


CATH. Thou say well therein* For in deed some of a man's words, may so be
handled without the rest, that they are enough to inuert and overthrow the very
right se^ce of all the whole tale. And therefore what words of saint Austens be
those that he does here allege?


HE. That are these: they were saved (says S. Aus.) by the same feith and the
same feith (says Frith) shall save us.


CA. Call thou this an allegation of a man's words, which should always be,
but a just rehersall or a veritall thereof, is witness, prove, or confirm an
other thing by? For to that purpose, all true men do evermore use it, and
none otherwise. But here thou see no rehersall at all, but only an other
distinct saying: and so distinct, that it differs in words, it differs in
order, it differs in sense, it differs in time, it differs in person, and
almost in every condition: so that it may well be denied to be any of saint
Austens mind. In so much, that if Frith had le^^e out, p^^ in, or changed,
but a word of saint Austens saiying, he had yet made therein, but a false
allegacion. Wherefore now, (...) he changes in manner no less then all
together, what shall we say, but that, under the only color and pretense of
an allegacion, he does falsely belie saint Austen, and nothing else?


HERE. Sir that foundeth but shrewdly, and therefore I pray you say not so.


CATH. Why ^a^e not I say so, as well as he does is? For does he not here^
father and forge the great proof of his purpose upon saint Austen? And yet what
one word has he here of saint Austens saying but only this, that he says,
the same feith? which he takes another in the same sense, nor order ^^ther,
that saint Austen speaks it in. And therefore does he not lie upon him, when
he says his purpose may be proved by him* for what can a word or words
prove, when they make no perfect sentence? and what perfect sentence makes these
words, They were saved by the same feith? But wottest thou why, he handles
the matter after this sort?


HERE. Why say you?


CATH. I shall tell the. Frith took this place of S. Austen, as though it had
been like unto a snaake: whose venim (men say) is but in the head and the
tail: which being cut away, the rest of the body may well be eaten, as
it is said, to be used in some countries. And therefore according to the same,
Frith perceiving the head and tail of this place of saint Austen to be such,
as were enough and able to kill and destroy the whole pith of his purpose
altogether, did in his allegacion cut them both clean away: and yet he
suspectinge that they would, at the least, be missed and asked for, if he should
have brought forth all the rest of his body, as it is, did also therefore cut
out thereof, but this preatie piece (the same feyth) so little, as whereby it
should not be known, of what kind of body it was: And so, neither the head,
nor the tail be looked for, nor missed another. For if he had brought forth the
whole rest of the body together, that is to say, the middle part as it is, and
said thus as saint Austen does (they were saved by the same feith) we must
needs have required the head of that body, and asked of him, which they? For
thou may well perceive, that saint Austen would not have said, they, (which
has relacion to some other word) except he had put somewhat before, unto the
which he does refer it. And that was nothing else, but (as it apereth in his
own plain words) the old just men, from whom (he says) there was some
thing hid. Again likewise, we must have required also the ta^^e of that
body to, and have asked of him, which same feith is that? for this word, the
same, must needs be referred to somewhat, before or after, or else it can have
no sense: And there is nothing before, that it can be referred unto. wherefore
it is declared by that, which comes after, and that is the same feith, which
(as saint Austen says) was to be reveled, when the time thereof came. Now for all that this is the principal place of saint Austen, wherein Frith has his
great and most singular trust, for the special defense and chief proof of his
foundation, yet if there be any spark of good will and wit in the at all, thou
may clearly perceive and see, not only how nothing it makes for him, but
also how clean it makes directly against him, and ouerthrowth his purpose
quite: ye and farther, how inuincibly it does declare and prove that to be true,
which I have said unto the all reddy concerning the same. For doubtless this
is the place (as he says him self) whereof he does (after his facion) gather
and say, The same feith shall save us, which saved the old fathers before
Christ's incarnacion.

Where as saint Austen says, (if thou mark him well) that they were saved, by
the same feith, wherein was some thing hid from them. And again, by the same
feith, which was to be reveled, when the time thereof came: which was not in
their days: but (as he says) when the mediator was made manifest, and would
the sacrament of our regeneracion to be manifest: And that was not before
Christ's incarnacion. Wherefore thou may now even here perceive, by the
plain words of saint Austen him self, directly against Frithes purpose how
the old fathers feith and ours, does both differ, and not differ, not differ
in respect of the whole, considered in general: And yet much differ, in
respect of the parts considered in special. For by the plain words of saint
Austen, there was some thing hid from them, that is not hid from us: And
some thing reveled to us, that was not reveled to them. And yet one and the
same feith in respect of the whole confusely together: and not one, nor the
same another, in respect of the parts considered a sonder. Wherefore, of that
which was hid from them, and now reveled unto us, why may not this holy
sacrament, with the belief thereof be a part, as well as the sacrament of
baptism is: if there be no reason nor truth to the contrary, as there is not
in deed, where is Frithes foundation become? Therefore shall I need now to ask
the any more, why Frith does not here allege saint Austens own words, first
in latin, and then in English, as he does in other places, but leaves them
both clean out as he does? I think thou see the cause why well enough now
thy self: If not, how say thou to such a fellow as brings in a witness,
and when the witness should speak, he will not suffer him to tell his tale?


HE. I say he seems not all the best.


CATH. Nay, if he seem not to the, a very false harlot, yet will I say plain,
that he is no less, when he trusts more in the name of his witness, then in
his tale.


HER. As ye say, there is somewhat in that.


CATH. Then farther, how say thou to that fellow, which in his cause, would
pike out such a witness for him, as when he comes to the hering, would and
must needs tell the tale clean against him?


HERE. Mary sir, I say, he were a very fool to those his witness so.


CATH. Yet may his witness be wise for all that. And therefore when the one of
these fellows plaieth (as thou say) the false harlot, and the other the very
fool, is it not here properly handled of Frith alone, to play no less, the^
both those parts in one? And to have S. Austen his witness in each of them to?


HERE. How so?


CA: First it apereth plain, that S. Austen for his witness he brings in,
and leueth his tale behind him clean, because he would not have that come to
hering in no condition: For else, he might have brought them, both together,
even as well the one as the other. But that he would in no wise do, because he
knew the name of his witness, might in his cause seem to do somewhat, where
as his very tale withal, could in deed do nothing, but mar altogether. And
therefore to brag out the matter, forth he comes with his bare witness whom
he keeps clean in silence, as untrusty to talk in his cause, while he
tells of his own head, all the whole tale, and makes up the evidence him
self. Wherefore because he faceth us after this sort, saying, The first part
of mine argument is proved by saint Austen ad Dardanum. And I dare boldly
say almost in an hundredth places. For I think there be no proposicion,
which he does more often inculcate then this, that the same feith saves us,
which saved our fathers.

I say, because he faceth us after this sort, with such a worthy credible
witness, and yet, when all comes to all, would not suffer us, (by his will)
to here him speak, nor him, as who say, to tell his own tale, another in this
named, nor yet in any other of those hundredth incertaine places beside, what
shall we, or can we make of him else, but even as he makes of him self, a very
false harlot in deed? And therefore as towchinge the other part of his play;
what a fool was he, to chose saint Austen among all other, to be his witness
herein? when there was none more unmeet for his purpose then he, as belike he
did suspect, and yet would have him nevertheless, for his foolish pha^sie:
trusting that with the sound of his name to do somewhat: whereas with his whole
saying he could do nothing: But yet notwihstande all his great shifte made,
to keep him from herynge, (wherein he shows him self as he is) yet was he
brought by mean unto it at last, and then told his tale so directly, against
the peruers purpose of Frithes wicked folly, that nothing could be said more
plain to the contrary, as thou have now herd thy self alredie. Wherefore
consider, that thou haste here now, for one piece of thy friends falshed, such
a manifest proof, as I dare say another thou, nor any friend that he has
beside, is able to cast any color of excuse thereupon: except it be, with
tushe tushe, no no, or some other wriglynge and startlynge talk, from one
thing to an other, till undiscussed the matter be wrapte up even all confusely
together, as your common practice is alwaie to do: Therefore let this be
sufficient, as it is in deed, to know what he is.


Cap. 19.
HERE. Naie sir not so. For he would not call it the very foundation of all his
matter, if he had not somewhat else, to make for him then all this.


CA. I pray thee what is that?


HE. No less then an other saiynge of saint Austen, which makes as well for
him as any thing that ye herd yet.


CA. I think thou saidest not a trewer word to day.


HE. Naie sir, I wot what you mean by that well enough: but I mean this, that
it makes for him very well.


CA. Who would believe that, knowing so much as thou have herd?


HE. That is no matter saint Austens words (he says) be these. As many as in
that ma^na, did understand Christ, did eat the same spiritual meat that we
do. But as many as sought only to fill and satisfy their hunger with that
ma^na, did eat and are dead. And likewise the same drink. For the stone was
Christ.


CATH. What I pray thee, will Frith make of this?


HERE. Mary sir ye shall here his own words.

Here you may gather (he says) of saint Austen, that the ma^na was unto them,
as the bread is unto us. And likewise that the water was to them, as the wine
is to us: which anon shall appear more plainly.


CA. So it had need. For he sends us here to a gatherynge, wherein I see not
what we can gather more trewly, then even the same of him, that we have
gathered before.


HERE. No sir, for he does alege, that saint Austen says further these
words: Moses also did eat manna, Aron, and Phinees did eat of it: and many
other did there eat of it, which pleased god, and are not dead. Why so?
Because they understood the visible meat spiritually. They were spiritually an
hungered, they tasted it spiritually, that they might spiritually be
replenished: they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and all did drink
the same spiritual drink, Even the same spiritual meat, albeit an other
bodily meat. For they did eat manna: and we eat an other thing: but they
did eat the same spiritual, which we do. And they all drank the same
spiritual drink. They drank one thing, and we an other, but that was in the
outward appearance: which for all that did signify the same thing
spiritually, how drank they the same drink? They (says the apostle) drank
of the spiritual stone following them, and that stone was Christ.

Now sir all this does he allege of saint Austen.


CA. Yea, but do thou recite it trewly, as he does allege it?


HE. Even as he does translate it out of latin into english, look in his
book when ye will. And therefore what say ye to it?


CA. This same I sai to it, that all this same difficultee of this same point,
after this same manner, is put this same way, clean out of doubt, if men take
this same truth, as it is in deed, yt this same error, of this same fellow,
made him of this same blindness, that he was of this same judgment, that this
same word, the same: could none otherwise be understand, but even the same
way, that he thought the same should draw men, from the same feith, which al
true christen people does hold, and bring them into the same heresy, which
the same Frith him self does teach. And all this same (I say) did he, by
reason of this same word the same. For is he not as one in a maze, now in the
same path, where he began? And therefore even just in the same case, that he
was than? For is there any other cause, why he does allege these words of
saint Austen, but that he says they did eat and drink the same spiritual
meat and drink, that we do? For what if saint Austen had put this word: an
other: in the place of this word the same? or else had left them both clean
out?


HE. Sir that had been an other matter: it had been then, nothing for Frithes
purpose. And therefore he would not alleged it, if it had been so.


CA. Thou say very true. And therefore all that seems herein, any thing to
make for him, thou may well perceive, does only rest (as I said) in this
same word, the same. And haste thou not herd enough, what a proper principle
it is, being undefined, to prove or conclude any thing by? Nevertheless, When
Frith him self does take this same spiritual meat and drink, to be the body
and blood of Christ, as in the iiii. leaf of his book, his own words
thereof are these, This Abraham (he says) did both eat his body and' drink
his blood, through feith.'

I would therefore wit of him, whether he take the same meat, and drink, to be
only spiritual and not corporal: or else both spiritual and also corporal?


HE. He does take it to be both, and so do I.


CA. As how?


HE. Even as he does here allege of. S. Aust. yt they did eat ma^na, and we an
other thing? which things are both corporal, wherein, that same, which they
did, and we do eat, is one spiritual meat: And therefore that, which they
did, and we do eat, is both spiritual and corporal.


CATH. Thou plaiest Frith with me now in deed. For my question is one, and thou
answerest me to an other. I ask not of their corporal meat, nor of ours
another, which to them was, and to us is, subject to the eye, and other
outward senses: but I ask only of the spiritual meat, which was to them
and is to us (as saint Austen says) all one and the same. Therefore whether
that be only spiritual, and not corporal, or else both corporal and
spiritual, is my question.


HERE. What if he say it be only corporal, and not spiritual?


CATH. Then is he directly against saint Paul in his first epistle, and xv.
chapter to the corinthians.


HERE. What if he say it be only spiritual, and not corporal?


CATH. Then he is directly against the veritee of Christ's body. And therefore
I would wit what he would say to my question?


HERE. He would say, it was spiritual in the old fathers days before
thincarnacion: And now corporal.


CATH. What, only spiritual then, and only corporal now?


HERE. Naie, only spiritual then, and both spiritual and corporal now? 1.
Co. 15



CATH. Then he can not deny, but that same meat, is both so, and otherwise
now, then it was then, when it was then but only spiritual, and now both
spiritual and corporal.


HERE. That I grant.


CATH. Therefore since it is both so, and also otherwise now, than it was then:
why should it not be so, and otherwise eaten now, than it was eaten then? For
it was not then, the same it is now, really in deed. And yet is it now, the
same it was then, virtually in effect. Wherefore there must be a corespondence
between the very present state of the meat, and the very eating thereof even
now, as there was then. And therefore when saint Austen (after the mind of the
apostle) speaks here only of that eating, which is according to the meat,
as it was then virtually in effect, and not of that eating, which is
according to the meat, as it is now really in deed: what makes he for
Frithes purpose?


HERE. It makes for him this: That as they did eat the same spiritual meat,
which we do now, and were saved by the belefe and feithe thereof, as well as
we are: so, Frith would have it follow, that we are not bound to believe any
other manner of eating of the same meat, beside the outward appearance, than
they were then, because the same feithe (he says) saves us, which saved them.


CATH. As touching the same feithe, thou haste herd enough alredie, of his
foolish and false understanding thereof. And therefore to the rest. True thou
say, that he would have it so follow in deed, but by what rule? by what
congreuence? by what reason? is there any rule or reason other, to lead us to
this consequence, that because they did eat the same spiritual meat that we
do, we should not therefore be bownde to the belefe of any other usage,
manner, or difference of eating that holy meat now, then they were then,
before Christ's incarnacion, when the blessed meat in it self, is far
otherwise now, than it was then? and when we have also now, an other manner of
doctrine taught us, of Christ him self, concerning the same, than ever they
had then? how far were this against reason?


HERE. Yet was it the same meat then, that it is now. And therefore the same
now, that it was then.


CATH. True it is. And yet say I, it was not then, as it is now, nor is not
now, as it was then.


HERE. How can that be?


CA. Very well. For as I told thee before, it was then only spiritual and
not corporal, but so it is not now. For now it is both spiritual and
corporal, and so was it not then: wherefore as it may be said, and was then,
the same and not the same, that it is now: So it may be said and is now, the
same and not the same, that it was then: which is to be understand in the
diuersitee of the respects, that is to say, of the spiritualitee, and the
corporalitee. whereof saint Austen touching here but the one, Frith with the
same, would deceive us in both. For else he would or should have made it first
certain, whether saint Austen did here mean the same spiritual meat, really
in deed, or else the same but virtually in effect, before he had attempted any
conclusion thereupon. And therefore because he does now here again, leave the
certaintee of the meaning of this fame word, the same, so doubtful and
indefined, as he did before, (the whole pith of his purpose consistyng therein)
clear it is, that nothing thereof can justly follow, nor be certainly proved
thereby, as thou thy self haste sufficiently seen and herd already. How be it,
the certaintee of a grownde, to reason upon, is no matter with Frith.

For he will first conclude, what so ever he does intend,
And with an incertaine principle so make up the end,
As though even where in very deed, does lie no less then all
There were even utterly to be found no matter at all.
And while there be few, of whom this falshed is perceived,
Small wonder it is, though many be therewith deceived.
He asks no more of al his diligent readers,
But that they should be well way of all those same sophisters:
wdich will make the^ perceive him, one of those same warrears,
That are of all other, the chief spiritual murderars.
Be ware of sophistry, and sophisters, beware cries he:
Yet any one man that uses it more, did thou never see.
And therefore even now of him, what a sophister find we,
But one of the very worste, that is possible to be?

Cap. 20.
HERE. What sir, me think your talk re^neth now in rhyme:


CA. That is no matter, so long as it renneth not against reason.


HE. Whether it do or no, yet it pleases not my fantasy.


CA. Why so.


HERE. What needs any ryme, when reason may well be without it?


CA. Can thou not tell what need?


HE. No not yet.


CA. Then thou meruelst at me, why I do put them to gether.


HE. And even so I do in deed.


CATH. Therefore why dooest thou not much more marvel at Frith, which
refuses to meddell with any of them both? In so much that rhyme, thou know
he used none: And as for reason, how far it is from him, may well apere by
his manifest falshed an lack of truth: Wherefore except thou will say, that
reason may be in falshed, and where truth is absent: thou shall surely find
in him, as it is sometime said of an other, that all his talk renneth clean
without rhyme or reason. And therefore where as I might have, somewhat else to
say, as touching ye manner of his allegacion of saint Austen, in these two
later places, yet because he has no reason to lay to the contrary but yt they
make no less the^ far from his purpose, I will pass the^ over with yt I have
said alredie, and go to that, which he bri^geth in of. S. Beda: whose few
words in latin are these. Videte autem fide manente signa variata." This
turned into english: is none other to sai, but behold


Cap. 21.
HERE. Sir that shall ye do. For consequently in the same. v. leaf of his
book, these be his words. Of those places (he says) you may plainly
perceive, not only that it is none article necessary to be believed under
peine of damnacion, seeing the old fathers never believed it, and yet did eat
Christ in feith, both before they had the ma^na, and more expressly through the
manna: And with no less fruit after the manna was ceased. And albe it the
manna was to them as the sacrament is to us, and they eat even the same
spiritual meat that we do yet were they never so mad, as to believe, that
the manna was changed into Christ's own natural body: but understood it
spiritually, that as the outward man did eat the material manna, which
comforted the body: so did the inward man through feith eat the body of
Christ, beleuynge that as manna came down from heaven and comforted their
bodies: so should their savior Christ, which was promised them of god the
father, come down from heaven, and strength their souls in everlasting life,
redemynge them from their sin by his death and resurrection. And likewise
do we eat Christ in feith, both before we come to the sacrament, and more
expressly through the sacrament. And with no less fruit after we have received
the sacrament, and need no more to make it his natural body, then the manna
was, but might much better understand it spiritually: that as the outward
man does eat the natural bread, which comfort the body: so does the
inward man through feith eat the body of Christ, believing, that as the bread
is broken, so was Christ's body broken on the cross for our sins, which
comfort our souls unto life everlasting. And as that feith did save them,
without beleueing that manna was altered into his body: even so does this
feith save us: although we believe not, that the substance of breadde is turned
into his natural body. For the same feith shall save us which saved them.
And we are bound to believe no more under peine of damnacion, then they were
bound to believe.

Now sir this is part of his mind.


CA. Thou say even truth. And therefore if thou mark it well (somewhat
after his own words: thou may of this place plainly perceive, not only by
the presence of this word, not only, but also by the absence of this word,
but also, that he at the first, intended to show us two things. The one of
the which, noted with this word not only, he has here (as thou see)
declared all ready, But the other depending thereupon, and ought to be noted with
this word, but also, he does utterly pass over and let it clean go. For he
renneth so wondrous fast, and can not tell whither, that he forgets the
one end of his tale, while he tells us the other: or else he does purposely
reserve and keep it in store, till he speak with us him self, to show us that
and more.


HERE. Tushe sir ye do but mock him now.


CATH. Why countreiman what would thou have me do? For to pitee him, thou
know well, it is to late: To praise him there is in deed no cause: To hold
my peace in this matter were to far against conscience. And what remains,
but alwaie to speak as he does minister occasion? Therefore where he says,
that the old fathers were never so mad, as to believe that the manna was
changed into Christ's own natural body: for what purpose does he tell us that,
when every man koweth it as well as he?


CA. I shall tell you for what purpose: he would have us take the bread as the
fathers took the manna. And as they were never so mad, as to believe that the
manna was changed in to Christ's own natural body: so he would not have us so
mad, as to believe, that the substance of bread is changed into Christ's
natural body another. For the same feith (he says) shall save us which saved
the^.


Cap. 22.
CATH. Thou say well, for that is his purpose in deed. And therefore as
touching his principle of the same feith, I have told the enough before. And as
concerning this changeing he speaks of, thou and I will talk thereof at
large, when we come to the place convenient. Therefore now to this that he does
here account all those, which believe, that the substance of the bread, by the
operacion of the holy ghost, in the holy consecracion is changed into the very
body of Christ, to be mad in so doing, who be they? but al Englishmen,
Welshmen, Irishme^, Frenchmen, Scotts, Danes, Douchmen, Spaniardes,
Portingales, Italia^s, with all other true Christen nations? for doubtless al
those do so believe.


HERE. Nay sir not all. For all can not be said, of Englishmen only: nor yet of
diverse other particular nations beside. For some among them believe otherwise.


CA. And pretely spoken. For is it said amiss, that such and such feldes are
all corn, because they are not each of them without some and to much darnell
in and among them? what if there be found such to many, as Frith was, among
Englishmen? and other true Christen nations beside? does that let the truth of
this, that all those nations believe otherwise then he did: that is to say, that
the very substance of the bread (through the operacion of the holy ghost, in
the holy consecracion) is turned into the very blessed body of Christ? al those
multitudes, Frith (thou see) does reckon therein to be mad. He does not
except al, or any, true christen princes: about whom there lacks not men, in
wit, grauitee, and lernyng, of the best sort that may be had: which seem not
of al men to be lightly deceived: whereof in this matter specially, they are
utterly most loathe. Therefore does the sadness of Frithe, show us madness in
all christen princes, in all their prudent and wise councillors: and in all
their multitudes of peoples innumerable under them? or else does not the
sadness of all those, show us the wonderful madness of him? I require no
answer of this, but consider it well with thy self. And therefore what is
there more in all his words, which thou have here rehearsed, but only his
own swasions: and foolish continual daunsing about this same word the same?
wherewith thou see he would conclude and confirm what so ever he babled
before. Nevertheless, yet forth he goes, showing us in the syxt lefe of his
book after his fantasy, how the old fathers did believe, saying: There is no
point in our Creed, but they believed it, as well as we do: and those
articles only, are necessary unto salvation.

Who has herd such an other teacher? For of this, it must needs follow, that
it is not necessary unto salvation, to believe that Christ is equal with the
father. For which of the.xii. articles is that? Those.xii. only (he says)
are necessary unto salvation. And this, that Christ is equal with the father,
is none of the.xii.

Wherefore the belefe thereof is not necessary unto salvation. Also it is not
necessary unto salvation, to believe it a damnable thing, to peruerte and
deprauate the hard sayings of saint Paul and other scriptures (although
saint Peter does say the contrary) because it is none of those.xii. articles,
2. Pe^
which he says are only necessary unto salvation. And to be short, we
may deny by his doctrine all the whole scripture, those.xii. articles of our
Creed excepted, if they only (as he says) be necessary unto salvation. For
what so ever is not necessary to salvation, may be vnbeleued without any
danger of damnacion. This does he somewhat more plainly declare immediately him
self saiynge these words: But the other points contained in scripture,
although they be undoubted veritees, yet may I be saved without them.

What is, this same, saved without them, but saved without the belefe of them?
That is to say, although they be never so true, and that of most worthy
things.

Yet I need not believe them. Therefore when he notes, all Christen princes, and
all Christen people, to be mad, for their belefe, which they have in the
blessed sacrament: how much may we note him, more then mad, that will
believe and so say, that he may be saved without the belefe of all or any
veritees contained in scripture, beside those same.xii. expressed in the Creed?


HERE. Sir I suppose that Frithe would soon avoid all these absurdites,
which ye do gather to follow of his words: and say that the veritee of
Christ's equalitee with the father, and such other veritees, as ye speak of,
are priuelie contained in the.xii. articles of our Creed, and believed in them,
although they do not therein, expressly and distinctly apere.


CATH. Naie naie countreie man, never suppose, that he would say so. For then
would I quickly answer him and say, as the trewthe is in deed, that the
veritee of this holy sacrament, which he denies, is one of them, and that it
was contained and hid in the old fathers feith, as many other veritees were
confusely, to be reveled and brought to light distinctly, when their time
thereof should come, which was by the coming of our savior Christ. Therefore
with this, Frithes mowthe were soon stopte, if he would say so. But he was
ware of this well enoughe: And provided for it thereafter, that men should not
take him so to mean. For else when he says those articles only, are
necessary to salvation, he would not have added this unto it, saying: The
other points contained in scripture, although they be undoubted veritees, yet
may I be saved without them.

Therefore who has heard of such a doctor, that will not deny, but all the
points of scripture, are undoubted veritees: And yet will hold, that we are
not bownde to the belefe of any more of them but only twelve? I could never
here of any veritee of the scripture (as there be in it none other) but who so
ever would not believe it, he was utterly therein no less then an heritike: But
this man is, and so teaches other to be, at libertee with them all, only
twelve except.


HERE. It may so be, well enough, in certain cases.


CATH. What cases, I pray thee be they?


HERE. He does forthwith declare.ii. or.iii. him self.


CATH. Then let me here them.


HERE. They be even these.

As be it in case (he says) that I never herd of them.'

There is one.

Or when I here of them, I can not understand them,' nor comprehend them.'

There is an other

Or that I here them, and vndestande them, and yet' by reason of an other text
misconstrew them.'

There is the third.


CATH. A, be these the cases, wherein men be not bound to believe any veritees
of scripture mo then those xii. expressed in the Creed?


HERE. So says he.


CATH. Then say I, that if thou mark it well in his first and second case
ioigned together, he does put, whether he do hear them, or not here them.
And in the second, and third case, whether he understand them or not
understand them: So that he does not put these cases, but only to thintente
that in every case, he might avoid and clean exclude, the need of all the
veritees of scripture, save only twelve. For when he says he may be saved
without them, whether he here them or here them not: and whether he understand
them, or understand them not. And therefore after his own doctrine, whether he
believe them, or believe them not? What need makes he of any of them all, but
meneth away with them clean in every condition. For if he may be saved
without them (as he says he may) then it is clear, that he has no need of
them. If he have no need of them: doubtless he has no need to believe them.
Therefore if he have no need to believe them: in very deed, he has less need to
understand them (for more necessary is belefe, then is understanding in
things of our feith) and therefore if he need not believe them, nor understand
them, plain it is, that he needs not so much as here the^ (for what should he
here, that he needs not believe) Therefore if he need not so much as here them,
he has utterly no need of them at all: if he have no need of them at all: then
be they (as he would make them in deed) no parts of the feithe at all: except
he will say (as he does so much as it comes to) that all the most part of
the feith need not to be herd: And consequently, nor believed another. Thus are
we clearly discharged of all the veritees of scripture, save only twelve in
every condition whereof he might be asked this pretty question, why they were
written? But how so ever this diuelishe doctrine behaueth it self: what other
thing is the feithe of Christ, but all the veritees of scripture? And contrary
wise, what other thing are all the veritees of scripture, but the feith of
Christ? Therefore when all the veritees of scripture, are contained in the
feith of Christ (as it is one of them so to believe) And the feith of Christ
(as I showed thee yesterdaie) can not be trewly had, but all whole together:
It must needs follow, that who so ever has trewly the feith of Christ, has
also therein no less then all the veritees of scripture. Falls therefore is the
doctrine of Frith, that says, we may be saved without them all, save only
twelve: when the feith cannot be trewly had, without them all. More over, how
say thou to this: is it not a necessary veritee unto salvation, to believe
that the commandments of god are good, and ought to be kept?


HERE. Sir what question is that: there is no man does doubt therein.


CATH. And is there any perell in it, if a man do not so believe it?


HERE. In very deed no less then damnable.


CATH. Take heed, perchance thou wotest nere what thou say.


HERE. Why what?


CATH. Utterly that Frith is a falls lier: when he says, those articles of our
Creed, are only necessary unto salvation. For which is it of those.xii. to
believe, that the commandments of god be good, and ought to be observed and
kept, or that there is any peril in it: if we do not so believe? Those.xii.
only be necessary, says he. This veritee thou see is none of them
(although as all other, it may be reduced unto them) which he will none of
in any case, lest that, which he labors to overthrow, should so by that
means, be brought in likewise: after his mind therefore without this, we may
be saved. That is to wit, without the belefe, that the commandments of god
be good, or ought to be observed and kept: who will not see, that this were
enough, to declare what a teacher he is? or who has so dull a wit, that he can
not perceive how devilish his purpose is? and it were but only by this, that he
can find no way to come to it, but only by such damnable paths as this is?
Behold how feign he would prove it no need, so to believe in the blessed
sacrament of the alter, as all true Christen people believes: In very deed so
feign, that, to bring it to pass with all, he sticks not here (as thou see
thy self) to leave us clean without the need of any, and of all the veritees of
holy scripture, mo then bare.xii. for in those.xii. veritees of our Creed, he
thought surely, that this veritee of the blessed sacrament could not be found.
And therefore he does say: that they only are necessary unto salvation, to
the intent he might utterly thereby exclude the need of this, which he would so
clean put away, that even for that cause, he excludes no less, then all the
rest, saiynge: The other points contained in scripture, although they be
undoubted veritees: yet may I be saved without them.

And this he declares in every condition, that is to say, whether he believe
them or not: whether he understand them or not, and whether he misconstrew
them or not: All these I say (says he) may be done without any ieoperdie of
damnacion.


Cap. 23.
HERE. Ye but sir, ye must take his conclusion with all.


CATH. What is that?


HERE. Marie this: Therefore we believe (he says) these articles of our Creed:
in the other is no peril, so that we have a probable reason to dissent from
them.


CATH. Doubtless a conclusion even like him self. How be it I muse not so much
thereat, nor yet at him another, as I do even at thee.


HERE. At me, why so?


CATH. Without fail, because thou dooest no more wonder at his blind
madness, or mad blyndenesse, choose thee whether. How be it I do partly
consider the cause. For surely if thou thy self were not by him, somewhat
combred with the same cloud of darkness, wherein he was inuolued and wrapped
him self, thou should easily, beside his wily wickedness, perceive him
tumbled into the greattest foolishness that ever thou saw any man. For when
he says, in the other is no peril, so that we have a probable reason to
dissent from the^, may not I sai: O folish Frith, what if we have none, nor
none can have? how then? how is it possible to have any probable reason to
dissent from any veritees most special and above al, from any veritees of holy
scripture? For what reason is there probable in deed, but only that, which is
true in deed? and can any one truth be against an other? Therefore if thou
mark this matter well, thou shall find, that by these words, he sets us
even at as much libertee, with our feith in all the.xii. veritees of our
Creed, as he does in all the other. For in them is no peril another, so that we
have a probable reason to dissent from them.


HERE. Why sir, we may not dissent from them in no wise.


CATH. What not with a probable reason? what thing is there, that a probable
reason does not bind me to do? For what is a probable reason, but that,
which may justly be proved to be true. And shall not truth lead me trewly
to and fro in every condi^ion?


HERE. Ye but there can be no such probable reason, to lead as from those
veritees of our Creed.


CATH. Why not from them, as well as from the other veritees of scripture
beside? be they more true, then any of the other are? How be it, thou
speak this of thine own head. For Frith says no more, but that we may
dissent from all the veritees of scripture, save.xii. so that we have a
probable reason thereto. And I say the same, by that reason, of those xii.
also, if we have a probable reason thereto: For what ought I to refrain, which
a probable reason will lead me unto? am I not alwaie bownde unto truth? and
what other thing is a probable reason? Therefore it must needs follow by his
reason, that in these veritees of our Creed, is no peril, so that we have a
probable reason, to dissent from them. Thus takes he from us, the need of all
the veritees of scripture, save.xii. so that by the same reason he takes away
the need of them to. And therefore he seems to except them in words, but not
in deed.


HERE. Yes sir, for else he would not say this. Those articles are only
necessary unto salvation. For them am I bound to believe, and am damned without
excuse, if I believe them not.


CATH. What of this? thou think by reason of these words, that he goth
about to make us believe, that we be bound to the veritees of our Creed.


HERE. what else? For what purpose should he speak it, but for that? or to
show us, how he does believe them him self.


CA. I thought even as much, when he intends none of them both. For his
purpose is not to make us believe them, but only to make us to believe no more.
For, to go about to make us believe so much, is one thing, and to go about to
make us believe no more, is an other thing. Therefore his intent is (as who say)
there to stop in our feith, that it should go no farther, and not to bring
it thither, nor there to uphold it. For although his blindness be so great
and manifest, that even the very same, which he labors to improve and
overthrow, he confesses to be a veritee of scripture (or else would he never
call it an article of our feith, as in the.xvi. lefe of his book he does in
deed) saying these words.

For though it be an article of our feith, yet it is not an article of our
Creed, in the.xii. articles, which are sufficient for our salvation.

Although his blindness (I say) be so great, that he him self does confess
this a veritee of scripture, which he laboreth so sore to improve: yet because
he thought it could not be found among the.xii. veritees of our Creed even
therefore would the catchpoule, as it were in a pinfolde, pyn up therein our
feith, from all the veritees of scripture beside: and all to the intent it should
not come at this veritee of the holy sacrament, and that for the special
hatred he bears unto it. How be it in so saying I confess my self
somewhat to large. For why should I say, that he bears a special hatred
against this blessed veritee, when he serves them all a like? yet am I therein
somewhat to rasshe to. For why should I say, that he serves them al a like,
when he would sleie al those for this, and not this for them, but this for it
self. not much unlike unto him, which for the malice he bare against one
innocent, slew an whole multitude. Mat. ^


But as that Herod missed his purpose of that one, who^ he principally
intented, and (to his own perdicion) was but a mean of bringing all the
residew to a far more clerer light then they had before. Even so I doubt not
of this Herod likewise, but that he shall miss his purpose of this one
veritee, which to destroy he does chefly intend. And also in the multitude of
other beside (although to his own perdition) be but a mean of bringing the^ to
a more clear light of knowlage in many one the^ ever they had before. That
Herod and this, although persecutors both, and both of Christ, wherein they
gree. Yet in the manner of their persecution, somewhat they differ. For that
Herod did persecute him directly, and apertly: but this Herod, consequently
and occultly, under and with the pretense, of the contrary. That Herod, sent
men to find him where he was not, but this Herod se^deth men to lose him where
he is. Also that Herod labored to make him be taken, but this Herod, labored
to make him forsaken. He with manifest cursednesse: and this with false feigned
holiness, He with cruel tyranny: and this with wicked heresy. Therefore what
so ever this young Herod does say, as towching the veritees of our Creed,
never think, that he speaks it to make us believe it, nor yet to show, that
he believes it him self. For that he says, is only to make us believe no
more, for less he thought he could not. And therefore he supposing, that if he
might stop our feith therein, from going any farther, he might then bring his
wicked purpose to pass well enough. And to be suer thereof, he would by such a
rule, discharge us of our feith in all the veritees of scripture, save only
these.xii. of our Creed, as would lead us even likewise, from the feith of
them to: when he says,

In the other is no peril, so that we have a probable reason' to dissent from
them.'

This probable reason (as I have told thee) is able to discharge us of all
manner of things none except, wherein so ever it may be had. And therefore as
well of all the veritees of our Creed, as of any other veritees of scripture
beside.


Cap 24.
HERE. Sir, I do now perceive, that all this while, ye take one probable reason
for an other, and not that probable reason, which Frith speaks of.


CATH. Hah, what say thou? I pray the tell me that agein.


HE. Mary sir I say, the probable reason that Frith speaks of, is not the
same, that ye take it for.


CATH. Trowest thou so?


HERE. No trewly.


CA. What is it then


HE. Ye know well enough, that there be two manner of probable reasons: of the
which, the one has in it a truth inevitable. And therefore it is or may be
called a probable reason existent. The other has in it no truth in deed, yet
is it so like to be true, that it is very hard to avoid, or to be otherwise
perceived or taked but for true in deed. And therefore it is, or may be called
a probable reason, apparent: but not existent.


CATH. I can thee thank countreyman, it is even very well said. And therefore
do thou think, that it is this probable reason, which is but aparent, that
Frith speaks of?


HERE. Yea trewly that I do.


CATH. Why so?


HERE. For it can not stand with any reason, that it should be the other
probable reason, which is true, because (as I now perceive my self) one
truth can never lead us to dissent from an other, but rather bind us unto it.


CATH. Doubtless therein thou hittest the nail even upon the head: And therefore
by that just and good reason, it does well apere, that when frith (speaking
of charticles of our Creed) does say.

In the other is no peril, so we have a probable reason to dissent from them.

It is not that probable reason, which has in it the very trewthe in deed.
But it is that probable reason, which is but only apparent, and does but only
seem to be true and nothing else* therefore what so ever does but only seem to
be true, without fail is not true in deed. And what so ever is not true in
deed, and yet seems to be true, is utterly nothing else, but even a mean to
deceive. And therefore the very conclusion is this, That where he says, In the
other veritees of scripture is no peril, so we have a probable reason to
dissent from them.

It is no more to say, but in the other veritees of scripture is no peril, so
we have a deceitful mean to dissent from them, when a probable reason without
truth is none other, but (as I said) a mean to deceive in deed.


HERE. Nay sir I can not yet for all this, believe that he meant so.


CATH. No? not when his own words compels us to take it so? For he can not
speak of a probable reason, and mean it to be another true nor false: except
thou will say (as of many a one it is, when he speaks he wotteh nere what)
that his wit is not his own. Therefore he me^t it to be either true or false.
If he meant it to be true: then is it as much to say, as in the other veritees
of scripture is no peril, so we have such a probable reason to dissent from
them, as is not possible to be had. For it is not possible to have truth,
against truth. Wherefore how foolish at the least is he, to suggest unto us,
any such case? Therefore of the other side, if he meant a probable reason but
aparent, and not true in deed: Then is it no more to say but this, In the
other veritees of scripture is no peril, so we have that probable reason to
dissent from them, which is so ready and easy to be had, that al we ought, to
bliss us from it.


HERE. Bliss us from it, what need that?


CATH. Needs it not, to bliss us from that probable reason, which might lead
us to dissent from any veritee of scripture? For what is the scripture but
gods word? therefore what is any verite of scripture, but the verite of gods
word? And what probable reason is that, which ledeth one to dissent from any
veritee of gods word, but only ye falsitee of ye devils word? Yet herein,
says Frith, there is no peril. This thou see, he moves us unto. For with a
probable reason (he says) we may without any peril, dissent from all the
veritees of scripture, save.xii. and I say, by that rule, from them to.
Therefore, while Frith does here in plain words, show us a way, to dissent
from the veritees of holy scripture, which is the word of god, what other
thing therein does he else, but utterly show us the way of the devil? How be it
herein, he teaches us but a point of his own facultee. For by this probable
reason, found he the means, to dissent and come away from the veritees of
holy scripture him self. For else, without fail, he had bid in them still. By
this probable reason also, rises the first heretic of every sect. And by
this probable reason, deceives he an other. By this probable reason gender
they mo and mo. By this probable reason grow they, sometime to a multitude. And
by this probable reason they continue, to the disquietnesse of the faithful
flock of Christ. Also by this probable reason which is but apparent, which
seems just, and is not, which promises truth, and paieth not, which bears
in hand to do, that it can not. By this probable reason (I say) heretics are
enticed, persuaded, and led, from the veritees of scripture, from the veritees
of gods word, and from the veritees of everlasting life. And by this
probable reason, they are provoked and set a work, to cry to the people, and
say beware of deceivers, beware of false teachers, beware of subtle
Sophisters. And what other thing therein do they else, but ignora^tly and even
directly against their own purpose, move the audience to be ware of them, and
of no men else? For such and the same are they, and in deed none other. Therefore
let us now return to his third case again, brefly to see what we left therein
behind (he says) Or be it in case, that I here them, and understand them and
yet by the reason of an other text misconstrew them Here he drives me to such
a streit, that I can not tell whether I may more wonder at him, or at his case.
For tell me, if ever thou herdst of any such brain. How is it possible for any
man to misconstrew the same, which he does understand? Is it one thing to
understand, and an other to know? Is any man therefore able to take a thing
otherwise, then he knows it is? Does not the knowlage or understanding of a
thing, clean put away the misco^struing thereof? For whereof, comes
misconstruing, but of misunderstanding? nevertheless, Be it in case (he says)
that I understand them, and yet by the reason of an other text misconstrew
them.

Here thou see plain, that he puts understanding, and misconstruing, both
together in one respect, and one case, and that by the reason (he says) of an
other text. Therefore whether he means the veritee of that other text, to be
understood, or not understood, let us try what follows of each of them,
and the^ we shall be sure, to come to his meaning, at the least in one of them.
Therefore if he mean it understood, then this must follow, that the
understanding of the veritee of that same one other text, may put away the
understanding of all the veritees of scripture.xii. except: when it may, bring
the understander to the misconstruction of them, as by his words it may, when
of them al (he says)

Or be it in case that I here them, and understand them,' and yet by the reason
of an other text misconstrew them.' So that the true understanding of that same
other text, is but a mean, to make the veritees of all the rest to be
misconstrued, and that of him that understands them. And what is that to say
but this, that the true understanding of one text, may bring a man from the
true understanding of of an other, when it brings him to the misconstrewyng
thereof? And therefore do thou not see, what good reason and truth, he
teaches in this case? have thou heard of this same lesson before that the true
understanding of one text, should pluck away the true understanding of an
other, from him that has it? I have herd that the true understanding of one
text, might induce and bring to light, the true understanding of an other: But
I never herd a fore now, that the true understanding of one, might misconstrew,
and so put away, the true understanding of an other, when truth (as I told
the before) is a mean to come by truth, and not a mean to misconstrew and
put away truth. for so, were truth against truth, and understanding against
understanding: And therefore Frith does here to save al upright, make
misco^struction, which is the great enemy of them both, to be as a stickeler
between them: wherefore of the other side, if he mean yt the verite of this
other text which may make this misconstruction, is not understood, then must
this follow, that the ignorance, and not understanding of the truth of one
text, may put away the knowlage and understanding of the truth of an other
text, as it must needs do, if it may make it misconstrued, as Frith does
hold it may. And so shall blind ignorance be more mighty and able to expel
and put away clear and perfect knowlage, from him that has it, then persite
knowlage is able to expel and put away it: as though the ignorance of one
thing, were the driuer away of the knowlage of an other, which is an
overthwart rule, contrary to all reason and truth. For it is the natural
propertee and strength of knowlage, where so ever it comes, to subdew and
expel ignorance, and not of ignorance, to overthrow and expel knowlage. How
be it I will not say. but ignorance may and commonly does in many cases, keep
truth from knowlage and understanding: but yet when and wherein so ever
knowlage and understanding does once get the victory, and obteineth it in
deed, ignorance then goes straight to wrake, and is utterly put to flight, for
any thing therein it can do more. Where. fore, the truth of one text,
understood or not understood, can never drive the truth of an other, out
of understanding, as it might do, if it might drive it to misconstruction, as
it can not, because there should be then (as I said) truth against truth, and
understanding against understanding, which can not be. Therefore whether the
truth of this other text, yt Frith speaks of, be understand or not
understand, yet false is this his saying thereof, that it may cause the true
understanding of an other text or veritee of scripture, to be misconstrued of
him that has it, and so put away: when it is not possible for the true
understanding of a thing, and the misconstruynge of the same, to stand to
gether, except Frith will say, that he can ioigne them together this way, as
when he understands a veritee never so well, yet he can purposely misconstrewe
the same nevertheless, to beguilde and deceive his neghbour withal, and bear
him in hand, it is otherwise meant, then he him self, does know it is.


HERE. What sir, ye do but taunte him now.


Cap. 25.
CATH. Tawnte or tawnte not, thou shall never find, how he can otherwise
ioigne them together when thou haste all done. And therefore, as a man so
trowbled and tired with this case of his own, that he woteth nere which way
to turn him, he gives it over quite, and falls to an other matter, even
with these words: But now to return (he says) to our purpose, if we will
examine the authoritees of saint Austen, and Beda before alleged, we shall
epsy, that beside the probacion of this foresaid proposicion: they open the
mystery of all our matter, to them that have eien to see:

(Those he means, which are as blind as he.)

For saint Austen says (says he) that we and the old fathers do differ, as
touching the bodily meat. For they eat manna, and we breadde.

Now countreiman, because thou did after his allegacion recite the words of
saint Austen unto me thy self. I pray thee hertily therefore remember them
well, and tell me trewly, whether saint Austen spoke there, so much as any
word of bread, as this fellow does now report him.


HERE. Sir therein to confess the truth, saint Austen says, that the fathers
did eat manna, and we an other thing. But in deed he has not there this same
word bread.


CATH. Thou may see therefore what a just part gentle Frieth plaith herein
with saint Austen. He thought this word bread, would sownde somewhat more for
his purpose, then this word an other thing: which in deed sounds toward
it nothing at all. And therefore in the stead thereof, in with bread he comes,
but not by and by immediately after he reherseth the words of saint Austen:
but long after. For had he brought it in straight way, while the words of
saint Austen were in the mind of the reader: he wist well enough, it would then
be soon perceived and taken, not like a point of falshed, but even as it is,
for very one and the self same in deed. and therefore he falls first in to a
long bablyng of his own fantastical inuencion. And afterward, when he
supposes the words of saint Austen somewhat grown out of remembrance with
the reader: Then, in comes the baker with his mustie bread,
And that he does only, even of his own head
without cause or request, made of any man,
But only in liyng, to show what he can.
wherefore in few words, by my very assent,
He shall for his great labor, be this content:
what so ever other men say, or will think,
To take his bread with him, and go ere he drink.



HERE. What sir me think ye fall to rymyng again.


CATH. In very deed, if thou were, so able to weigh and consider how wily and
foolish his falshed is, as some men are and does in deed, I doubt not, but
thou would say thy self, that rimynge only, were good enough for him,
although it were (as it is not here) without both reason and trewthe. For he
that uses, (where alwaie two of them ought to be) nothing else but falshed in
deed, Is not even the least of them three, more then enough, and to good for
him? How false does he apere once again, in this report that he makes here
now of saint Austen? For could not saint Austen him self have put in this
word bread: as well as this word, an other thing? if he had so meant, or
had not seen some good cause to the contrary? was his mind so occupied in
treating only of this matter, that he had forgotten the proper name of bread,
which was most present ready and apt to be thought upon in this case? or
could he not call that word to remembrance: because it was so strange and
far out of use? He sticks not at manna, but directly expresses it with the
proper name thereof: why staieth he at this word bread, more then at that? was
it more strange and farther out of use, then the manna was? why does he touch
this, with no proper name: but with a word commune, and indifferent, in manner
to all things? would he refrain so ready a thing, and see no cause why? if he
saw any, what was that? Frith will not put that in question unto us: he would
not here of it: he had lever have us forget it: it makes not for his purpose,
as hereafter it shall well apere.


HERE. Yet sir in some other places, seint Austen him self does call it bread
plainly.


CA. Why therefore, does Frith allege him so here, where he does not so call
it: and will not allege him there, where he does call it so? what meneth he by
that? does it signify nothing? I will well, that saint Austen so does call it:
and that diverse times: but yet never without such a certain convenient
circumstance with all, as declares what he means by it: which circumstance,
Frith perceives to make no less against him, then this word bread, seems
to sownde with him. And therefore because the word and that circumstance, he
can not find in saint Austen asonder, he therefore him self, would plant the
one, in some other corner alone: as thou see him here, this craftily assaie,
where he does know, that circumstance to be away: And therefore this have
thou herd a great part of the very thing I may say unto thee, which (as
he says) does open the mystery of all his matter, to them that have eien to
see: Although he means but those (as I told thee before) which are as
blind as he: wherefore, have thou not now, even more then enough, to perceive
what a goodly foundation of his this is, to build any good work upon?


Cap. 26.
HERE. To say the trewthe, if it be no better then ye make it, he has not
leide it so depely as I thought he had done:


CATH. Naie say not so, for he has leide it no less deep, I may say to
thee, then even down to the devil him self: And therefore find thou no lack
in the depenesse thereof: for deper could no man lay it in deed, then he has
done: And yet not withstanding that, and all that I have declared thereof
beside: Behold how he glories therein, and what a face he sets upon it, as
though there were no such matter at all: for in his preface and first lefe of
his book, where he speaks of his first treatise, which he wrote in
hucker-mucker, and not (as he confesses him self) to be published abroad, he
has these words: But now it is commune (he says) abroad in many men's
mowthes, in so much that master Moore which of late has busied him self,
to meddle in all such matters (of what zeal I will not difine) has sore
labored to confute it, but some men think that he is ashamed of his part.

And a little after, he adds unto it these words.

But this I am right sure of, that he never towched the foundation that my
treatise was builded upon. And therefore since my foundation stands so sure,
and inuinsible (for else I think verily he would sore have labored to have
undermined it) I will thereupon, build a little more: and also declare that his
ordinance is to sclender to break it down although it were set upon a wors
foundation.

Which I say is not possible to be had: and yet for all that in the third
lefe. his words thereof be these: This was (he says) the foundation of my
first treatise, that he has left unshaken: which is a great argument that
it is very true. For else his pregnant wit could not have passed it so clean
over. But would have assailed it with some sophistical cauellacion which by
his painted poetree, he might so have colored: that at the least he might make
the ignorant some appearance of trewthe, as he has done against the residew of
my first treatise, which nevertheless is true, and shall so be proved. How it
proves, thou have had a good say thereof alredie: And yet behold (as I said)
how he glories therein, as though it were in very perfection, most suer and
inuinsible: in so much, that with those terms he bosteth and sets it out
(as here thou see) to the vttermoste: when it is in deed no less, but even
as far behind, as he would set it forward. And as for that he says here,
of master Moore, every man knows of his notable worthiness, what a singular
man he was, both of wit and learning, and yet mark how lewdly this fellow
d^oth here use him with nothing else, but very mockes tauntes, and checkes,
thinkyng thereby to deface him, and set out him self: but which way that
turns, I suppose it no need to tell thee: Therefore I pray thee tell me, how
comes this to pass? that one having not half the wit or lernyng, that
Frith was thought to have, before he fell to these foolish, fond, wicked, and
erroneous opinions: can soon perceive so much folly and falshed in his book,
that there is in manner no lefe without it, and yet he him self, could see
thereof nothing at all? how (I say) comes this to pass? May we not think,
that he met with that facultee, which causes it to be trewly said of some
man, that the longer he lives, the more fool he wexeth? That is to say the
more he takes of it, the les wit he has? for if he saw any falshed therein,
then went he wittyngly about to deceive men: if he saw none, wherein is so
much: what bitter smooke so troubled his eyes, that he could not epsy some
part thereof? was he not taken (trowest thou) into the weswarde tuicion, of
that dark and invisible tutour, which (for all thy saing) caused him therein
to wander, he wi^^ nere whether? how may we think otherwise, if we with
diligence prepende well the matter? For the very trewthe to say (as I told
thee before, and now also again, to the intent thou should the better here it
away, and keep it in mind) if the devil him self, were at the libertee, to
be incarnate: And even so to come among us, only to entice and led us from
the belefe of any article of our feithe, let me see, how it were possible, for
that father and fountain of all crafty falshed, to invente for that purpose
any manner of deceivable wyle, comparable to this, which we find in Frith?
That is to wit, to bear us in hand, that it is indifferent, and at our own
libertee, to believe it or not: there is no peril in the matter, take which
part we lust: for, by this persuasion, how many true men is there in a
land, towched with never so litell a need, that might not soon, be brought to
stealyng, if they were borne in hand, and so persuaded to think in deed, that
it were an act indifferent and without al manner of peril to them that would
use it? Ye what manner of evils are they, which some men (now full honest)
would then forbear and refrain, if they thought, were therein to them no
danger? or which way might they so easily be led unto them, as to be stiffly
so borne in hand? ye make them but once believe that, and led them no farther:
for it shall then, be no need at al. a marvelous zeal of justice has he, that
would not sone play the thief at a companions request, if he were once
brought in opinion, that therein could be, to him no manner of peril. Thus learned
Frith (of whom so ever he was taught) to perceive, that he had a wondrous fast
feith in this blessed sacrament, which would not sone be content to leave it,
if he were once brought in opinion, that therein could come unto him no manner of
displeasure. he saw it a matter of most difficulte, to make Christen people
leave any part of their feith directy: but he saw it agein, a matter as easy, if
they might once be made believe to be no peril therein, if they so did: full well
he wist, bring them once to that opinion, and let them then alone them selfs.
For it should be enough, with the help of his own doctor of darkness,
which taught him this lesson: for doubtless from whence it came, the thing it
self, does show and declare: wherefore of this his most perilous, crafty and
wicked wilines in this case, let this, with yt I said thereof before, be a
sufficient occasion for the, well to prepe^de, mark and consider, both what it
is, and whereof it came: For the more thou think upon it, the more thou shall
see in it: And the more thou shall see in it, The more (I dare well say) thou
shall mislyke it: ye and at length, even abhor it:


HE. Ye do what ye can, to make a man abhor it in deed:


CATH. If I do otherwise, I should not do well: And therefore take thou
good head unto it, for it stands thee so in hand:


HERE. Whether it do or not, I will not forget what ye say.


Cap. 27.
CATH. Then of the other side, to grow to an end for this time, what shall I
say, more then I have done, of his most fond, foolish, and blind falshed?
which apereth so plain, in every thing, that he medleth withal, that I can
not well tell, what to say more, but that I am sure thou never saw nor
herdest of the like, nor no man else. For who but he, in a matter of our feithe,
would grant us a libertee to believe that, which he him self, doothe not
only, not believe, but also stiffly hold and say, that it is false, and no
such thing in deed? And yet for all that, say, that it is an article of our
feithe to.


HERE. What sir, ye ouercharge him now to far: for there is no man so mad,
(I think) as to speak things, after such a sort:


CATH. If thou had excepted him, I would grant the fame.


HERE. Naie I will not except him, nor no man else herein.


HERE. Then against him, let us take none other, but even he him self to
witness. For in the last lefe of his book, where he calls the changeyng of
the substance of bread and wine into the very flesh and blood of our savior
Christ, at the time of the holy consecration thereof, the opinion of the
prelates, as though it were but their opinion, and nothing else, his own words
be these.

The cause why I can not (he says) believe their opinion of transmutacion, is
this, first because I think verily that it is false, and can not be proved by
scripture nor feithful doctors, if they be well pondered.

Here thou feast plain of his own words, that he takes this article to be
utterly false, And yet he gives us libertee and leave to believe it
nevertheless: as it may and does well apere, by this, that he (saying, neither
part ought to despise other) will no more reprehende us therein, then he would
that we should reprehende him in the contrary. For each (he says) seeks the
glory of god: And therefore by that (as I towld the before) the one in a true
feith and the other in a false, for both can not be true. Wherefore beside this,
the very same, which he does here sai in plain words, that he thinks verily
to be false, he confesses it as plain, to be an article of our feith,
saying, Though it be an article of our feith, it is none of our Creed.

Therefore by this it is clear, that although he denies it an article of our
creed. yet he confesses it an article of our faith.


HERE. Ye but not necessary to be believed the says) under pain of damnation.


CATH. Whether it be under that pain or no: yet an article of our feith (as ye
truth is in deed) he says it is: And therefore say I, necessary to, for else it
were but vain and superfluous, which to believe, were shame unto us, and
disshonour to our feith, that it should contain any such thing.


HERE. Sir now I perceive that ye do not take this, that Frith does say (not
necessary) as he does mean it.


CATH. How is that?


HERE. He means it for indifferent and nothing else: for in the last leaf of
his book save one, his words thereof be these.

I think many men wonder (he says) how I can die in this article, seying that
it is no necessary article of our feith: I grant that neither part is an
article necessary to be believed under pain of damnacion, but leave it as a
thing indifferent, to think therein as god shall instill in every man's mind,
and that neither part condemn other for this matter, but each receive other in
brotherly love.

Here you may perceive that he means by this word, not necessary, nothing
else but indifferency.


CATH. I can the thank, it is a place well place out: wherein strife, consider
upon what to quest he makes his grant. And after that, when he says, I
leave it as a thing indifferente, tell me what means he, by this same word,
it? saying I leave it.


HERE. He means the same that goes before, when he says, neither part is
an article necessary. etc.


CATH. Then the sense of his words must needs be this, that he leaves it, that
is to say, neither part, as a thing indifferent: wherefore if he leave neither
part, as a thing indifferent, then he leaves both parts as things necessary:
if he leave them both as things necessary, Then (to understand the best
thereof) he leaves the one part necessary to be taken, and the other as
necessary to be forsaken, because the one is true and the other false. And
therefore, where is now his indifferency become, that thou speak of? or
where is his principal purpose become, but by this clean overthrown?


HERE. I never herd one, turn a man's tale as ye do.


CATH. why so?


HERE. Because ye have brought it clean out of his meaning, and directly
against the purpose he speaks it for, as it does well apere: for ye may be
suer, he meant not so.


CA. How then?


HE. His meaning is this, that neither part, that is to say, neither of both
parts, is an article necessary to be believed under pain of damnation, but
each of them, is to be left as a thing indifferent to think therein as god
shall instill in every man's mind.


CATH. And is this, his very meaning think thou?


HERE. It can be none otherwise?


CATH. Then this indifferency he means not to be of neither part: But to be
of both parts


HERE. What else?


CATH. which both are they?


HE. Both his part and yours.


HERE. His and ours, are clean contrary.


HERE. That is plain.


CATH. And even therefore so plain is this, that the one is true, and the other
false.


HERE. That can not be denied.


CATH. Therefore this must needs be granted, that here he leaves plain, both
truth and falshed at libertee, to be taken or forsaken, even together
indifferently: and in the end knitteth up the knot, with the request of a
brotherly love, to be had between them. Wherefore have thou herd of such a
stickler between truth and falshed as this is? who would venture so arduous a
matter, but he alone? how be it, his courage was such, that when he saw
between truth and falshed, that is to say between god and the devil, so great
a controversy, as yet was never at rest, he thinking therein to win his
spurs, would needs as a man indifferent, take up the matter between them, and
make them shake hands, with a brotherly love. But yet because his
indifferency was in this matter such, as did put no difference between those
parties which are of so great and (...) difference that is possible to be, Go^
wole therefore in no wife have him of his side, but refused him so clean, that
he had been yet, as a masterlesse vacab^nd, if he had not ben taken into service
of the other side.


HERE. What sir me think ye talk your pleasure now at large.


CATH. In very deed no more at large, then thoccasion thereof does justly
require: for without question he was far to parciall of the wrong side, to
supple truth and falshed together, with the strait narowe yoke of
indifferency: he had forgotte the gospel, wherein truth it self does say,
qui non est mecum, Mat. 12.
contra me est: That is to say, he that is not with me, is against me: wherein
we find no mean allowed. Nevertheless although it be impossible for this
same, with me, and against me, to ioygne together by any mean in bid, yet
Frith not therewith content, would needs thrust in no less then even
indifferency, as a mean between them for all that, and so, couple them
together according to his fantasy. But how he sped withal, somewhat thou
feast, and more thou shalt: for what if I lay to his charge, that he does here
impute unto God, thynstilling as well of falshed, as of truth into men's minds?


HERE. It shall not skyll what ye lay to his charge, so ye prove it not in
deed.


Cap. 28.
CATH. Let me see how thou can herin defend him. For does he not say, I leave
it as a thing indifference, to think therein as God shall instill in every man's
mind?


HERE. So he says, but what of that?


CATH. Soest thou not see it plain in those words, that he imputes to God
the instilling of that into every man's mind, which he means by this word,
therein? And again that he means by this word, therein, none other, but to
gether each part, both his and ours whereof he speaks? and those parts of his
and ours are so contrary, that the one must needs be true and the other false?
wherefore he does (I say) impute unto god, thinstilling of these two parts in
every man's mind, as well the one as the other: so that he will have God
thinstillar as well of falshed, as of truth.


HERE. Tushe sir this is to far wide.


CATH. Wherefore?


HERE. Because it another does, nor yet can follow so: for the sense of his
words is this. I leave it (he says) as a thing indifferent to think therein,
that is to say, in each part, as god shall instill in every man's mind, that
is to say, as God shall reuele unto them, which part has the truth, and
which has not.


CATH. Thou say much for him, and as much as may be said: But yet it will
not hold: for with his indifferency, he has provided to much to the
contrary: As it may somewhat apere by these words that he says,

As god shall instill in every man's mind.'

He says not in some men's minds. But he says ineuery man's mind. And the
truth of this matter (as he holds him self) God does not instill in every
man's mind: wherefore his meaning must needs be of that instilling, which does
reach and extend farther then truth, or else it must needs come short of every
man's mind. wherefore he does here impute unto god, the instilling of more then
truth, which can be none other but falshed.


HERE. Sir I do marvel to here you speak, for Frith does not here mean,
every man generally, as ye take him: but he means every man specially, as in
whom, god shall instill the truth of this matter, and no farther.


CATH. He is much behoulding unto the: for he could say no better for him
self. But yet it will not help: for the very same, that he calls here
indifferent, is another more nor less, but even the same, that he leaves to
gods instilling in every man's mind. And that is plain to be both the parts
of his belief and ours, in this article of the holy sacrament, whereof the one
is true, and the other false. And those two parts does he so glue together
with indifferency, to the intent they should so go and be taken together
inseperably, that he would not say, I leave them as things indifferent, but
says, I leave it as a thing indifferent, putting them both together in the
singular numore as one. And so refers, it to gods instilling in every man's
mind, not the one, or the other disiunctiuely, but even jointly both together,
according to his own saying indifferently: Wherefore why may I not say, (as I
said) that he does refer unto God thinstillinge as well of falshed as of
truth in every man's mind, when therein he does so knit and wrappe* them both
together with his indifferency, and that in the singular number, that we can
not by his own words, divide or pluck them asonder?


HERE. I daresay, for all this, ye do not think your self, that ever he meant,
god to be thinstiller of any falshed in any man's mind.


CATH. How should we know his meaning but by his saying? his saying, does show
and lead us, to this meaning. And therefore what would thou have more?


HERE. Yet I will not believe, that he meant to refer thinstilling of truth
and falshed both unto god, with any such indifferency as ye speak of.


CATH. Then thou must needs grant, that he meant it rather of the one, then
of the other: or else only of the one, and not of the other.


HERE. What else?


CATH. If we understand him, to refer unto god, thinstilling rather of the
one then of the other, or only of the one, and not of the other. Then because
the one part is his, and the other is ours, We must therefore needs understand
him, to refer unto god, the instillinge rather of his part, then of ours, or
else only of his part and not of ours, because he leaning to his own part,
and not to ours, would needs prefer his own before ours. Wherefore because
his part has the falshed, and so has not ours, which has the truth, and
so has not his, it must needs follow, that he refers unto god thinstilling
rather of falshed then of truth, or else only of the falshed and not of the
truth. Therefore he leaves and refers unto god, thinstilling other of both
parts (according to his own saying) indifferently, or else rather of the one
part, then of the other leaning not even eaqually, or else only of his own
part, and not of the other even wholl percially, for one of the three, it must
needs be, and yet take of them which thou will, this have thou seen, what
follows thereof.


HE. Sir I see that, follow thereof, which is to badde, to be gathered of any
man's meaning.


CATH. Whether it be or no, yet it does and must needs proceed of his saying.
And therefore thou may well perceive, that it is not so badde, but he was as
mad, to take upon him, to play the part of such an indifferent stickler,
between truth and falshed, as would needs persuade such a brotherly love to
be had between them, as neither of them should condemn other, but reserve (he
says) each others infirmitee to god: wherein also it appears plain, that he
would have here the infirmitee of falshed, which is of the one side, reserved to
god: Therefore what he means by that, or how it sounds in thine ear, I say
no more, but this is he, which under pretense of his dewtie to believe the.xii.
veritees of the Creed, does deny his dewty of belefe in all the veritees of the
whole scripture beside. Also this is he, that pretends to bear with us in
the truth of our belefe, to the intent he would have us bear as much with him,
in the falshed of his belefe. moreover this is he, which does say we may believe
that, which he him self does say is false, and yet he him self will not
believe that, which both he and we do say is true: for we say it is an article
of our feith, and even so says he: how be it he holds it indifferent to
believe or not believe, but so do not we. And therefore he will not believe it one
whit, till we do both agree, which he has brought so nere the point, that now
it will never be.


Cap. 29.
HERE. Well sir, ye do but dally with me now: how be it, if he were living as
he is not, and might answer for him self, he would perchance answer ye
otherwise and far better then I can.


CA. He would if he could, but yet would I appose him for all that, in one cause
more, why he did thus divide all the other veritees of scripture from those.xii.
of the Creed?


HE. Is there an other cause thereof yet?


CA. ye that there is.


HE. I pray you what is that?


CA. In the last leaf of his book, his own words does well declare, which
are even these.

There are many veritees (he says) which are no such articles of our feith.


HE. Is this all?


CA. Nay not so But first what articles means he, by these, no such?


HE. No such as be of our Creed.


CATH. Well said. And what vetitees does he mean here, that may be no such
articles?


HERE. All the other veritees of scripture.


CATH. Then here his words again, with those that follows, and therein let
them be judge. for There are (he says) many veritees which yet may be no
such articles of our feithe. It is true that I lay in yrons, when I wrote
this. how be it I would not receive this trewthe for an article of our feithe:
for you may think the contrary without all ieoperdie of damnacion: Now
consider all this well together, and thou may soon perceive, that this same
exaumple of his imprisonment, does clearly show, that he means not here, by
these same veritees that he speaks of, any veritees of scripture, but the
veritees of all other things, which veritees in general, with the veritee of
his imprisonment inspeciall, he brings for example, how he would have us take
all the veritees of scripture save twelve. For as the veritee of his
imprisonment, may be no such article of our feithe, as those be of our Creed,
Even so after the same sort, would he have all those other veritees of
scripture, to be no such articles of our feithe another: But the veritee of his
imprisonment, and all other of that sort beside, are not only no such, but
utterly no articles of our feithe in deed, wherefore no more would he have all
the veritees of scripture, scantly those twelve except of the Creed: And yet
before this, he left those other veritees of scripture as articles
indifferent: But now he will have them, other none articles of our feithe at
all, or else the veritees of all other things, to be articles of our feithe
even as well as the: Therefore what wonder is it, though he thus divide all the
other veritees of scripture, as of an other kind from the veritees of the
Creed, when they be with him of no more estimacion, then be all such other
veritees, as (for example) the steple of Paul's is higher then the cross in
chepe? And because the veritee thereof is none article of our feithe, for all it
is a veritee in deed: Therefore by his plain exaumple, no more would he have
all the veritees of scripture, saving only those expressed in the Creed: were
not a man happy think thou, to mete with such a doctor, to teache him his
feithe? dooest thou not perceive the mighty power and strength of this
veritee, which he would so feign overthrow, when it gives him so shameful
faules, in every wicked wile, that he does attempt against it?

It is true (he says) that I lay in yrons when I wrote this: how be it I
would not receive that trewthe for an article of our feithe.

And yet without fail when he said so, he went more nere to make it one, then
he was ware of him self: for he went so nere it, that he brought it within one
word of it: In so much, that if he had put in (as the truth required) but
this same word (worthily) more then he did, and said, it is true that I lay
worthily in yrons when I wrote this, without question, it had been then so nere
an article of our feith in deed, That who so ever would not believe it (knowing
the matter) they could not be, but in great ieoperdie of damnacion. For
doubtless those that think him unworthily prisoned, knowing the cause why, be
of the same most damnable opinion, that he was of him self, god of his great
mercy grant them sone to amend it: for how damnable that opinion is, it may
well and sufficiently apere, and it were but by these his reasons (as to some
they seem) which we have discussed hitherto alredie: how be it, god willing,
in the residewe yet to come, it shall be no doubt to the most affectionate
friends that he has: only those except, which gate it by the same mean,
and holds it by the same tenor, that he came by it and held it him self.


HERE. Well sir, if there be no better meaning in Frithes words, then ye
have declared hitherto, I marvel greatly, that ever he would speak them as
he does.


CATH. Dooest thou mernaile at that?


HERE. I can not choose.


CATH. Then why do thou not marvel at an other thing, which is a thousand
times more meruellous then that is:


HE. What is that?


CATH. That ever such a number would follow him as there has done, and take
him for so plain, being so deceitful: Take him so simple, being so traftie:
Take him so wise, being so foolish: Take him so true, being so false. And of
that number, so many welthie, as men does deem: so many wise, as them selfs
does wene: so many politic, as they seem: and yet spy not his falshed in all
this time, what meruell may be compared unto it? for where as the wisdom of
one, should overthrow ye foolishnes of many, here the wisdom of many, is clean
overthrown with the foolishnes of one: And also where as the falshed of one,
should give place to the truth of many, here has the truth of many, clean
given place, to the falshed of one: who is able sufficiently to describe the
wonderfulnes of this mattier? Wherefore if thou fall to meruailynge, marvel at
this, which may be called a marvel alone: And therefore because, in
consideracion of our long talk, it is now time to draw to an end. Remember
that I have declared unto thee, although not all, nor half another, but yet
enough and enough, for thee to perceive what manner of foundation it is, wherein
Frith bosteth and glories so greatly, that he is not ashamed, in reproach of
master Moore, and auauncynge him self, to say (as I told thee before) these
words.

This am I right suer of (he says) that he never touched the foundation, that
my treatise was builded upon. And therefore since my foundation stands so suer
and invincible (for else I think verily he would sore have labored to have
undermined it) I will thereupon build a little more. etc.

And again: This was the foundation (he says) of my first treatise, that he
has left unshaken, which is a great argument that it is very true. For else
his pregnant wit could not have passed it so clean over, but would have
assailed it with some sophistical rauellacion. etc.

How false a riar he shows him self herein, I take none other, but even him
self to witness in the. 56. lefe of his book, where he recites master
Moors own saiynge in these words.

God forbid (says master Moore) that any man should be the more prone and
ready to believe this young man in this great matter, because he says in the
beginning, that he will bring al men to a concord and a quietness of
conscience. For he brings men to the worste kind of quietness that may be
devised, when he tells us as he does, that every man in this matter, may
without perell believe which wai he lust. Every man may in every matter, without
any counsel, soon set him self at rest, if he lust to take that way, and
to believe as he lust him self, and care not how. But and if that way had been
suer, saint Paul would never have showed, that many were in perell of sickness
and death to, for lack of discernyng reverently the body of our Lord in that
sacrament, when they came to receive him:

How say thou now? does master Moore leave this liars false foundation
untouched and unshaken, as he shamefully says and lies that he does? who,
may say more unto it, in so few words? And yet as though it were nothing
so, I would not have thee forget, how the false rainarde glories therein, as
though he had wonderful just, and good cause why so to do, how be it, I
do not greatly marvel thereat. For so much ashamed is he to lie, as most
honest men are, to say the trewthe: And therefore with this I will leave thee
now, and bid thee farewell.


Cap. 30.
HERE. Mary sir a fair farewell in deed.


CATH. Why what eileth it?


HE. What shall I need to tell you, if we part now, and leave the matter thus?


CA. What remedy? for I can tarry no longer at this time:


HERE. Then I pray you tell me, when we shall mete again:


CATH. Mete again? why art thou not well yet?


HERE. Well yet quotha? Mary sir all this is nothing to that I look for.


CATH. what is that?


HERE. I look for the scriptures, the old holy doctors, and the natural
reasons, that Frith brings for the proof of his principal purpose against
the real presence of Christ's very body in the sacrament, which purpose he
builds upon this foundation. These things I look for, to see, what ye can
say to them: or whether ye be able to avoid them or not.


CATH. I do plainly confess, that I am not able in deed. For who can avoid
holy scriptures, old holy doctors, or natural reason other?


HERE. Then if ye can not avoid them, ye must needs grant, that Frith has
his purpose.


CATH. Naie soft, thou must pardon me thereof. For although I can not avoid
the holy scriptures, nor yet the old holy doctors, that he brings for him:
yet I can well avoid his false understanding of them. And what by them, has he
gotten then? And as for his natural reasons that thou speak of, I am well
able to prove, that they be in the name of them, nothing else, but a sort of
deceueable sophisticacions: wherein he plaieth as one did (since I may
remember) being about to steal ware out of a shop in London, and
perceiuyng that he was spied and like to be taken, he to go, and diverse after
him, criynge stop the thief stop the thief, and he herynge that, cried even
so likewise him self, as fast as they did, by reason whereof, such as met him
in the way, nothing suspectynge him, looked so much after an other, which
as they thought should be before him, that he by that means gat to saint
Martyns, and deceived them all. And so likewise this wily sophister Frith,
going about to steal from us the trewthe of our feithe with his deceivable
sophisticacions, under the name and pretense of natural reasons, and fearyng
therewith to be taken, had none other shifte nor hope to escape, (but as I told
thee before) to exclame and cry, beware of sophisters, beware of sophisters,
thinking utterly thereby, that no man would suspects him to be any of that
sort: and yet in comparison of him, there is none but he alone: whereof thou
haste had a metely good proof alredie:


HERE. What proof so ever I have had alredie, I would here the proof of that
which I now desire:


CATH. Thou shalt:


HERE. Yea but when?


CATH. Even when thou will thy self:


HERE. That, by my will; shall be even to morrow, while this that I have herd
to day, is somewhat fresh in memory.


CA. Content.


HERE. Then where shall I mete with you?


CATH. In no place better than here:


HE. What time? before noone or after?


CA. Naie it passes an after noones work I may say to thee: for the whole
day long, I suppose were littell enough. And therefore come by nine or ten of
the clock at the fardest. For one thing I will tell thee before, thou never
herdest such a work, of an heretic since thou were borne, as thou shall
here of him declared in this proof which thou requirest.


HE. What wors then I have herd to day?


CA. Be thou judge thy self when thou herest it:


HE. Well sir, I will not fail the time appointed, for I shall now think long
till it come.


CA. Therefore I will bid thee farewell till then:


HE. No sir not yet, for I will bring you homewarde.


CA. That shall not need:


HE. Yes sir, for half your way and mine is all one:


CA. Then come on, let us go together for so far:


HE. That is my desire. And therefore is it not as good we be talkyng by the
way for the time, as ought else?


CA. Yes, I am very well pleased therwithal, if thou have any thing else to
say.


HE. Yes mary sir, and that is this: I would feign know by what reason you can
prove, yt this same article, which we have been about all this while, is one
of them, that we are bownde of necessitee to believe under peine of damnacion:
Ye have hitherto inueied against Frith, for holdyng the contrary, but yet
have ye done nothing to the probacion thereof your self: for it is two
things to prove Frithes opinion false, and to prove yours true:


CATH. Well, although the probacion of the trewthe, can not have a very apt
and convenient place, before the falsitee be clean reselled and thoroughly put
away, and that in the whole, as it is not now, but in part, yet all void of
thy request, I will not leave thee, because I perceive thee, somewhat desirous
to here of the matter: And therefore while Frithes opinion is this, that it is
an article of no necessitee to be believed, and our feithe is plain to the
contrary, the one part, or the other, must needs be true: wherefore because
the one part, or the other must needs be true, and between trewthe and
falshed there can be no mean, it can not be avoided, but since the falshed is
found of his side: The trewthe must needs remain with us.


HERE. Nay sir that follows not: for the falshed that ye find with Frithe, is
in his probacion and not in the thing, which he goes about to prove. For ye
know right well, that a man may miss in the probacion of a true thing
sometime, and yet is not the thing false, because the probacion is not true.


CATH. So may thou excuse every falshed, which any false harlot goes
about to prove true: for soon may thou say, that although he fail in
his probacion, yet is the thing that he would prove, true enough for all
that, because a man may be deceived in the probacion of a true thing. When in
deed the faulsitee of a thing, is often times more then half disclosed, by the
falsitee of the probacion. And therefore although the manifest falshed of
Frithes probacions, do not even very apertly prove the falshed of his
opinion. Yet does it make at the least, an inevitable conjecture thereof. And
therefore even as much for the truth of our side: for what shall or may we
gather of this, that all the reasons which he has brought for his purpose,
does not only not prove his intent, but also draw after them such odible
consequences, as every good christen ear must needs abhor to here? what
shall we gather (I say) of this, but that the mighty and invincible truth of
the contrary part, will in no case suffer it self to be overthrown.
Furthermore, what will thou say, if Frith do sufficiently prove our part him
self?


HERE. That can not be, for all his whole purpose is utterly to the contrary.


CATH. I grant the same, and yet mark him well. For he intendinge in deed to
prove the contrary, makes never a reason, but that (as I have declared unto
the) it renneth utterly even as much against the necessitee of other necessary
articles beside, as it does against this, for which he did purpose it: and that
were not possible, but because the like or the very same necessitee of belief,
is as well in this, as in them, and all one: for how should his reasons purposed
only against the necessary belief of this article, touch the necessary,
belief of any other likewise, more the^ they touch the light of the son, the
heat of the fire and other like, being no more purposed against those other
necessary articles, then against these things, but utterly because those
articles and this, be all of one sort, and of like necessitee to be believed,
and each of these things, that is to say, the light of the son, and the
heat of the fire, clean of an other sort? For what reason so ever be brought
against any thing, so far it does always run as the communitee of the thing,
against which it is brought, does extend, and no farther: As be it in case,
that one were so mad, as to deny the immortalitee of thy soul, and would go
about to disprove the same. Yet what so ever reasons he should make against it,
without fail must needs run likewise, even as well against the immortalitee
of all other men's souls beside, as against thine, and that could not be, but
because that same immortalitee is commune and does apperteine as well unto thy
soul as to theirs. Wherefore after the like manner, the cause why, that Frithes
reasons does run, as well against the necessitee of other necessary articles,
as it does against the necessitee of this (for which they were purposed) is
utterly because, the very same necessitee of belief, is commune and does
aperteine as well unto this, as to them and all one: for else it were not
possible for those reasons purposed but only against this, to make any thing
more against the necessitee of those other, then against (as I said) the light
of the son, or any thing else beside. Therefore it must needs follow, that this
article, is of as great necessitee to be believed, as any of the other is.
wherefore because Frith would have proved it indifferent and could not, he has
therefore now proved it necessary and would not. Wherewith content thy self,
thou gettest no more of me at this time.


HERE. Yes I pray you sir, one thing more, and then I will bid you farewell.


CA. What is that?


HERE. Mary sir I have read Frithes book, I wene as often as ever did you, and
yet could I never find or perceive such matter therein, as ye have declared,
and I marvel greatly what should be the cause thereof:


CATH. It is no marvel at all: for doubtless if Frith had no more truth,
virtue, wit, and learning in thine opinion, then he had in his own head, thou
should sone have perceived in his book, a great deal more, then I have
showed the. And that shall thou prove most true, if thou do but withdraw thine
opinion and affection from him.


HERE. Trow ye so?


CATH. There is no doubt of that.


HERE. Well sir, here is my way now, and therefore I will trouble you no longer
at this time.


CATH. Then farewell till to morrow.


HERE. God be with you sir.


CATH. And with the to.


HERE. At. ix. or x. of the clock ye say.


CATHOLICVS. What else?


HERETICVS. I will not fail you.


Fautes escaped in the printyng.
Leofe. Side. Line. Fautes. Corrected. 37. 2. 15. any and of any of 38. 2. 6.
as us 40. 1. 6. whtch which

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE IN THE HOVS OF THOmas Berthelet.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum folum.

LVCRECIA ROMANA THOMAS BERTHELETVS




