DIVERSE voyages touching the discovery of America, and the Islands adjacent
unto the same, made first of all by our Englishmen, and afterward by the
Frenchmen and Britons: And certain notes of aduertisements for observations,
necessary for such as shall hereafter make the like attempt, With two mappes
annexed heereunto for the plainer understanding of the whole matter.

Imprinted at London for Thomas VVoodcocke, dwelling in paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the black bear. 1582.

The names of certain late writers of Geographie, with the year wherein they
wrote.
The year of our Lord. 1300 A Belfada Ismael prince of Syria, Persia, and
Assyria. 1320 John Mandeuill Englishman. 1500 Albertus Crantzius of Hamburge.
1520 Peter martyr Millanoyse. 1525 Gonsaluo Ouiedo Spaniarde. 1527 Robert
Thorn English man. 1530 Hieronymus Fracastor Italian. 1539 Gemma Frifius. 1540
Antonie di Mendoza Spaniard. 1541 Gerardus Mercator Fleming. 1549 John Baptista
Guicchardine Florentine. 1553 John Baptista Ramusius, he gathered many notable
things. 1554 Sebastian Munster Germane. 1554 Thomas Giunti Venetian. 1555
Clement Adams Englishman. 1555 Orontius Finaeus Frenchman. 1564 Abraham
Ortelius Fleming. 1574 Hierome Osorius Portingall. 1575 Andreas Theuet
Frenchman. 1575 Francis Belforest Frenchman. 1576 Humfrey Gilbert knight,
Englishman. 1577 Dionyse Settle Englishman. 1578 George Best Englishman. 1580
Nicolas Chauncellor Englishman.

The names of certain late trauaylers, both by sea and by land, which also
for the most part have written of their own trauayles and voyages.
The year of our Lord. 1178 Benjamin Tudelensis a Jew. 1270 Marcus Paulus a
Venetian. 1300 Harton an Armenian. 1320 John Mandeuile knight, englishman. 1380
Nicolaus and Antonius Zeni, venetians. 1444 Nicolaus Contivenetian. 1492
Christopher Columbus a Genoway. 1497 Sebastian Gabot, an egnlishman the son
of a venetia^. 1497 M. Thorn and Hugh Eleot of Bristowe, englishmen. 1497
Vasques de Gama a portingale. 1500 Gasper Corterealis a portingale. 1516
Edoardus Barbosa a portingale. 1519 Fernandus Magalianes a portingale. 1530
John Barros a portingale. 1534 Jacques Cartier a Briton. 1540 Francis Vasques de
Coronado Spaniarde. 1542 John Gaetan Spaniarde. 1549 Francis Xauier a
portingale. 1553 Hugh Willowbie knight, and Richard Chauncellor Eng. 1554
Francis Galuano a portingale. 1556 Stenen and William Burros Englishmen. 1562
Antonie Ienkinson Englishman. 1562 John Ribault a Frenchman. 1565 Andrewe
Theuet a Frenchman. 1576 Martin Frobisher Englishman. 1578 Francis Drake
Englishman. 1580 Arthur Pet, and Charles Iackma^ Englishmen. 1582 Edward
Fenton, and Luke ward, Englishmen. 1582 Humfrey Gilbert knight, Edward Heyes,
and Antonie Brigham Englishmen.

A very late and great probability of a passage, by the Northwest part of
America in 58. degrees of Northerly latitude.
AN excellent learned man of portingale, of singular grauety, authority and
experience told me very lately, that one Anus Cortereal, captain of the isle
of Tercera about the year 1574. which is not above eight years past, sent a
Ship to discover the Northwest passage of America, and that the same ship
arriving on the coast of the said America in fifty eyghte degrees of
latitude, found a great entrance exceeding deep and broad, without all
impediment of ice, into which they passed above twenty leagues, and found it
always to trende toward the South, the land lying low and plain on either
side: And that they persuaded them selves verily, that there was a way open
into the south sea. But their victailes failing them, and being but one ship,
they returned back again with joy. This place seems to lie in equal degrees
of latitude, with the first entrance of the sound of Denmark between Norway
and the head land, called in latin Cimbrorum promontorium, and therefore like
to be open and nauigable a great part of the year. And this report may be
well annexed unto the other eight reasons mentioned in my epistle dedicatorie,
for proof of the likelihood of this passage by the Northwest.

To the right worshipful and most virtuous Gentleman master Phillip Sydney
Esquire.
I Marvel not a little (right worshipful) that since the first discovery of
America (which is now full fourscore and ten years) after so great
conquests and plantings of the Spaniardes and Portingales there, that we of
England could never have the grace to set fast footing in such fertile and
temperate places, as are left as yet vnpossessed of them. But again when I
consider that there is a time for all men, and see the Portingales time to be
out of date, and that the nakedness of the spaniards, and their long hidden
secrets are now at length espied, whereby they went about to delude the
world, I conceive great hope, that the time approaches and now is, that we of
England may share and part stakes (if we will our selves) both with the
spaniarde and the Portingale in part of America, and other regions as yet
undiscovered. And surely if there were in us that desire to advance the honor
of our Country which ought to be in every good man, we would not all this
while have foreslowne the possessing of those lands, which of equity and
right appertain unto us, as by the discourses that follow shall appear most
plainly. Yea if we would behold with the eye of pity how al our Prisons
are pestered and filled with able men to serve their Country, which for small
roberies are daily hanged up in great numbers even twenty at a clappe out of
one iayle (as was seen at the last assizes at Rochester) we would hasten and
further every man to his power the deducting of some Colonies of our
superfluous people into those temperate and fertile parts of America, which
being within six weeks sailing of England are yet vnpossessed by any
Christians: and seem to offer themselves unto us, stretching nearer unto her
Majesty's Dominions, then to any other part of Europe. We read that the Bees,
when they grow to be too many in their own hiues at home, are wont to be led
out by their Captains to swarm abroad, and seek themselves a new dwelling
place. If the examples of the Grecians and Carthaginians of old time, and the
practice of our age may not move us, yet let us learn wisdom of these small
weak and unreasonable creatures. It chanced very lately that upon occasion I
had great conference in matters of Cosmographie with an excellent learned man
of Portingale, most privy to all the discoueries of his nation, who wondered
that those blessed countries, from the point of Florida Northward, The speech
of a learned Portingale.
were all this while unplanted by Christians, protesting with great affection
and zeal, that if he were now as young as I (for at this present he is
threescore years of age) he would sell all he had, being a man of no small
wealth and honor, to furnish a convenient number of ships to sea for the
inhabiting of those countries, and reducing those gentile people to
christianity. Master John Barros the causer of the inhabiting of Bresilia.
Moreover he added that John Barros their chief Cosmographer being moved with
the like desire, was the cause that Bresilia was first inhabited by the
Portingales: where they have nine baronies or lordships, and thirty engennies
or sugar milles, two or three hundred slaves belonging to each myll, with a
Judge, and other officers, and a Church: so that every mill is as it were a
little common wealth: and that the country was first planted by such men, as
for small offenses were saved from the rope. This he spoke not only unto me
and in my hearing, but also in the presence of a friend of mine, a man of great
skill in the Mathematikes. If this man's desire might be executed, we might
not only for the present time take possession of that good land, but also in
short space by Gods grace find out that short and easy passage by the
Northwest, which we have hitherto so long desired, and whereof we have many
good and more then probable conjectures: a few whereof I think it not amiss
here to set down, although your worship know them as well as my self. First
therefore it is not to be forgotten, that Sebastian Gabot wrote to master
Baptista Ramusius, that he verily believed that all the North part of America
is divided into Islands. Secondly that master John Verarzanus, which had been
thrice on that coast, in an old excellent map, which he gave to king Henry
the eight, and is yet in the custody of master Lock, does so lay it out, as
it is to be seen in the map annexed to the end of this book, being made
according to Verarzanus plat. Thirdly the story of Gil Gonsalua recorded by
Franciscus Lopes de Gomara, which is said to have sought a passage by the
North west, seems to argue and prove the same. Fourthly, in the second
relation of Jacques Cartier the 12. Chapter the people of Saguinay do testify
that upon their coasts Westwarde there is a sea the end whereof is unknown
unto them. Fifthly, in the end of that discourse is added this, as a special
remembrance, to wit, that they of Canada say that it is a months space to
sail to a land where cinnamon and cloves are growing. Sixthly, the people of
Florida signified unto John Ribault (as it is expressed in his discourse
heerewithall imprinted) that they might sail from the River of May unto Ceuola
and the south sea through their country within twenty days. Seventhly, the
experience of captain. Frobisher on the hither side, and Sir Fraunces Drake on
the back side of America, with the testimony of Nicolaus and Anthonius Zeni,
that Estotilanda is an Island, does yield no small hope thereof. Lastly, the
judgment of the excellent Geographer Gerardus Mercator, which his son Rumold
Mercator my friend showed me in his letters, and drew out for me in
writing, is not of wise men lightly to be regarded. His words are these. The
judgment of Gerardus Mercator of a passage by the Northwest.
Magna tametsi pauca de noua Frobisheri nauigatione scribis, quam miror ante
multos annos no^ fuisse attentatam. Non enim dubium est, quin recta and breuis
via pateat in occidentem Cathaium vsque. In quod regnu^, si recte nauigationem
instituant, nobilissimas totius mundi merces colligent, and multis Gentibus
adhuc idololatris Christi nomen communicabunt. You write (says he to his
son) great matters though very briefly of the new discovery of Frobisher,
which I wonder was never these many years heretofore attempted. For there is
no doubt, but that there is a straight and short way open into the West even
unto Cathay. Into which kingdom, if they take their course aright, they shall
gather the most noble merchandise of all the world, and shall make the name of
Christ to be known unto many idolatrous and Heathen people. And here to
conclude and shut up this matter, I have heard my self of Merchants of
credit that have lived long in Spain, that King Phillip has made a law of
late that none of his subjects shall discover to the Northwardes of five and
forty degrees of America: A law made of late by king. Phillip.
which may be thought to proceed chiefly of two causes, the one, least
passing farther to the North they should discover the open passage from the
south sea to our north sea: the other because they have not people enough to
possess and keep that passage, but rather thereby should open a gappe for
other nations to pass that way. Certes if hitherto in our own discoueries we
had not been led with a preposterous desire of seeking rather gain then Gods
glory, I assure my self that our labors had taken far better effect. But
we forgotte, that Godliness is great riches, and that if we first seek the
kingdom of God, al other things will be given unto us, and that as the light
accompanies the Sun, and the heat the fire, so lasting riches do wait upon
them that are zealous for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, and the
enlargement of his glorious Gospel: as it is said, I will honor them that
honor me. I trust that now being taught by their manifold losses our men
will take a more godly course, and use some part of their goods to his glory:
if not, he will turn even their covetousness to serve him, as he has done the
pride and avarice of the Spaniardes and Portingales, who pretending in glorious
words that they made their discoueries chiefly to convert Infidelles to our
most holy faith, (as they say) in deed and truth sought not them, but their
goods and riches. Which thing that our nation may more speedily and happily
perform, there is no better mean in my simple judge me^t then the increase of
knowledge in the art of navigations, and breading of skilfulnesse in the sea
men: which Charles the Emperor and the king of Spain that now is wisely
considering have in their Contractation house in Civil The co^tractatio^ house
at Civil.
appointed a learned reader of the said art of Navigations, and joined with him
certain examiners, and have distinguished the orders among the sea men, as the
groomet which is the basest degree, the mariner which is the second, the
master the third, and the pilote the fourth, unto the which two last degrees
none is admitted without he have heard the reader for a certain space (which
is commonly an excellent Mathematician, of which number were Pedro di Medina
which writ learnedly of the art of navigations, and Alonso di Chauez and
Hieronimus di Chauez, whose works likewise I have seen) and being found fit
by him and his assistantes, which are to examine matters touching experience,
they are admitted with as great solemnity and giving of presents to the
ancient masters and Pilots, and the reader and examiners, as the great doctors
in the Universities, or our great Sergeantes at the law when they proceed, and
so are admitted to take charge for the Indies. And that your worship may
know that this is true, Master Steven Borrows, M. Steven Borrowes.
now one of the four masters of the Queens navy, told me that newely after
his return from the discovery of Moscouie by the North, in Queen Mary's
days, the Spaniards, having intelligence that he was master in that
discovery, took him into their co^tractation house at their making and
admitting of masters and pilots, giving him great honor, and presented him
with a pair of perfumed gloves worth five or six Ducates. I speak all this
to this end, that the like order of erecting such a Lecture A lecture of the
art of nauigatio^ necessary for to be erected in London.
here in London or about Ratcliffe in some convenient place, were a matter of
great consequence and importance, for the saving of many men's lives and goods,
which now through gross ignorance are daily in great hazerd, to the no small
detriment of the whole realm. For which cause I have dealt with the right
worshipful sir Frances Drake, that seeing God has blessed him so wonderfully,
he would do this honnour to him self and benefit to his country, to be at
the cost to erecte such a lecture: Whereunto in most bountiful manner at the
very first he answered, The bountiful offer of sir Francis Drake toward
furthering the art of Navigations.
that he liked so well of the motion, that he would give twenty pounds by
the year standing, and twenty pounds more before hand to a learned man to
furnish him with instruments and maps, that would take this thing upon him:
yea so ready he was that he earnestly requested me to help him to the notice
of a fit man for that purpose, which I, for the zeal I bare to this good
actio^, did presently, and brought him one, who came unto him and conferred
with him thereupon: but in fine he would not undertake the lecture, unless he
might have forty pound a year standing, and so the matter ceased for that
time: howebeit the worthy and good Knight remains full constant, and will
be, as he told me very lately, as good as his word. Now if God should put
into the head of any noble man to contribute other twenty pound, to make this
lecture a competent living for a learned man, the whole realm no doubt might
reap no small benefit thereby. To leave this matter and to draw to an end,
I have hear right worshipful in this hasty work first put down the title
which we have to that part of America which is from Florida to 67. degrees
northwarde, by the letters patentes granted to John Gabote and his three
sons, Ihon Gabote and his three sons.
Jews, Sebastian, and Santius, with Sebastians own Certificate to Baptista
Ramusius of his discovery of America, and the testimony of Fabian our own
Chronicler. Next I have caused to be added the letters of M. Robert Thorn to
King Henry the eight, and his discourse to his Ambassador doctor Ley in
Spain of the like argument, with the kings setting out of two ships for
discovery in the 19. year of his reign. The^ I have translated the voyage of
John Verarzanus from thirty degrees to Cape Briton, (and the last year at my
charges, and other of my friends by my exhortation, I caused Jacques Cartiers
two voyages of discovering the grand Bay, and Canada, Saguinay, and Hochelaga
to be translated out of my Volumes, which are to be annexed to this present
translation). Moreover following the order of the map, and not the course of
time, I have put down the discourse of Nicholaus and Antonius Zenie. The last
treatise of John Ribault, is a thing that has been already printed, but not
now to be had, unless I had caused it to be printed again. The map is
master Michael Locks, a man, for his knowledge in diners languages and
especially in Cosmographie, able to do his country good, and worthy in my
judgment, for the manifold good parts in him, of good reputation and better
fortune. This cursorie pamphlet I am over bold to present unto your worship:
but I had rather want a little discretion, then to be found unthankful to him,
which has been always so ready to pleasure me and all my name.

Here I cease, craving pardon for my over boldness, trusting also that your
worship will continue and increase your accustomed favor toward these godly
and honorable discoueries.

Your worshippes humble always to command. R. H.

A latin copy of the letters patentes of King Henry the seventh, granted
unto John Gabote and his three sons, Jews, Sebastian, and Santius for the
discovering of new and unknown lands.
HEnricus dei gratia rex Angliae and Franciae, and dominus hiberniae,
omnibus, ad quos praesentes literae nostrae peruenerint, salutem,
Notum sit and manifestum, quod dedimus and concessimus, ac per praesentes
damus and concedimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris dilectis nobis Ioanni
Gabotociui Veneciarum, Lodouico, Sebastiano, and Santio, filiis dicti Ioannis,
and eorum and cuiuslibet eorum haeredibus and deputatis plenam ac liberam
authoritate^, facultatem and potestatem nauigandi ad omnes parts, regiones and
sinus ma^is orientalis, occidentalis, and septentrionalis sub banneris,
vexillis, and insignits nostris, cum quinque nauibus sieve nauigijs, cuiuscunque
portiturae and qualitatis existant, and cum tot et tantis nautis and hominibus
quot and quantos in dictis nauibus secum ducere voluerint, suis and eorum
propriis sumptibus and expensis, ad inueniendum, discoperiendum, and
iuuestigandum quascunque insulas, patrias, regiones sieve prouincias gentilium
and infidelium quorumcunque in quacunque part mundi positas, quae Christianis
omnibus ante haec tempora fuerint incognitae. Concessimus etiam eisdem and
eorum cuilibet, eorumque and cuiuslibet eorum haeredibus and deputatis ac
licentiam dedimus ad affigendum praedictas banneras nostras and insignia in
quacunque villa, oppido, castro, insula seu terra firma ase nouiter inuentis.
Et quod praenominatus Ioannes and filii eiusdem seu haeredes and eorundem
deputati, quascunque hiusmodi villas, castra, oppida and insulas a se inuentas,
quae subiugari, occupari, possideri possint, subiugare, occupare, possidere
valea^t, tanqua^ vasalli nostri, and gubernatores, locatenentes and deputati,
eorundem dominium, titilum, and iurisdictionem earundem vilbarum, castrorum,
oppidorum, insularum, acterrae firmae sic inuentorum nobis acquirendo. Ita
tamen vt ex omnibus fructibus, proficuis, emolumentis, commodis, lucris, and
obuentionibus ex h^iusmodi nauigatione prouenientibus praefatus Ioannes and
filij ac haeredes, and eorum deputati tenea^tur and sint obligati nobis pro
omni viagio suo, toties quoties ad portu^ nostru^ Bristolliae applicuerint (ad
quem omnino applicare tenea^tur, and sint astricti) deductis omnibus su^ptibus
and impensis necessariis per eosdem factis, quintam partem capitalis lucri
facti, sieve in mercibus sieve in pecuniis persoluere. Dantes nos and concede^tes
eisde^ suisque haerdibus and deputatis, vt ab omni solutione custumarum omniu^
and singulorum bonorum ac mercium, quas secum reportarint ab illis locis sie
nouiter inuentis, liberi sint and immunes. Et insuper dedimus and concessimus
eisdem ac suis haeredibus and deputatis, quod terrae omnes firmae, iusulae,
villa, oppida, castra, and loca quaecunque a se inuenta, quctquot ab eis
inueniri contigerit, non possint ab aliis quibusuis nostris subditis
frequentari seu visitari, absque licentia praedictorum Ioannis and eius
filiorum suorumque deputatorum, sub paena amissionis ta^ nauium, quam bonorum
omniu^ quorumcunque ad ea loca sic inuenta nauigare praesu^entiu^. Volentes and
strictissime mandantes omnibus and singulis nostris subditis tam in terra quam
in mari constitutis, vt praefato Ioanni and eius filiis, ac deputatis bona^
assistentiam faciant, and tam in armandis nauibus seu nauigiis, quam in
prouisione quietatus and victualium pro sua pecunia emendorum, atque aliarum
omnium rerum sibi prouidendarum pro dicta nauigatione sumenda, suos omnes
fauores and auxilia impertiant. In cuius rei testimonium has literas nostras
fieri fecimus patentes: ^. Martii. 1495
testeme ipso apud Westmonasteriu^ quinto die Martii, anno regni nostri
vndecimo.

The same letters patents in english.
Henry by the grace of GOD king of England, and France, and Lord of Irelande,
to all, to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
Be it known that we have given and granted, and by these presents do give
and grant for us and our heirs, to our well beloved John Gabote citizen of
Venice, to Jews, Sebastian, and Santius, sons of the said John, and to the
heirs of them and every of them, and their deputies, full and free authority,
leave, and power to sail to all parts, countries and seas of the East, of the
West, License gra^^^^ to John Gabot, his sons and heirs, to discover
unknown lands under the kings banner.
and of the North under our banners and ensigns, with five ships, of what
burden or quantity soever they be: and as many mariners or men as they will
have with them in the said ships, upon their own proper costs and charges to
seek out, discover and find whatsoever isles, countries, regions, or
provinces, of the heathen and infidelles whatsoever they be, and in what part
of the world soever they be, which before this time have been unknown to all
Christians. We have granted to them also and to every of them, the heirs of
them, and every of them and their deputies, and have given them license to set
up our banners and ensigns in every village, town, castle, isle, or maine
land of them newely found. And that the foresaid John and his sons or their
heirs and assigns may subdue, occupy, and possess all such towns, cities,
castles and yles of them found, which they can subdue, To subdue (...)
possess those lands as the kings vassalles.
occupy, and possess, as our vassailes and lieutenantes, getting unto us the
rule, title, and jurisdiction of the same villages, towns, castles, and firm
land so found.

Yet so that the foresaid John and his sons and heirs, and their Deputies
be holden and bounden, of all the fruits, profits, gains and commodities
growing of such navigations, for every their voyage as often as they shall
arrive at our port of Bristoll, (at the which port they shall be bound and
holden only to arrive) all manner of necessary costs and charges by them made
being deducted, to pay unto us in wares or money the fifth part of the Capital
gain so gotten. The fifth of all goods to be paid to the king.
We giving and granting unto them and to their heirs and Deputies, that they
shall be free from all paying of customs of all and singular such
merchandise, Freedom from all customs.
as they shall bring with them from those places so newely found.

And moreover we have given and granted to them, their heirs and Deputies,
that all the firm lands, Isles, Villages, Towns, Castles and places
whatsoever they be, None but they and their assigns may travail thither.
that they shall chance to find, may not of any other of our subjects be
frequented or visited without the license of the foresaid John, his sons and
their deputies under pain of forfayture as well of their ships, as of all
and singular goods of all them that shall presume to sail to those places so
found. Willing and most straightly commanding all and singular our subjects
as well on land as on sea appointed officers, to give good assistance to the
aforesaid John and his sons and deputies, and that as well in arming and
furnishing their ships or vessels, as in provision of quietness, and in buying
of victualles for their money and all other things by them to be provided
necessary for the said navigations, they do give them all their help and
favor. In witness whereof we have caused to be made these our letters
patentes. The 5. of march 1594.
Witness our self at Westminster the fifte day of March in the xi. year of
our reign.

A note of Sebastian Gabotes voyage of discovery, taken out of an old
Chronicle written by Robert Fabian sometime Alderman of London, which is in the
custody of John Stowe Citizen, a diligent searcher and preserver of
Antiquities.
THIS year the King, In the 13. year of king Henry the vii. 1498.
(by means of a Venetian which made himself very expert and cunning in
knowledge of the circuit of the world and Islands of the same, as by a Card
and other demonstrations reasonable he showed) caused to man and victual a
ship at Bristowe, Note.
to search for an Island, which, he said he knew well, was rich and
replenished with rich commodities. Which Ship thus manned and victualed at the
kings cost, diverse merchants of London ventured in her small stocks, being in
her as chief Patron the said Venetian. And in the company of the said
ship sailed also out of Bristowe Bristow.
three or four small ships fraught with fleight and gross merchandises, as
course cloth, Caps, Laces, points and other trifles, and so departed from
Bristowe in the beginning of May: William Purchase Mayor of London.
of whom in this Majors time returned no tidings.

Of three savage men which he brought home, and presented unto the king in the
xvii. year of his reign.
THis year also were brought unto the king three men taken in the new found
Island, Three savage men brought into England.
that before I spoke of in William Purchase time being Mayor. These were clothed
in beasts skins, Raw flesh. Beasts skins.
and ate raw flesh, and spoke such speech that no man could understand them,
and in their demeanor like to brute beasts, whom the king kept a time after.
Of the which upon two years past after I saw two apparelled after the manner of
English men in Westminster palace, which at that time I could not discern
from English men, till I was learned what they were. But as for speech I heard
none of them utter one word.

John Baptista Ramusius in his Preface to the third volume of the nauigations,
writes thus of Sebastian Gabot.
IN the latter part of this volume are put certain relations of John de
Verarzana a Florentine, and of a great Captain a Frenchman, and the two
voyages of Jacques Cartier a Briton, who sailed unto the land set in fifty
degrees of latitude to the north, which is called New France: of the which
lands hitherto it is not thoroughly known whether they do join with the
firm land of Florida and noua Hispania, or whether they be separated and
divided all by the Sea as Islands: Sebastian Gabots letters to Ramusius.
and whether that by that way one may go by Sea unto the country of Cathaio:
as many years past it was written unto me by Sebastian Gaboto our country man
Venetian, a man of great experience and very rare in the art of Navigations, and
the knowledge of Cosmographie: Note.
who sailed along and beyond this land of New France at the charges of king
Henry the seventh king of England: He calls them Islands.
And he told me that having sailed a long time West and by North beyond
these Islands unto the latitude of 67. degrees and an half under the North
Pole. and at the 11. day of June finding still the open Sea without any manner
of impediment, Sebastian Gabot might have sailed to Catheis.
he thought verily by that way to have passed on still the way to Cathais,
which is in the East, and would have done it, if the mutiny of the shipmaster
and mariners had not rebelled and made him to return homewardes from that
place. This voyage to Cathay reserved by God for some great Prince.
But it seems that God does yet still reserve this great enterprise for some
great Prince, to discover this voyage of Cathaio by this way: which for the
bringing of the spiceries from India into Europe were the most easy and
shortest of all other ways hitherto found out. This way the shortest of all
others.
And surely this enterprise would be the most glorious and of most importance
of all other that can be imagined, to make his name great, and fame immortal
to all ages to come, This discovery were a most glorious enteprise.
far more then can be done by any of all these great troubles and wars,
which daily are used in Europe among the miserable Christian people.

This much concerning Sebastian Gabotes discovery may suffice for a present
taste: but shortly, God willing, shall come out in print all his own mappes and
discourses drawn and written by himself, which are in the custody of the
worshipful master William Worthington one of her Majesty's Pensioners, William
Worthington Pensioner.
who (because so worthy monumentes should not be buried in perpetual
oblivion) is very willing to suffer them to be ouerseene and published in as
good order as may be, to the encouragement and benefit of our Country men.

A declaration of the Indies and lands discovered, and subdued unto the
Emperor, and the king of Portugale. And also of other parts of the Indies and
rich Countries to be discovered, which the worshipful master Robert Thorn
merchant of London (who dwelt long in the City of Siuil in Spain) exhorted
king Henry the eight to take in hand. MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE.
EXperience proves that naturally all Princes be desirous to extend and
enlarge their dominions and kingdoms. Wherefore it is not to be marvelled, to
see them every day procure ye same, not regarding any cost, peril, and labor,
that may thereby chance, but rather it is to be marueiled, if there be any
prince content to live quiet with his own dominions. For surely the people
would think he lacks the noble courage and spirit of all other. The world
knows that the desires of Princes have been so fervent to obtain their
purpose, that they have adventured and proved things to man's conjecture
impossible, the which they have made possible, and also things difficult have
made facil, and thus to obtain their purpose have in manner turned up and down
the whole world so many times, that the people inhabiting in the farthest
regio^ of the occident have pursued with great desires, labors and perils, to
penetrate and enter into the farthest regions of the Orient: And in likewise
those people of the said parts of the Orient have had no less labor and
desire to enter and penetrate into the farthest land of the Occident, and so
following their purchase have not seized until they could pass no farther by
reason of the great Seas. This natural inclination is cause, that scarsely it
may be said there is any kingdom stable, nor king quiet, but that his own
imagination, or other Princes his neighbors do trouble him. God and nature
has provided to your Grace, and to your Gracious progenitors this Realm of
England, and set it in so fruitful a place, and within such limits, that
it should seem to be a place quiet and aparted from all the foresaid
desires. One special cause is, for that it is compassed with the Sea: by
reason thereof it seems, this notwithstanding, their desires and noble
courages have been most commonly like unto others: and with marvelous great
labors, costs and perilles, they have traveled and passed the Seas making
war not only with kings and dominions nigh neighbors, but also with them of
far countries, and so has won and conquered many rich and fair
Dominions, and amplifted this your Graces Realm with great victory and glory.
And also now of late your Grace having like courage and desire, and not
without just cause, to enlarge this your kingdom and demand your limits and
tribute of the French king, which at that present he restrained your Grace in
person passed with a great power into France, putting your Graces person to
great pain and labor, and without doubt victoriously you had conquered the
said Realm of France, as ye began; if your adversary had not reconciled
him, and knowledged your Graces right and title: and so promised truly to pay
the tribute then due, and fulfill your request in all things, and also desired
your Grace for peace, the which of your clemency you could not refuse.

Now I considering this your noble courage and desire, and also perceiving
that your Grace may at your pleasure, to your greater glory, by a godly mean,
with little cost, peril, or labor to your Grace or any of your Subjects,
amplify and inriche this your said Realm, I know it is my bound duty to
manifest this secret unto your Grace, which hitherto as I suppose has been
hid: Note.
which is that with a small number of ships there may be discovered diverse
new lands and kingdoms, in the which without doubt your Grace shall win
perpetual glory and your Subjects infinite profit. To which places there is
left one way to discover, which is into the North: For that of the four parts
of the world it seems three parts are discovered by other Princes. For out
of Spain they have discovered all the Indies and Seas Occidentall, and out of
Portugale all the Indies and Seas Oriental: So that by this part of the Orient
and Occident, they have compassed the world. For the one of them departing
toward the Orient, and the other toward the Occident, met again in the
course or way of the midst of the day, and so then was discovered a great
part of the same Seas and coasts by the Spaniardes. So that now rest to be
discovered the said North parts, the which it seems to me, is only your
charge and duty. Because the situation of this your Realm is thereunto
nearest and aptest of all other: Note.
and also for that you have already taken it in hand: And in mine opinion, it
will not seem well to leave so great and profitable an enterprise, seeing it
may so easily and with so little cost, labor, and danger, be followed and
obtained: Though heretofore your Grace has made theereof a proof, and found
not the commodity thereby as you trusted, at this time it shall be no
impediment. For there may be now provided remedies for things, then lacked,
and the inconveniences and lettes removed that then were cause your Graces
desire took no full effect, which is, the courses to be changed, and follow
the aforesaid new courses. And concerning the mariners, ships, and
provision, an order may be devised and taken meet and convenient much better
then hitherto. By reason whereof, and by Gods grace, no doubt your purpose
shall take effect. Surely the cost herein will be nothing, in comparison to
the great profit. The labor is much less, yea nothing at all, where so great
honor and glory is hoped for: and considering well the courses, truly the
danger and way is shorter to us, the^ to spain or Portugal, as by evident
reasons appears. And now to declare some thing of the commodity and
utility of this Navigations and discovering, Note.
it is very clear and certain, that the Seas that commonly men say, that
without great danger, difficulty and peril, yea rather it is impossible to
pass, those same Seas be nauigable and without any such danger, but that
ships may pass and have in them perpetual cleerenesse of the day without
any darkness of the night: which thing is a great commodity for the
nauigants, to see at all tunes round about them, as well the safegardes as
dangers, and how great difference it is between the commodity and perilles
of other which lease the most part of every four and twenty hours the said
light, and go in darkness groping their way, I think there is none so
ignorant but perceives this more plainly, then it can be expressed: yea what
a vantage shall your Graces Subjects have also by this light to discover the
strange lands, countries, and coasts, for if they that be discovered to
sail by them in darkness is with great danger, much more then the coasts
not discovered be dangerous to travel by night or in darkness. Yet these
dangers or darkness has not let the Spaniardes and Portingals and other,
to discover many unknown realms to their great peril, which considered (and
that your Graces Subjects may have the said light) it will seem your
Graces subjects to be without actiuitie or courage, in leaving to do this
glorious and noble enterprise. For they being past this little way which they
named so dangerous, which may be ii, or iii. leagues before they come to ye
Pole, and as much more after they pass the Pole, it is clear that from thence
forth the Seas and lands are as temperat as in these parts, and that then it
may be at the will and pleasure of the mariners, to choose whether they will
sail by ye coasts that be cold, temperate, or hot. For they being past the
pole, it is plain they may decline to what part they list. If they will go
toward the Orient they shall enjoy the regions of all the Tartarians that
extend toward the midday, and from thence they may go and proceed to the
land of ye Chinas, and from thence to the land of Cathaio oriental, which is
of all the main land most oriental that can be reckoned from our
habitation. And if from thence they do continue their navigations, following
the coaste that returns toward the occident, they shall fall in Melassa, and
so in all the Indees which we call oriental, and following that way may
return hither by the Cape of Bona Speransa: and thus they shall compass the
whole world. And if they will take their course after they be past the pole,
toward the occident, they shall go in the back side of the new found land,
which of late was discovered by your Graces subjects, until they come to the
backside and South seas of the Indees occidentalls. And so continuing their
viage they may return through the strait of Magallanas to this country, and
so they compass also the world by that way, and if they go this third way,
and after they be past the pole, go right toward the pole Antartike, and
then decline toward the lands and Islands situated between the Tropikes, and
under the Equinoctial, without doubt they shall find there ye richest lands and
Islands of the world of Gold, precious stones, balmes, spices, and other
things that we here esteem most: which come out of strange countries, and may
return the same way.

By this it appears your Grace have not only a great advantage of the
riches, but also your subjects shall not travel half of the way that other
do, which go round about as aforesaid.

The book made by the right worshipful Master Robert Thorn in the year
1527. in Civil to Doctourley, Lord ambassador for King Henry the eight to
Charles the Emperor, being an information of the parts of the world,
discovered by him and the King of Portingale: And also of the way to the
Moluccaes by the north.
RIght noble and reverend in etc. I received your letters, and have procured
and sent to know of your servant, who your Lordeship wrote should be sick
in Merchena. I can not there or else where hear of him, without he be returned to
you, or gone to S. Lucar and shipped. I can not judge but that of some contagious
sickness he died, so that the owner of the house for defaming his house would
bury him secretly, and not be known of it. For such things have often times
happened in this country.

Also to write to your Lordshippe of the new trade of spicerie of the
Emperor, there is no doubt but that the Islands are fertile of cloves,
nutmegs, mace, and cinnamon: And that the said Islands, with other there
about, abound with gold, Rubies, Diamonds, Balasses, Granates, iacincts and
other stones and pearls, as al other lands, that are under and nere ye
equinoctial. For we see, where nature gives any thing, she is no nigarde. For
as with us and other, that are aparted from the said equinoctial, our
mettalles be lead, tynne, and iron, so theirs be gold, silver, and copper. And
as our fruits and grains be aples, nuttes, and corn, so theirs be ^ates,
nutmegges, pepper, cloves, and other spices. And as we have iette, amber,
cristall, jasper, and other like stones, so have they rubies, diamonds,
balasses, saphires, Iacincts, and other like. And though some say that of such
precious metals, grains or kind of spices, and precious stones, the
abundance and quantity is nothing so great, as our metals, fruits or stones
above rehearsed: yet if it be well considered, how the quantity of the earth
under the equinoctial to both the tropicall lines, (in which space is found
the said gold, spices and precious stones) to be as much in quantity, as
almost all the earth from the tropickes to both the poles: it can not be denied
but there is more quantity of the said mettels, fruits, spices, and precious
stones, then there is of the other mettels and other things before rehearsed.
And I see that the preciousnesse of these things is measured after the
distance that is between us, and the things that we have appetite unto. For in
this navigations of the spicerie was discovered, that these Islands nothing set
by gold, but set more by a knife and a nail of iron, then by his quantity of
Gold: and with reason, as the thing more necessary for man's service. And I
doubt not but to them should be as precious our corn and seeds, if they
might have them, as to us their spices: and likewise the pieces of glass that
hear we have counterfayted are as precious to them, as to us their stones:
which by experience is seen daily by them that have trade thither. This of
the riches of those countries is sufficient.

Touching that your Lordship wrote, whether it may be profitable to the
Emperor or no, it may be without doubt of great profit: if as the king of
Portingall does, he would become a merchant, and provide ships and their
lading, and trade thither alone, and defend the trade of these Islands for
himself. But other greater business withholdeth him from this. But still, as
now it is begun to be occupied, it would come to much. For the ships
coming in safety, there would thither many every year, of which to the
Emperor is due of all the wares and Iuelles that come from thence the fifth
part for his custom clear without any cost. And besides this he puts in
every flote a certain quantity of money, of which he enjoys of the gains
pound and pounds like as other adventurers do. In a flote of three ships
and a carauell that went from this city armed by the merchants of it, which
departed in April last past, I and my partener have 1400. Ducates that we
employed in the said fleet, Note.
principally for that two Englishmen friends of mine, which are somewhat
learned in Cosmographie, should go in the same ships, to bring me certain
relation of the situation of the country, and to be expert in the Navigations
of those seas, and there to have informations of many other things, and advise
that I desire to know especially. Seeing in these quarters are ships, and
mariners of that country, and cards by which they sail, though much unlike
ours: that they should procure to have the said Cards, and learn how they
understand them, and especially to know what Navigations they have for those
Islands Northwardes, and Northeastwarde.

Note.
For if from the said Islands the Sea do extend, without interposition of
land, to sail from the North point to the Northeast point 1700. or 1800.
leagues, they should come to the New found Islands that we discovered, and
so we should be nearer to the said spicerie by almost 2000. leagues then
the Emperor, or the king of Portingal are. And to advise your Lordshippe
whether of these spiceries of the King of Portingal or the Emperors is nearer,
and also of the titles that either of them has, and how our New found
lands are parted from it, (for that by writing without some demonstration, it
were hard to give any declaration of it,) I have caused that your Lordeshippe
shall receive herewith a little Map or Card of the world: the which, I
fear me, shall put your Lordshippe to more labor to understand, then me to
make it, only for that it is made in so little room that it cannot be but
obscurely set out, yt is desired to be seen in it, and also for yt I am in
this science little expert: Yet to remedy in part this difficulty, it is
necessary to declare to your Lordshippe my intent, with which I trust you shall
perceive in this card part of your desire, if, for that I cannot express mine
intent, with my declaration I do not make it more obscure.

First, your Lordship knows that the Cosmographers have divided the earth by
360. degrees in latitude, and as many in longitude, under the which is
comprehended all the roundnesse of the earth: the latitude being divided into
4. quarters, ninety degrees amount to every quarter, which they measure by
the altitude of the poles, that is the North and South stars, being from the
line equinoctial till they come right under the Noth star the said ninety
degrees: and as much from the said line equinoctial to the South star be
other ninety degrees. And as much more is also from either of the said
stars again to the equinoctial. Which imagined to be round, is soon
perceived thus, 360. degrees of latitude to be consumed in the said four
quarters, of ninety degrees a quarter, so that this latitude is the measure of
the world from North to South, and from South to North. And the longitude, in
which are also counted other 360. is counted from West to East, or from East to
West, as in the card is set. The said latitude your Lordship may see marked and
divided in the end of this card on the left hand. To know the latitudes.
So that if you would know in what degrees of latitude any region or coast
stands, take a compass and set the one foot of the same in the equinoctial
line right against the said region, and apply the other foot of the compass
to the said region or coast, and then set the said compass at the end of the
card, where the degrees are divided. And the one foot of the compass
standing in the line equinoctial, the other will show in the scale the
degrees of altitude or latitude that the said region is in. Also the longitude
of the world I have set out in the nether part of the card, containing also
360. degrees: which begin to be counted after Ptolome and other Cosmographers
from an head land called Capo verde, which is over against a little cross made
in the part occidentall, where the division of the degrees begins, and
ends in ye same Capo verde. To know the Longitudes.
Now to know in what longitude any land is, your Lordeshippe must take a
ruler or a compass, and set the one foot of the compass upon the land or
coast whose longitude you would know, and extend the other foot of the
compass to the next part of one of the transuersall lines in the Oriental
or Occidentall part: which done, set the one foot of the compass in the said
transuersall line at the end of the nether scale, the scale of longitude, and
the other foot shows the degree of longitude that the region is in. And your
Lordshippe must understand that this card though little conteyneth the
universal whole world betwixt the two collateral lines, the one in the
Occidentall part descends perpendicular upon the 175. degree, and the other
in the Oriental on the 170. degree, whose distaunce measures the scale of
longitude. And that which is without the two said transuersall lines is only
to show how the Oriental part is joined with the Occident, and Occident with
the Orient. For that that is set without the line in the Orient part, is the
same that is set within the other line in the Occidentall part: and again
that that is set without the line in the Occidentall part, is the same that
is set within the line on the Oriental part: To show that though this figure
of the world in plain or flat seems to have an end, yet one imagining that
this said card were set upon a round thing, where the ends should touch by
the lines, it would plainly appear how the Orient part joins with the
Occident, as there without the lines it is described and figured. And for more
declaration of the said card, your Lordship shall understand, that beginning on
the part Occidentall within the line, the first land that is set out, is ye
main land and Island of the Indies of ye Emperor. Which main land or coast
goes Northwarde, and finisheth in the land that we found, which is called
here Terra de Labrador. So that it appears the said land that we found
and the Indies to be all one main land. The said coast from the said Indies
Southwarde, as by the card your Lordshippe may see, comes to a certain
strait sea called Estrecho de todos Sanctos: Now called the streit of Ma^^lane.
by which strait Sea the Spaniardes go to the spiceries, as I shall declare
more at large: the which strait sea is right against the three hundred
fifteen degrees of Longitude, and is of Latitude or altitude from the
Equinoctial fifty three degrees. The first land from the said beginning of
the card toward the Orient is certain Islands of the Canaries and Islands of
Capo verde. But the first main land next to the line Equinoctial is the
said Capo verde, and from thence northwarde by the streite of this sea of
Italy. And so follows Spain, France, Flaunders, Almaine, Denmark and
Norway, which is the highest part toward the North. And over against Flaunders
are our Islands of England and Irelande. Of the lands and coasts within the
straites I have set out only the Regions, dividing them by lines of their
lymittes, by which playnelie I think your Lordship may see, in what situatio^
every region is, and of what highness, and with what regions it is joined. I
do think few are left out of all Europe. In the parts of Asia and Africa I
could not so well make the said divisions: for that they be not so well known,
nor need not so much. This I write because in the said card be made the
said lines and strikes, that your Lordshippe should understand wherefore they
do serve. Also returning to foresaid Capo verde the coast goes Southwarde to
a cape called Capo de bona speransa: which is right over against the sixtye and
sixty fifte degree of Longitude. And by this cape go the Portingales to their
spicerie. For from this cape toward the Orient, is the Land of Calicut, as
your Lordshippe may see in the head land over against the 130. degree. From
the said cape of Bona Speransa the coast returns toward the line
Equinoctial, and passing forth enters the read sea, and returning out
enters again into the gulf of Persia, and returns toward the Equinoctial
line, till that it comes to the headland called Callicut before said, and
from thence the coast making a Gulf, where is the river of Ganges, returns
toward the line to a head land called Malacha, where is the principal
spicerie: And from this cape returns and makes a great gulf, and after the
coast goes right toward the Orient, and over against this last gulf and coast
be many Islands, which be Islands of the spiceries of the Emperor. Upon which
the Portingales and he be at vartaunce. The said coast goes toward the
Orient, and ends right against the 155. degrees, and after returns toward
the occident Northwarde: which coast not yet plainly known I may ioyn to the
new found land found by us, that I spoke of before. So that I finishe with this
a brief declaration of the card aforesaid. Well I know I should also have
declared how the coasts within the streites of the Sea of Italy run. It is
plain that passing the streites on the Northside of that Sea after the coast
of Granado, and with that which pertaynes to Spain, is the coast of that which
France has in Italy. And then follows in one piece all Italy, which land
has an arm of a sea with a gulf which is called Mare Adriaticum. And in the
bottom of this gulf is the city of Venice. And on the other part of the said
gulf is Sclauonia, and next Grecia, then the streites of Constantinople, and
then the Sea called Euximus, which is within the said streites: And coming
out of the said straits flows toward Turcia mayor. (Though now on both sides
it is called Turcia.) And so the coast runs Southward to Syria, and over
against the said Turcia are the Ila^des of Rhodes, Candie, and Cyprus. And over
against Italy are the Islands of Sicilia and Sardinia. And over against Spain
is Maiorca and minorca. In the end of the gulf of Syria is Judea. And from
thence returns the coast toward the Occident, till it comes to the streites
where we began, which all is the coast of Affricke or Barbary. Also your
Lordshippe shall understand that the coasts of the Sea throughout all the
world I have colored with yellow; for that it may appear that all that is
within the line colored yellow, is to be imagined to be main land or Island:
and all without the said line so colored to be Sea: whereby it is easy and
light to know it. Albeit in this little room any other description would
rather have made it obscure then clear. Also the said coasts of the Sea are
all set justly after the manner and form as they lie, as the navigations
approoueth the^ throughout all the card, save only the coasts and Isles of
the spicerie of ye Emperor which is from over against the 160. to the 215.
degrees of Longitude. For these coasts and situations of the Islands every of
the Cosinographers and pilots of Portingall and Spain do set after their
purpose. The Spaniards more toward the Orient, because they should appear to
appertain to the Emperor: and the Portingalles more toward the Occident, for
that they should fall within their jurisdiction. So that the Pilots and
nauigants thither, which in such cases should declare ye truth, by their
industry do set the^ falsely every one to favor his prince. And for this
cause can be no certain situatio^ of ye coast and Islands, til this difference
betwixt them be verified. Now to come to the purpose of your Lordshippes
demand touching the difference between the Emperor and the king of
Portingall, to understand it better, I must declare ye beginning of this
discovering. Though peradventure your Lordship may say yt in that I have
written ought of purpose I fall in the Proverb, A gemino ouo bellum: But your
Lordship commanded me to be large, and I take license to be prolixouse, and
shall be peradventure tedious, but your Lordship knows that nihil ignorantia
verbosius. In the year 1484. the king of Portingal minded to arm certain
caruelles to discover this spicery. Then forasmuch as he feared that being
discovered every other prince would send and trade thither, so yt the cost and
peril of discovering should be his, and the profit common: wherefore first he
gave knowledge of this his mind to al princes christened, saying yt he would
seek amongst ye infidels new possessions of regions, and therefore would make
a certain army: and yt if any of the^ would help in ye cost of ye said army he
should enjoy his part of the profit or honor that should come of it. And as
then this discovering was holden for a strange thing and uncertain. Now they
say, that all the Princes of Christendom aunsweared that they would be no
part of such an army, nor yet of the profit yt might come of it. After the
which he gave knowledge to the Pope of his purpose, and of the answer of all
the Princes, desiring him yt seeing that none would help in the costs, that
he would judge all that should be found and discovered to be of his
jurisdiction, and command that none other Princes should intermeddle
therewith. The Pope said not as Christ says, Quis me constituit iudicem inter
vos? He did not refuse, but making him self as Lord and Judge of all, not
only granted that all that should be discovered from Orie^t to Occide^t should
be the kings of Portingall, but also, that upon great censures no other Prince
should discover but he: And if they did, all to be the kings of Portingall. So
he armed a fleet, and in the year 1487. was discovered yt Islands of Calicut,
from whence is brought all the spice he has. After this in the year 1492. the
king of Spain willing to discover lands toward the Occident without making
any such diligence, or taking license of the king of Portingale, armed certain
caruelles, and then discovered this India Occidentall, especially two Islands
of the said India, that in this card I set forth named the one Ladominica,
and the other Cuba, and brought certain gold from thence. Of the which when
the king of Portingall had knowledge, he sent to the king of Spain, requiring
him to give him ye said Islands. For that by the sentence of the Pope all that
should be discovered was his, and that he should not proceed further in the
discovery without his license. And at the same time it seems that out of
Castill, into Portingale had gone for fear of burning infinite number of Jews
that were expelled out of Spain, for that they would not turn to be
Christians, and carried with the^ infinite number of gold and silver. So that
it seems that the king of Spain answered that it was reason that the king of
Portingall asked, and that to be obedient to that which the pope had decreed,
he would give him the said Islands of the Indies. Now for as much as it was
decreed betwixt ye said kings, yt none should receive ye others subjects
fugitives, nor their goods, therefore the king of Portingale should pay and
return to the king of Spain a million of Gold or more, that the Jews had
carried out of Spain to Portingale; and that so doing he would give these
Islands and desist from any more discovering. And not fulfilling this he would
not only not give these Islands, but procure to discover more where him thought
best. It seems that the king of Portingale would not or could not with his
ease pay this money. And so not paying that he could not let the king of Spain
to discover: so that he enterprised not toward the Orient where he had begun
and found the spicery. And consented to the king of Spain that touching this
discovering they should divide the world between them two. And that all that
should be discovered from Capo verde, where this card begins to be counted
in the degrees of longitude, to 180. of the said scale of longitude, which is
half the world toward the Orient, and finisheth in this card right over
against a little cross made at the said 180. degrees, to be the king of
Portingalles. And all the land from the said Cross toward the Occident,
until it joins with the other Cross in the Orient, which contains the
other hundredth and eighty degrees, that is the other half of the world, to
be the king of Spaynes. So that from the land over against the said hundredth
and eighty degrees until it finish in the three hundred and sixty on both
the ends of the card, is the jurisdiction of the king of Spain. So after
this manner they divided the world between them. Now for that these Islands
of spicerie fall near the term and lymites between these Princes (for as by
the said card you may see they begin from one hundred and sixty degrees
of Longitude, and end in 215.) it seems all that falls from 160. to 180.
degrees, should be of Portingall: and all the rest of Spain. And for that
their Cosmographers and Pilots could not agree in the situation of the said
Islands (for the Portingals set them al within their 180. degrees, and the
Spaniards set them all without: and for that in measuring, all the
Cosmographers of both parts, or what other that ever have been cannot give
certain order to measure ye lo^gitude of the world, The longitudes hard to be
found out.
as they do of ye latitude: for yt there is no star fixed from East to West,
as are ye stars of the poles from North to South, but all moves with the
moving divine:) no manner can be found how certainly it may be measured, but
by conjectures, as the Nauigantes have esteemed the way they have gone. But it
is manifest that Spain had the situation of all the lands from Capo verde,
toward the Orient of the Portingales to their 180. degrees. And in all their
cards they never hitherto set the said Islands within their limitatio^ of the
said 180. degrees: (Though they knew very well of the Islands,) til now that
the Spaniards discovered them. And it is known that the king of Portingale had
trade to these Islands before, but would never suffer Portingale to go thither
from Calicut: for so much as he knew that it fell out of his dominion: least
by going thither there might come some knowledge of those other Islands of the
king of Spain, but bought the cloves of Merchauntes of that country, that
brought them to Calicut, much deerer then they would have cost, if he had sent
for the^, thinking after this manner it would abide always secret. And now
that it is discovered he sendes and keeps the Spanierds from the trade all
that he can. Also it should see me that when this foresaid consent of the
division of the world was agreed of between them, the king of Portingale had
already discovered certain Islands that lie over against Capo verde, and also
certain part of the main land of India toward the South, from whence he
fet Brasill, and called it the land of Brasill. So for that all should come
in his term and limits, be took three hundred and seventy leagues beyond
Capo verde: and after this, his 180. degrees, being his part of the world,
should begin in the Card right over against the 340 degrees, where I have
made a little compass with a cross, and should finishe at the 160. degree,
where also I have made an other little mark. And after this computation
without any controversy, the Islands of the spicerie fall out of the
Portingales domination. So that now the Spaniardes say to the Portingales that
if they would begin their 180. degrees from the said Capo verde, to the
intent they should extend more toward the orient, and so to touch those
Islands of the spicerie of the Emperor, which is all that is between the two
crosses made in this card, that then the Islands of Capo verde and the land
of Brasill that the Portingales now obtain, is out of the said limitation,
and that they are of the Emperors. Or if their 180. degrees they count from
the 370. leagues beyond the said Capo verde, to include in it the said
Islands and lands of Brasill, then plainly appears the said 180. degrees
should finishe long before they come to these Islands of the spicerie of the
Emperor: As by this Card your Lordeshippe may see. For their limittes should
begin at the 340. degrees, of this Card, and end at 160. degrees, where I
have made two little marks of the compass with crosses in them.

So that plainly it should appear by reason, that the Portingales should
leave these Islands of Capo verde and land of Brasill, if they would have part
of the spicerie of the Emperors: or else holding these, they have no part
there. To this the Portingales say, that they will begin their 180. degrees
from the self same Capo verde: for that it may extend so much more toward
the orient and touch these Islands of the Emperors: and would win these
Islands of Capo verde and land of Brasill never the less, as a thing that
they possessed before the consent of this limitation was made.

So none can verylye tell which has the best reason.

They be not yet agreed, Quare sub Iudice lis est. But without doubt by all
conjectures of reason the said Islands fall all without the limitation of
Portingale, and pertayne to Spain, as it appears by the most part of all
the Cards made by the Portingales, save those they have falsified of late
purposely. But now touching that your Lordeshippe wrote, whether that which
we discovered touches any thing the foresaid coasts: New found la^d
discovered by the englishmen.
once it appears plainly that the New found land that we discovered is
all a main land with the Indies occidentall, from whence the emperor has
all the gold and pearls: and so continues of coaste more then 5000. leagues
of length, as by this Card appears. For from the said new lands it
proceeds toward the occide^t to the Indies, and from the Indies returns
toward the orient, and after turns southwarde up till it come to the straytes
of Todos Sanctos, which I reckon to be more then 5000. leagues.

Note.
So that to the Indians it should seem that we have some title, at least that
for our discovering we might trade thither as other do. But all this is
nothing near the spicerie.

Now then (if from the said new found lands the Sea be Nauigable, To
sail by the pole.
) there is no doubt, but sailing Northwarde and passing the pole descending to
the equinoctial line we shall hitte these Islands, and it should be much
more shorter way, then either the Spaniardes or the Portingales have. For we
be distaunt from the pole but 39. degrees, and from the pole to the
Equinoctial be 90. the which added together be 129. degrees, leagues 2480.
and miles 7440. Where we should find these Islands. And the Navigations of
the Spaniardes to the spicerie is, as by this Card you may see, from Spain to
the Islands of Canarie, and from these Islands they run over the line
Equinoctial Southwarde to the cape of the main land of Indians, called the
Cape of Saint Augustine, and from this Cape Southwardes to the straytes of
Todos Sanctos, Or the straite^ of Magelan.
in the which Navigations to the said straites is 1700. or 1800. leagues: and
from these straytes being past them, they return toward the line Equinoctial
to the Islands of spicerie, which are distante from the said straites 4200.
or 4300. leagues.

The Navigations of the Portingalles to the said Islands is, departing from
Portingale Southwarde toward the Capo verde, and from thence to another Cape
passing the line equinoctial called Capo de bona speransa, and from Portingale
to the cape is 1800. leagues, and from this cape to the Islands of spicerie of
the Emperor is 2500. leagues.

So that by this navigations amounts all to 4300. leagues. So that as before is
said, if between our New found lands or Norway, or Islande the Seas
toward the north be Nauigable, we should go to these Islands a shorter way
by more then 2000 leagues. And though we went not to the said Islands, Note.
for that they are the Emperors or Kings of Portingale, we should by the
way, and coming once to the line Equinoctial, find lands no less rich of
Gold and spicerie, as all other lands are under the said line Equinoctial:
and also should, if we may pass under the North, enjoy the Navigations of
all Tartarie. Benefit to England.


Which should be no less profitable to our commodities of clothe, then these
spiceries to the Emperor, and king of Portingale.



nor more temperate. Nihil fit vacuum in rerum natura: A true opinion.
So I judge there is no land inhabitable, nor Sea innauigable. If I should
write the reason that presents this unto me, I should be too prolixe, and
it seems not requisite for this present matter. God knows that though by it
I should have no great interest, yet I have had and still have no little mind
of this business: A voyage of discovery by the pole.
So that if I had faculty to my will, it should be ye first thing that I
would understand, even to attempt, if our Seas Northwarde be nauigable to
the Pole, or no. I reason, that as some sicknesses are hereditarious, M. Thorn
and M. Eliot discouerers of New found land.
and come from the father to the son, so this inclination or desire of this
discovery I inherited of my father, which with another merchant of Bristowe
named hugh Eliot were the discouerers of the new found lands, The cause why
the west Indees were not ours: which also Sebastian Gabot writes man epistle
to Baptist Ramusius.
of the which there is no doubt, as now plainly appears, if the mariners
would then have been ruled, and followed their pilots mind, the lands of the
west Indies, from whence all the gold comes, had been ours. For all is one
coaste, as by the card appears, and is aforesaid. Also in this card by the
coasts where you see C. your Lordship shall understand it is set for Cape or
head land, where I, for Island, where P. for Port, where R. for River. Also in all this little card I think nothing be erred touching the situation of the
land, save only in these Islands of spicery: which, for that as before is said,
every one sets them after his mind, there can be no certification how they
stand. I do not deny, that there lack many things, that a consu^mate card
should have, or that a right good demonstration desires. For there should be
expressed all the mountains and rivers that are principal of name in the
earth, with the names of Ports of the sea, the names of all principal cities,
which all I might have set, but not in this Card, for the little space would
not consent.

Your Lordship may see that setting only the names almost of every region, and
yet not of all, the room is occupied. Many Islands are also left out for the
said lack of room: the names almost of all ports put to silence, with the
roses of the winds or points of the compass: For that this is not for Pilots
to sail by, but a summarie declaration of that which your Lordship commanded.
And if by this your Lordshippe cannot well perceive the meaning of this card,
of the which I would not marvel, by reason of the rude composition of it,
will it please your Lordship to advise me to make a bigger and a better map,
or else that I may cause one to be made. For I know my self in this and all
other nothing perfect, but Licet semper discens, nunquam tamen ad perfectam
scientiam peruenient. Also I know to set the form Sphericall of the world in
Plano after the true rule of Cosmographie, it would have been made otherwise
then this is: Howbeit the demonstration should not have been so plain. And
also these degrees of longitude, that I set in the lower part of this Card,
should have been set along by the line equinoctial, and so then must be
imagined. For the degrees of longitude near either of the poles are nothing
equal in bigness to them in the equinoctial. But these are set so, for that
setting them a long the Equinoctial, it would have made obscure a great part
of the map. Many other curiosities may be required, which for the nonce I did
not set down, as well for that the intent I had principally was to satisfy
your doubt touching the spicerie, as for that I lack leisure and time. I trust
your Lordshippe correcting that which is erred, will accept my good will, which
is to do any thing that I may in your Lordshippes service. But from henceforth
I know your Lordshippe will rather command me to keep silence, then to be
large, when you shall be weeried with the reading of this discourse. Jesus
prosper your estate and health.

Your Lordshippes Robert Thorn. 1527.


ALso this Card and that which I write touching the vartaunce between the
Emperor and the king of Portingale, is not to be showed or communicated there
with many of that Court. For though there is nothing in it prejudicial to the
Emperor, yet it may be a cause of pain to the maker: as well for that none
may make these Cards, but certain appointed and allowed for masters, as for
that peradventure it would not sound well to them, that a stranger should
know or discover their secrets: and would appear worst of all, if they
understand that I write touching ye short way to the spicerie by our Seas.
Though peradventure of troth it is not to be looked too, as a thing that by
all opinions is impossible, and I think never will come to effect: and
therefore neither here nor else where is it to be spoken of. For to move it
amongst wisemen, it should be had in derision. And therefore to none I
would have written nor spoken of such things, but to your Lordship, to whom
boldly I commit in this all my foolish fantasy as to my self. But if it
please God that into England I may come with your Lordship, I will show some
conjectures of reason though against the general opinion of Cosmographers, by
which shall appear this that I say not to lack some foundation. And till that
time I beseech your Lordship let it be put to silence: and in the mean
season it may please God to send our two Englishmen, that are gone to the
spicerie, which may also bring more plain declaration of yt which in this case
might be desired. Also I know it needed not to have been so prolixe in the
declaration of this Card to your Lordship, if the said Card had been very
well made after the rules of Cosmographie. For your Lordship would soon
understand it better then I, or any other that could have made it: and so it
should appear that I showed Delphinum natare. But for that I have made it
after my rude manner, it is necessary that I be the declarer or gloser of mine
own work, or else your Lordship should have had much labor to understand it,
which now with it also cannot be excused, it is so grossly done. But I knew
you looked for no curious things of me, and therefore I trust your Lordshippe
will accept this, and hold me for excused. In other men's letters that they
write they crave pardon that at this present they write no larger: but I must
finish, asking pardon that at this present I write so largely. Jesus preserve
your Lordship with augmentation of dignities.

Your servant Robert Thorn, 1527.


THis exhortation to king Henry the eight, with the discourse to Doctor Ley
his Ambassador in Spain, was preserved by one master Emmanuel Lucar executour
to master Robert Thorn, and was friendly imparted unto me by master Cyprian
Lucar his son an honest Gentleman and very forward to further any good and
landable action. And that it may be known that this motion took present
effect with the king, I thought it good herewithall to put down the testimony
of our Chronicle that the king set out ships for this discovery in his life
time. master Hall and master Grafton in their Chronicles write both thus: This
same month king Henry the eight sent two fair ships, well manned and
victualed, having in them diverse cunning men, to seek strange regions: and so
they set forth, out of the Thames the xx. day of May in the xix. year of his
reign. In the year of our Lord. 1527.

FINIS.
To the most Christian king of France, Fraunces the first. The relation of
John Verarzanus a Florentine, of the land by him discovered in the name of his
Majesty, written in Diepe the eight of July 1524.
I Wrote not to your Majesty (most Christian king) since the time we suffered
the tempest in the North parts, of the success of the four Ships, which your
Majesty sent forth to discover new lands by the Ocean, thinking your Majesty
had been already duly informed thereof. Now by these presents I will give
your Majesty to understand, how by the violence of the winds we were forced
with ye two ships, the Norman and the Dolphin, in such evil case as they were,
to land in Britain. Whereafter we had repaired them in all points as was
needful and armed them very well, we took our course a long by the coast of
Spain. Afterward with the Dolphin alone, we determined to make discovery
of new Countries, to prosecute the navigations we had already begun, which I
purpose at this present to recount unto your Majesty, to make manifest the
whole proceeding of the matter. The 17 of January, the year 1524. by the
grace of God, we departed from the dishabited Rock, by the Isle of Madera,
appertaining to the king of Portingall, with fifty men, with victuals, weapon,
and other ship munition very well provided and furnished for 8. months: And
sailing westwards with a fair Easterly wind, in 25. days we ran 500.
leagues, and the 20. of February we were overtaken with as sharp and
terrible a tempest as ever any sailors suffered: whereof with ye divine help
and merciful assistaunce of Almighty God, and the goodness of our ship
accompanied with the good hap of her fortunate name we were delivered, and
with a prosperous wind followed our course West and by North. And in other 25.
days we made above 400. leagues more, where we discovered a new land, never
before seen of any man either ancient or modern, and at the first sight it
seemed somewhat low, but being within a quarter of a league of it, we
perceived by the great fires that we saw by the Sea coaste that it was
inhabited: and saw that the land stretched to the Southwards: in seeking some
convenient harborough whereby to come a land, and have knowledge of the place,
we sailed fifty leagues in vain, and seeing the land to runn still to the
Southwards we resolved to return back again toward the North, where we
found our selves troubled with the like difficulty: at length being in
despair to find any port, we cast anchor upon the coast, and sent our Boat
to shore, where we saw great store of people which came to the Sea side, and
seeing us to approach they fled away, and sometimes would stand still and
look back, beholding us with great admiration: but afterward being
animated and assured with signs that we made them, some of them came hard to
the Sea side seeming to rejoice very much at the sight of us, and marueiling
greatly at our apparel, shape and whitenes, showed us by sundry signs where
we might most commodiously come a land with our Boat, offering us also of
their victuals to eat. Now I will briefly declare to your Majesty their life
and manners, as far as we could have notice thereof: These people go
altogether naked except only that they cover their privy parts with certain
skins of beasts like unto Marterns, which they fasten unto a narrow girdle
made of grass very artificially wrought, hanged about with tails of diverse
other beasts, which round about their bodies hang dangling down to their
knees. Some of them wear garlandes of birds feathers. The people are of
color russet, and not much unlike the Saracens, their hair black, thick and
not very long, which they tie together in a knot behind and wear it like a
tail. They are well featured in their limbs, of mean stature and commonly
somewhat bigger then we, broad breasted, strong arms, their legs and other
parts of their bodies well fashioned, and they are disfigured in nothing
saving that they have somewhat broad visages, and yet not all of them: for we
saw many of them well favored having black and great eyes, with a cheerful
and stedie look, not strong of body yet sharp witted, nymble and great
runners, as far as we could learn by experience, and in those two last
qualities they are like to the people of the East parts of the world, and
especially to them of the uttermost parts of China, we could not learn of
this people their manner of living, nor their particular customs by reason of
ye short abode we made on the shore, our company being but small, and our ship
ryding far of in the Sea. And not far from these we found an other people,
whose living we think to be like unto theirs, (as hereafter I will declare
unto your Majesty,) showing at this present the situation and nature of the
foresaid land: The shore is all covered with small sand, and so ascends
vpwardes for the space of fifteen foot rising in form of little hills about
fifty paces broad. And sailing forwards we found certain small Rivers and
arms of the Sea, that enter at certain creekes, washing the shore on both
sides as the coast lies. And beyond this we saw the open Country rising in
height above the sandy shore with many fair fields and plains, full of
mighty great woods, some very thick and some thin, replenished with diverse
sorts of trees, as pleasant and delectable to behold as is possible to
imagine. And your Majesty may not think that these are like the woods of
Hercinia or the wild Deserts of Tartary, and the Northern Coasts full of
fruitelesse trees: But full of Palm trees, Bay trees, and high Cypress trees,
and many other sorts of trees unknown in Europe, which yield most sweet
savors far from the shore, the property whereof we could not learn For
the cause aforesaid, and not for any difficulty to pass through the woods:
Seeing they are not so thick but that a man may pass through them. Neither
do we think that they part taking of the East world round about them are
all to geather void of drugs or spicerie, and other richesse of gold, seeing
the color of the land does so much argue it and the land is full of many
beasts, as Stags, Dear and Hares, and likewise of Lakes and Pooles of Fresh
water, with great plenty of fowls, convenient for all kind of pleasant game.
This land is in latitude 34. Gr. 34.
D. with good and wholesome air, temperate, between hot and cold, no vehement
winds do blow in those Regions, and those that do commonly reign in those
Coasts, are the North West and West winds in the Summer season, (in the
beginning whereof we were there) the sky clear and fair with very little
rain: and if at any time the air be cloudie and mistie with the Sowtherne
wind immediately it is dissolved and waxes clear and fair again. The Sea
is caulme, not boisterous, the waves gentle, and although all the shore be
somewhat low and with out harborough: yet it is not dangerous to the sailors
being free from rocks and deep, so that within four or five foot of the
shore, there is twenty foot deep of water without ebb or flood, the depth
still increasing in such uniform proportion. There is very good ryding at Sea:
for any Ship being shaken in a tempest can never perish there by breaking of
her cables, which we have proved by experience. For in the beginning of March
(as is usual in all Regions) being in the Sea oppressed with Northern winds
and riding there, we found our anchor broken before the earth failed or moved
at all. We departed from this place still running a long the coaste, which we
found to trende toward the East, and we saw every where very great fires,
by reason of the multitude of the inhabitants. While we rode on that Coaste
partly because it had no harborough, and for that we wanted water, we sent
our Boat a shore with 25. men: whereby reason of great and continual waves that
beat against the shore, being an open coast, without succor, none of our men
could possible go a shore without loosing our boat. We saw there many
people which came unto the shore, making diverse signs of friendship, and
showing that they were content we should come a land, and by trial we found
the^ to be very courteous and gentle as your majesty shall understand by the
success. Courteous and gentle people.
To the intent we might send them of our things, which the Indians commonly
desire and esteem as sheets of Paper, glasses, belles, and such like trifles:
We sent a young man one of our Mariners a shore, who swimming toward them,
and being within 3. or 4. yeards off the shore, not trusting them, cast the
things upon the shore, seeking afterward to return, he was with such
violence of the waves beaten upon the shore, that he was so bruised that he
lay there almost dead, which the Indians perceiving, ran to catch him, and
drawing him out they carried him a little way of from the sea: The young man
perceiving they carried him, being at the first dismaide, began then greatly to
fear and cried out pitiously, likewise did the Indians which did accompany
him, going about to cheer him and give him courage, and then setting him on
the ground at the foot of a little hill against the sun, began to behold
him with great admiration, marueiling at the whiteness of his flesh: And
putting off his clothes they made him warm at a great fire, not without our
great fear which remained in the boat, that they would have roasted him at
that fire and have eaten him. The young man having recovered his strength, and
having stayed a while with them, showed them by signs that he was desirous to
return to the ship: And they with great love clapping him fast about with
many embracings, accompanying him unto the sea, and to put him in more
assurance, leaving him alone they went unto a high ground and stood there,
beholding him until he was entered into the boat. This young man observed as we
did also, that these are of color enclining to Black as the other were, with
their flesh very shining of mean stature, handsome visag, and dilicate
limbs and of very little strength: but of prompt wit, farther we observed
not.

Departing from hence following the shore which trended somewhat toward the
North in 50. leagues space, we came to another land which showed much more
fair and full of woods, being very great, where we rode at Ancker, and that
we might have some knowledge thereof, we sent 20. men a land, which entered
into the country about two leagues, and they found that the people were
fled to the woods for fear, they saw only one old woman with a young
maid of 18. or 20. years old, which seeing our company hid them selves in
the grass for fear, the old woman carried two Infantes on her shoulders, and
behind her neck a child of 8. years old: the young woman was laden likewise
with as many: but when our men came unto them, the women cried out, the old
woman made signs that the men were fled unto the woods, as soon as they saw
us to quiet them and to win their favor, our men gave them such victuals as
they had with them to eat, which the old woman received thankfully: but the
young woman disdained them al, and threw them disdainefully on the ground,
they took a child from the old woman to bring into France, and going about
to take the young woman which was very beawtifull and of tal stature, they
could not possibly for ye great outcries that she made bring her to the sea,
and especially having great woods to pass through, and being far from the
ship, we purposed to leave her behind bearing away the child only. We
found those folks to be more white than those that we found before, being
clad with certain leaves ye hang on boughs of trees, which they sow together
with thredes of wild hemp, their heads were trussed up after the same manner
as the former were, their ordinary food is of pulse, whereof they have great
store, differing in color and taste from ours, of good and plasant taste.
Moreover they live by fishing and fouling which they take with ginnes, and
bows made of hard wood the arrows of Canes, being headed with the bones of
fish and other beasts. The beasts in these parts are much wilder the^ in our
Europe, by reason they are continually chased and hunted. We saw many of
their boats made of one tree 20. foot long, and 4. foot broad, which are
not made with Iron, or stone, or any other kind of metal, (because that in all
this country for the space of 200. leagues which we ran, we never saw one
stone of any sort): they help themselves with fire, burning so much of the tree
as is sufficient for the hollownesse of the boat, the like they do in making
the stern and the foreparte until it be fit to sail upon the sea. The
land is in situation, goodness and fairenes like the other: it has woods
like the other, thin and full of diverse sorts of trees: but not so sweet
because the country is more northerly and cold.

We saw in this Country many Vines growing naturally, which growing up take
hold of the trees as they do in Lombardie, wc if by husbandmen they were
dressed in good order, without all doubt they would yield excellent wines:
for we having oftentimes seen the fruit thereof dried, which was sweet and
pleasant, and not differing from ours. We do think that they do esteem
the same, because that in every place where they grow, they take away the
under branches growing round about, that the fruit thereof may ripen the
better.

We found also roses, violettes, lillies, and many sorts of herbs, and sweet
and odoriferous flowers different from ours. We knew not their dwellinges,
because they were far up in the land, and we judge by many signs that we
saw, that they are of wood and of trees framed together.

We do believe also by many conjectures and signs, that many of them
sleeping in the fields, have no other cover then the open sky. Further
knowledge have we not of them, we think yt all the rest whose countries we
passed live all after one manner, having our aboade three days in this
country, riding on the coast for want of harboroughs, we concluded to depart
from thence, trending along the shore between the North and the East, sailing
only in the daytime, and riding at ancker by night in the space of 100.
leagues sailing, we found a very pleasant place, situated amongst certain
little steep hills: from amiddest the which hills there ran down into the sea
a great stream of water, which within the mouth was very deep, and from ye sea
to ye mouth of same with the tide which we found to rise 8. foot, any great
vessel laden may pass up.

But because we rode at Ancker in a place well fensed from the wind, we
would not venture our selves without knowledge of the place, and we passed up
with our boat only into the said River, and saw the Country very well
peopled. The people are almost like unto the others, and clad with the feathers
of fowls of diverse colors, they came toward us very cherefully, making
great showtes of admiration, showing us where we might come to land most
safely with our boat. We entered up the said river into the land about half a
league, where it made a most pleasant lake about 3. leagues in compass: on the
which they rowed from the one side to the other to the number of 30. of their
small boats: wherein were many people which passed from one shore to the
other to come and see us, and behold upon the sudden (as it is wont to fall
out in sailing) a contrary flawe of wind coming from the sea, we were
enforced to return to our Ship, leaving this land to our great
coffeehouse, The pleasantnes and riches of the land.
for the great commodity and pleasantness thereof which we suppose is not
without some riches, all the hills showing mineral matters in the^. We weied
Ancker, and sailed toward the East, for so the coast trended, and so always
for 50. leagues being in the sight thereof we discovered and Island in form
of a triangle, The description of Claudia Island.
distant from the maine land 3. leagues, about the bigness of the Island of
the Rodes, it was full of hills covered with trees, Claudia was wife of King
Francis.
well peopled, for we saw fires all along the coaste, we gave the name of it,
of your Majesty's mother, not staying there by reason of the weather being
contrary.

And we came to another land being 15. leagues distant from the Island, where
we found a passing good haven, The Country of Sir H. ^. voyage.
wherein being entered we found about 20. small boats of the people which with
diverse cries and wondrings came about our ship, coming no nerer then 50.
paces toward us, they stayed and beheld the artificialnesse of our ship, our
shape and apparel, tha^ they al made a loud showte together declaring that they
rejoiced: when we had something animated them using their geastes, they came so
near us that we cast them certain bells and glasses and many toys, which
when they had received they lookte on them with laughing and came without fear
aborde our ship. There were amongst these people 2. kings of so goodly stature
and shape as is possible to declare, the eldest was about 40. years of ag, the
second was a young man of 20. years old. Their apparel was on this manner, the
elder had upon his naked body a hearts skin wrought artificialie with diverse
branches like Damask, his head was bare with the hair tied up behind with
diverse knottes: About his neck he had a large chain, garnished with diverse
stones of sundry colors the young man was almost appareled after the same
manner. This is the goodliest people and of the fairest conditions that we
have found in this our voyage. They exceed us in bigness, they are of the color
of brass, some of the^ incline more to whitnes: others are of yellowe color,
of comely visage with long and black heir which they are very careful to
trim and deck up, they are black and quick eyed. I write not to your
Majesty, of the other part of their body, having all such proportion as
appertains to any handsome man. The women are of the like conformity and
Beawtie, very handsome and well favored, they are as well mannered and
continente as any women, of good education, they are all naked save their
privy parts which they cover with a Deares skin braunched or embrodered as
the men use: there are also of them which wear on their arms very rich
skins of leopardes, they adorn their heads with diverse ornaments made of
their own heir, which hang down before on both sides their breasts, others
use other kind of dressing them selves like unto the women of Egypt and Syria,
these are of the elder sort: and when they are married they wear diverse
toys, according to the usage of the people of the East as well men as women.

Among whom we saw many plates of wrought coper, which they esteem more then
gold, which for the color they make no account of, for that among all other
it is counted the basest, they make most account of Azure and red. The things
that they esteemed most of al those which we gave them were bells, cristall of
Azure color, and other toies to hang at their ears or about their neck. They
did not desire cloth of silk or of gold, much less of any other sort,
neither cared they for things made of steel and Iron, which we often showed
them in our armor which they made no wonder at, and in beholding them they
only asked the art of making them: the like they did at our glasses, which
when the beheld, they suddenly laughed and gave them us again. They are very
liberal for they give that which they have, we became great friends with
these, and one day we entered into the haven with our ship, where as before
we rode a league of at sea by reason of the contrary weather. They came in
great companies of their small boats unto the ship with their faces all be
painted with diverse colors, showing us yt it was a sign of joy, bringing us
of their victuals, they made signs unto us where we might safest ride in the
haven for the safegarde of our ship keeping still our company: and after we
were come to an Ancker, we bestowed fifteen days in providing our selves many
necessary things, whether every day the people repaired to see our ship
bringing their wives with them, whereof they are very ielous: and they
themselves entering abroad the ship and stayinge there a good space, caused
their wives to stay in their boats, and for all the entreaty we could make,
offering to give them diverse things, we could never obtain that they would
suffer them to come aborde our ship. And oftentimes one of the two kings
coming with his queen, and many gentlemen for their pleasure to see us, they
all stayed on ye shore two hundred paces from us, sending a small boat to give
us intelligence of their coming, saying they would come to see our ship,
this they did in token of safetye, and as soon as they had answer from us they
came immediately, and having stayed a while to behold it, they wondered at
hearing the cries and noyes of the mariners. The queen and her maids stayed
in a very light boat, at an Island a quarter of a leage off, while the king
abode a long space in our ship uttering diverse conceits with geastures,
viewing with great admiration, all the furniture of the ship, demanding the
property of every thing perticularly. He took likewise great pleasure in
beholding our apparel, and in tasting our meats, and so courteously taking
his leave departed. And sometimes our men staying for two or three days on a
little Island nere the ship for diverse necessaries, (as it is ye use of seamen)
he returned with 7. or 8. of his gentlemen to see what we did, and asked of us
often times if we meant to make any long aboade there, offering us of their
provision: then the king drawing his bow and running up and down with his
gentlemen, made much sport to gratify our men, we were oftentimes within the
land 5. or 6. leagues, which we found as pleasant as is possible to declare
very apt for any kind of husbandry of corn, wine and oil: for that there are
plains 25. or 30. leagues broad, open and without any impediment of trees of
such fruitfulness, that any seed being sown therein, will bring forth most
excellent fruit. We entered afterward into the woods which we found so great
and thick, that any army were it never so great might have hid it self
therein, the trees whereof are oaks, cipres trees, and other sorts unknown in
Europe. We found Pomi appii, Damson trees, and Nutte trees, and many other
sorts of fruits differing from ours: there are beasts in great abundance, as
hearts, deares, leopardes, and other kinds which they take with their nets and
bows which are their chief weapons, the arrows which they use are made with
great cunning, and in stead of iron, they head them with smeriglio, with jasper
stone, and hard marble and other sharp stones which they use in stead of iron
to cut trees, and make their boats of one whole piece of wood, making it
hollow with great and wonderful art, wherein 10. or 12. men may be
co^modiously, their oars are short and broad at the end, and they use them
in the sea without any danger, and by maine force of arms, with as great
speediness as they list them selves. We saw their houses made in circuler or
round form 10. or 12. foot in compass, made with half circles of timber,
separate one from another without any order of building, covered with mattes of
straw wrought cunningly together, which save them from the wind and rain,
and if they had the order of building and perfect skill of workma^ship as we
have: there were no doubt but yt they would also make eftsoons great and
stately buildings. For all the sea coasts are full of clear and glistering
stones, and alablaster, and therefore it is full of good havens and barbarours
for ships. They move the foresaid houses from one place to another according
to the commodity of the place and season wherein they will make their aboade,
and only taking of the cover, they have other houses builded incontinent. The
father and the whole family dwell together in one house in great number: in
some of them we saw 25. or 30. persons. They feed as the other do aforesaid
of pulse which do grow in that country with better order of husbandry the^
in the others. They observe in their sowing the course of the Moon and the
rising of certain stars, and diverse other customs spoken of by antiquity.
Moreover, they live by hunting and fishing. they live long, and are seldom
sick, and if they chance to fall sick at any time, they heal them selves
with fire without any physician, and they say that they die for very age. They
are very pitiful and charitable toward their neighbors, they make great
lamentations in their adversity and in their misery, the kindred reckon up all
their felicity, at their departure out of life, they use mourning mixed with
singing, with continues for a long space. This is as much as we could learn of
them. This land is situated in the Paralele of Rome, in 41. degrees and 2.
terces: but somewhat more cold by accidental cause and not of nature, (as I
will declare unto your highness else where) describing at this present the
situation of the foresaid country, which lies East and West, I say that the
mouth of the haven lies open to the South half a league broad, and being
entered within it between the East and the North, it stretches twelve leagues:
where it waxes brother and brother, and makes a gulf about 20. leagues in
compass, wherein are fine small Islandes very fruitful and pleasant, full of
hie and broad trees, among the which Islands, any great Navy may ride safe
without any fear of tempest or other danger. Afterward turning toward the
South and in the entering into the Haven on both sides there are most pleasant
hills, with many rivers of most clear water falling into the Sea.

In the midst of this entrance there is a rock of free stone growing by
nature apt to build any Castle or Fortress there, for ye keeping of the
haven. The fifth of May being furnished with all things necessary, we departed
from ye said Coast keeping along in the sight thereof, and we sailed 150
leagues finding it all ways after one manner: but the land somewhat higher
with certain mountains all which bear a show of mineral matter, we sought
not to land there in any place, because the weather served our turn for
sailing: but we suppose that it was like to the former, the Coast ran
Eastward for the space of fifty leagues. And trending afterward the North,
we found another land high full of thick woods, the trees whereof were
firres, Cipresses and such like as are wont to grow in cold Countries. The
people differ much from the other, and look how much the former seemed to be
courteous and gentle: so much were these full of rudeness and ill manners, and
so barbarous that by no signs that ever we could make, we could have any
kind of traffic with them. They cloth themselves with Bears skins and
Leopardes and sealles and other beasts skins. Their food as far as we
could percieue, repayring often unto their dwellings we suppose to be by
hunting and fishing, and of certain fruits, which are a kind of roots,
which the earth yields of her own accord. They have no grain, neither saw
we any kind or sign of tyllage, neither is the land, for the barrennes
thereof apt to bear fruit or seed. If at any time we desired by exchange to
have any of their commodities, they used to come to the Sea shore upon certain
craggie rocks, and we standing in our Boats, they let down with a rope what
it pleased them to give us, crying continually that we should not approach to
the land, demanding immediately the exchange taking nothing but knives,
fishookes and tools to cut withal, neither did they make any account of our
courtesy. And when we had nothing left to exchange with them, when we departed
from them the people showed all signs of discourtesie and disdain, as was
possible for any creature to invent. We were in despite of them two or three
leagues within the land, being in number 25. armed men of us: And when we
went on shore they shot at us with their bows, making great outcries, and
afterward fled into the woods. We found not in this land any thing
notable, or of importance, saving very great woods and certain hills, they
may have some mynerall matter in them, because we saw many of the^ have
beadstones of Copper hanging at their ears. We departed from thence keeping
our course North East along the coaste, which we found more pleasant champion
and without woods, with high mountains within the land continuing directly
along the coast for the space of fifty leagues, we discovered 32. Ilelandes
lying all near the land, being small and pleasant to the view, high and
having many turnings and windings between them, making many fair harboroughes
and channels as they do in the goulfe of Venice in Saluonia, and Dalmatia, we
had no knowledge or acquaintance with the people: we suppose they are of the
same manners and nature that the others are. Sailing Northeast for the space of
150. leagues we approached to the land that in times past was discovered by the
Britons, which is in fifty degrees. Having now spent all our provision and
victuals, and having discovered about 700. leagues and more of new Countries,
and being furnished with Water and Wood we concluded to return into France.

Touching the religion of this people, which we have found for want of their
language we could not understand neither by signs nor gesture that they had
any religion or law at all, or that they did acknowledge any first cause or
mouer, neither that they worship the heaven or stars the Sun or Moon or
other Planets, and much less whether they be idolaters, neither could we
learn whether that they used any kind of Sacrifices or other adorations,
neither in their villages have they any Temples or houses of prayer. We suppose
that they have no religion at all, and yt they live at their own liberty. And
yt all this proceeds of ignorance, for that they are very easy to be
persuaded: and all that they see us Christians do in our divine service they
did the same with the like imitation as they saw us to do it.

The discovery of the Isles of Frisland, Iseland, Engroueland, Estotiland,
Drogeo and Icaria, made by M. Nicolas Zeno, Knight, and M. Antonio his brother.
IN the year of our Lord 1200. There was in the City of Venice a famous
Gentleman, named M. Marino Zeno, who for his great virtue and singular
wisdom, was called and elected governor in certain common wealths of Italy,
in the administration whereof he bore himself so discreetly, that he was
beloved of all men, and his name greatly reverenced of those that never knew
or saw his person. And among sundry his worthy works, this is recorded of
him, that he pacified certain grievous civil dissentions that arose among
the Cittzens of Verona: whereas otherwise if by his grave advise and great
diligence, they had not been prevented, the matter was likely to break out in
hot broiles of war. Podesta.
He was the first Agent that the common wealth of Venice kept in
Constantinople in the year 1205. quando n'era patrona, conli baroni fra^cesi.
This Gentleman had a son named M. Pietro, who was the father of the Duke
Rinieri, which Duke dying with out issue, made his heir M. Andrea, the son
af M. Marco his brother. This M. Andrea was captain general and Procurator, a
man of great reputation for many rare parts, that were in him. He had a son
M. Rinieri, a worthy Senator and prudent Counselor: Of whom descend M.
Pietro General of the league of the Christians against the Turks, who was
called Dragon, for that in his arms he bare a Dragon. He was father to M.
Carlo the famous Procurator and General against the Genowayes in those cruel
wars, when as almost all the chief princes of Europe did oppugn and seek to
overthrow our Empire and liberty, where by his great valiancie and prowess
like an other Furius Camillus, he delivered his Country from the present
peril it was in, being ready to become a pray and spoil unto the enemy,
wherefore he was afterward surnamed, the Lion, and for an eternal
remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploits he gave the Lion in his
arms. M. Carlo had two brethren, M. Nicolo, the knight and Antonio, the father
M. Dragon, of whom issued M. Caterino, the father of M. Pietro, this M. Pietro
had sons M. Caterino, that dyed the last year, M. Francisco, M. Carlo, M.
Battista, and M. Vincenzo. That M. Caterino was father to M. Nicolo, that is
yet living. Now M. Nicolo, the knight, being a man of great courage and very
nobly minded, after this foresaid war of Genoua, that troubled so our
predecessors, entered into a wonderful great desire and fancy to see the
fashions of the world, and to travail, and to acquaint himself with the
manners of sundry nations and learn their languages, whereby afterward upon
occasions he might be ye better able to do service to his country and
purchase to himself credit and honor. Wherefore he caused a ship to be
made and having furnished her at his proper charges (as he was very wealthy)
he departed out of our Seas and passing the straites of Gibralterra, he sailed
for certain days upon ye Ocean keeping his course still to ye Northwards, with
intent to see England and Flaunders. Where being assaulted in those Seas by a
terrible tempest, was so tossed for the space of many days with the Sea and
wind that he knew not where he was, till at length he discovered land,
and not being able any longer to sustain the violence of the tempest the ship
was cast away upon the Isle of Friseland. The ship of M. N. Zeno cast away upon
Frisland in anno. 1380.
The men were saved, and most part of the goods that were in the Ship. And this
was in the year 1380. The inhabitants of the Island came running in great
multitudes with weapons to set upon M. Nicolo and his men, who being sore wether
beaten and ouerlaboured at Sea, and not knowing in what part of the world they
were, were not able to make any resistaunce at all, much less to defend them
selves courageously, as it behooued them in such dangerous case. And they
should have been doubtless very discourteously entreated and cruelly
handeled, if by good hap there had not been hard by the place a Prince with
armed people. Who understanding, that there was even at that present a great
ship cast away upon the Island, came running at the noise and outcries that they
made against our poor Mariners, and driving away the inhabitants, A foreign
prince happening to be in Frisla^d with armed men. When M. Zeno suffered shipwreck,
there came unto him and spoke latin.
spoke in latin and asked them what they were and from whence they came, and
perceiving yt they were Italians, and all of one Country, he was surprised
with marvelous great joy. Wherefore promising the^ all, that they should
receive no discourtesie, and that they were come into a place where they
should be well used and very welcome, he took them into his protection upon
his faith. This was a great Lord and possessed certain Islands called Porland,
lying one the Southside of Frisland being ye richest and most populous of all
those parts, his name was Zichmni: Zichmni prince of Porland or duke of Zorani.
and beside the said little Islands, he was Duke of Sorani, lying within the
land toward Scotland. Of these North parts I thought good to draw the copy
of a Sea card, which amongst other antiquities, I have in my house, which
although it be rotten through many years: yet it falls out indifferent well,
and to those that are delighted in these things, it may serve for some light to
the understanding of that, which without it cannot so easily be conceived.
Zichmni being Lord of those Seignories (as is said) was a very warlike and
valiant man and above al things famous in Sea causes. And having this year
before given the overthrow to the king of Norway, who was Lord of the Island,
Frisland the king of Norwayes.
being desirous to win fame by feats of arms, was come on land with his
me^ to give the attempt, for ye winning of Frisland, which is an Island much
bigger then Ireland. Wherefore seeing that M. Nicolo was a man of judgment and
discretion, and very expert both in Sea matters and martial affairs, he gave
him commission to go aboard his navy with all his men, charging the captain
to honor him and in all things to use his counsel. This Navy of Zichmni was
of thirteen vessels, whereof two only were with oars, the rest small barks,
and one ship, with the which they sailed to the Westwardes and with little
pains won Ledouo and Ilofe and diverse other small Islands, and turning into
a bay called Sudero, in the haven of the town named Sanestol they took
certain small Barks laden with salt fish. And here they found Zichmni, who
came by land with his army conquering all the country as he went, they stayed
here but a while but held on their course to the Westwards till they came to
the other Cape of the goulfe or bay, then turning again they found certain
Ilelandes and broken lands which they reduced all unto the Seignorie and
possession of Zichmni. These Seas for as much as they sailed, were in manner
nothing but sholds and rocks, in sort that if M. Nicolo and the venetian
mariners had not been their Pilots, the whole Fleet in judgment of all that
were in it, had been cast away, so small was ye skill of Zichmnis men in
respect of ours, who had been trained up in the art and practice of navigations
all the days of their life. Now the Fleet having done such things, (as is
declared) ye Captain by the counsel of M. Nicolo, determined to go a land at
a town called Bondendon, to understand what success Zichmni had in his
wars, where they heard to their great content, that he had fought a great
battle and put to flight the army of his enemy: by reason of which victory
they sent Ambassadors from all parts of the Island to yield the country up
into his hands, taking down their enseignes in every town and castle: They
thought good to stay in that place for his coming, being reported for certain
that the would be there very shortly. At his coming there was great
congratulatio^ and many signs of gladness showed, as well for the victory by
land as for that by Sea, for the which the venetians were honored and
extolled of all men, in such sort yt there was no talk but of them, and of ye
great valor of M. Nicolo. Wherefore the Prince who was a great favorer of
valiant men and especially of those that could behave them selves well at the
Sea, caused M. Nicolo to be brought before him, and after having commended him
with many honorable speeches, and praised his great industry and dexterie of
wit, by the which, he acknowledged himself to have received an inestimable
benefit as the saving of his Fleet and the winning of many places, he made
him Knight, N. Zeno, made knight by Zichmni.
and rewarded his men with many rich and bountiful gifts: Then departing
from thence they went in triumphing manner toward Friseland, the chief City
of ye Island, Ships laden with fish at frisland: for Flaunders, Britain.
England, Scotland, Norway, and Denmark. But not to be proved that ever any
came thence. A letter sent by master. N. Zeno from Friseland to his brother, M.
Antonio in Venice. End of the first letter.
situate on the Southest side of the Isle, within a goulf, (as there are very
many in that Island). In this goulfe or bay there is such great abundance of
fish taken, that many ships are laden therewith to serve Flaunders, Britain,
England, Scotland, Norway and Denmark, and by this trade they gather great
wealth.

And thus much is taken out of a letter, that M. Nicolo sent unto M. Antonio
his brother, requesting him that he would seek some means to come to him.
Wherefore he, who had as great desire to travail as his brother, bought a
Ship, and directing his course that way, after he had sailed a great while and
escaped many dangers, he arrived at length in safety with M. Nicolo, who
received him very joyfully, for that he was his brother not only in flesh and
blood, but also in valor and good qualities. M. Antonio remained in Friselande
and dwelt there for the space of fourteen years, four years with M. Nicolo,
and ten years alone. Where they came into such grace and favor with the
Prince, that he made M. Nicolo, Captain of his Navy, and with great
preparation of war they were sent forth for the enterprise of Estlande,
which lies upon the coaste between Friseland and Norway, where they did many
do^mages, but hearing that the king of Norway was coming toward them with a
great Fleet, they departed with such a terrible flaw of wind yt they were driven
upon certain sholdes. Where a great part of their ships were cast away, ye rest
were saved upon Grisland, a great Island but dishabited. The king of Norway his
fleet being taken with the same storm, did utterly perish in those seas.
Whereof Zichmni having notice, by a ship of his enemies, that was cast by
chance upon Grisland. Having repaired his fleet, and perceiving him self
northerly near unto the Islandes, determined to set upon Islande, which
together with the rest was subject to the king of Norway: But he found the
country so well fortified and defended, that his fleet being so small and
very ill appointed both of weapons and men, he was glad to retire. And so
he left that enterprise without perfourming any thing at all, and in the same
chanelles he assaulted ye other Isles called the Islands, which are seven Talas,
Broas, Iscant, Trans, Mimant, Dambere, and Bres, and having spoiled them all,
he built a fort in Bres, where he left M. Nicolo, with certain small barks
and men and munition. And now thinking he had done well for this voyage, with
those few ships which were left he returned into Frieslande. M. Nicolo
remaining now in Bres determined upon a time to go forth and discover land,
wherefore arming out their small barks in the month of July, Engrouelande.
Preaching Friars of S. Thomas.
he sailed to the Northwardes, and arrived in Engrouelande. Where he found a
monastery of Friars of the order of the Predicators, and a Church dedicated to
S. Thomas hard by a hill, that casts forth fire, like Vesuuius and Etna.

There is a fountain of hot burning water with the which they heat the
Church of the monastery and the Friars chambers, it comes also into the
kitchen so boiling hot, that they use no other fire to dress their meat,
and putting their bread into brass pottes without any water, it does bake as
it were in a hot oven. They have also small gardens, covered over in the winter
time, which being watered with this water are defended from the force of the
snow and cold, which in those parts being situate far under the pole, is
very extreme; A notable (...)
and by this means they produce flowers and fruits and herbs of sundry
sorts, even as in other temperate countries in their seasons in such sort
that the rude and savage people of those parts seeing these supernatural
effects do take those Friars for Gods, and bring them many presents as
chickens, flesh and diverse other things, and have them all in great reverence
as Lords. When the frost and snow is great, they heat their houses in manner
before said, and will by letting in the water or opening the windows, temper
the heat and cold at their pleasure. In ye buildings of the monastery they
use no other matter but that which is ministered unto them by the fire, for they
take the burning stones, that are cast out as it were sparkles or ceindres at
the fiery mouth of the hill, and when they are most enflamed, cast water upon
them, whereby they are dissolved and become excellent white lime and so tough
that being contrived in building it lasts for ever. And the very sparkles
after the fire is out of them do serve in steed of stones to make walls and
vautes: for being once cold they will never dissolve or break except they be
cut with some iro^ tool, and the vautes that are made of them are so light
that they need no sustentacle or proppe to hold them up, and they will endure
continually very fair and whole. By reason of these great commodities the
friars have made there so many buildings and walls, that it is a wonder to
see. The couerts or roofes of their houses for the most part are made in this
manner, first they raise the wall up to his full height, then they make it
enclining or bowing in by little and little in form of a vaute. But they are not
greatly troubled with rain in those parts, for that, by reason of the pole or
cold climate, the first snow being fallen it thaweth no more for the space of
nine months, for so long dureth their winter. They feed of the flesh of
wild beasts and of fish, for where as the warm water falls into the sea,
there is a large and wide haven, which by reason of the heat of the water,
does never freeze all the winter, by means whereof there is such concourse
and flocks of sea foul and such abundance of fish, that they take thereof
infinite multitudes, whereby they maintain a great number of people round
about which they keep in continuale work, both in building and taking of
fowls and fish, and in a thousand other necessary affairs and business
about the monastery.

Their houses are builte about the hill on every side, in form round, and
25. foot broad, and in mounting vpwardes they go narower and narower,
leaving at the top a little hole, whereat the air comes in, to give light
to the house, and the flore of the house is so hot, that being within they
feel no cold at all. Trade in summer time from Trondon to S. Thomas friars in
Ingroucla^d.
Hither in the summer time come many barks from the Islands there about, and
from the Cape above Norway and from Trondon. And bring to the Friars al manner
things that may be desired, taking in change thereof fish which they dry in
the sun or in the cold, and skins of diverse kinds of beasts. For the which
they have wood to burn and timber very artificially carved, and corn and
cloth to make them apparel. For in change of the two foresaid commodities all
the nations bordering round about them covet to traffic with them, and so
they without any travel or expenses have that which they desire. To this
monastery resort Friars of Norway, Resort of friars from Norway and Sueden, to
the monastery in Ingrouelande called S. Tho^.
of Suetia and of other countries but the most part are of the Islandes. There
are continually in that part many barks, which are kept in there by reason of
the sea being frozen, waiting for the season of the year to dissolve the Ice.
The fishers boats are made like unto a weuers shuttle, taking the skins of
fishes, they fashion them with the bones of the same fishes, and sowing the^
together in many doubles they make them so sure and substanciall, that it is
miraculous to see, how in tempests they will shut themselves close within, and
let the sea and wind carry them, they care not whether, without any fear
either of breaking or drowning. And if they chance to be driven upon any rocks,
they remain sound, without the least bruise in the world: And they have as it
were a sleeue in the bottom which is tied fast in ye middle, and when there
comes any water into their boat, they put it into the one half of ye sleeue,
the^ fastening ye end of it with two pieces of wood and loosing ye band beneath
they convey the water forth of the boat: and this they do as often as they
have occasion without any peril or impediment at all.

Moreover, the water of the monastery being of sulphurious or brimstone nature
is conveyed into the lodginges of the principal Friars by certain vessels of
brass, tin or stone so hot that it heateth the place as it were a stowe,
not carrying with it any stink or other noisome smell.

Besides this they have another conueyance to bring hot water with a wall under
the ground to the end it should not freese, unto the middle of the court,
where it falls into a great vessel of brass, that stands in the middle of
a boiling fountain, and this is to heat their water to drink and to water
their gardens, and thus they have from the hill the greatest commodities that
may be wished, and so these Friars employ all their travail and study for the
most part in trimming their gardins and in making fair and beawtifull
buildings and especially handsome and commodious, neither are they destitute of
ingenious and painful artificers for the purpose, for they give very large
payment, and to them that bring them fruits and seeds they are very
bountiful and give they care not what. So that there is great resort of
workmen and masters in diverse faculties, by reason of the good gains and
large allowance that is there.

The most of them speak the Latin tongue, and especially the superiors and
principalls of the monastery. In the monastarie S. Thomas most of them speak
the latin tongue. and of the two letter.
And this is as much as is known of Engrouelande, which is all by the
relation of M. Nicolo, who makes also particular description of a river, that
he discovered, as is to be seen in the card that I drew. And in the end M.
Nicolo not being used and acquainted with these cruel coldes, fell sick, and
a little while after returned into Frislande, where he dyed. He left behind him
in Venice two sons, M. Giouanni and M. Toma, who had two sons M. Nicolo,
the father of the famous Cardinal Zeno, and M. Pietro of whom descended the
other Zenos, that are living at this day.

N. Zeno died in Frislande.
Now M. Nicolo being dead, M. Aotonio succeeded him both in his goods and in his
dignities and honor, and albeit he attempted diverse ways and made great
supplication he could never obtain license to return into his Country. For
Zichmni had determined to make him self Lord of the sea. Wherefore using
always the counsel and service of M. Antonio, he sent him with some small
barks to the Westwardes, for that toward those parts some of his fishermen
had discovered certain Islands very rich and populous, which discovery, M.
Antonio in a letter to his brother M. Carlo, recounteth from point to point in
this manner, saving that we have changed some old words, leaving the
matter entire as it was

Six and twenty years ago there departed four Fisher boats, the which a
mighty tempest arising, 3. letter begins from the second brother M. Antonio
out of Frislande, to his other brother in Venice named Master Carlo.
Estotiland. 6. Fisher men taken.
were tossed for the space of many days very desperately upon the Sea, when
at length the tempeste ceassyng and the weather waxing fair they discovered an
Island called Estotilande, lying to the Westwardes above 1000. Miles from
Frislande, upon the which one of the boats was cast away, and six men that
were in it were taken of the inhabitauntes and brought unto a very fair and
populous City, where the king of the place sent for many interpreters, but
there was none could be found that understood the language of the
fishermen, except one that spoke Latin, Fishermen of Frislande spoke latin.
who was also cast by chance upon the same Island, who in the behalf of the
king asked them what Countrymen they were, and so understanding their case,
rehearsed it unto the King, who willed that they should tarry in the
Country, wherefore they obeyinge his commandment for that they could not
otherwise do, Six were 5. years in Estotilande.
dwelte five years in the Island, and learned the language, and one of them
was in diverse parts of the Island, and reports that it is a very rich
Country, One of the f shers of Frisland reports of Estotilande. Estotilande
rich: abounding with all the commodity of the world.
abounding with all the commodities of the world, and that it is little less
than Islande, but far more fruitful, having in the middle thereof a very
high mountain, from the which there rises four Rivers, that pass through
the whole Country.

The inhabitants are very witty people, and have all the arts and faculties
as we have: and it is credible, that in time past they have had traffic with
our men, for he said that he saw latin books in the Kings library, which
they at this present do not understand, they have a peculiar language and
letters or caracters to them selves. They have mines of all manner of metals,
Abundance of gold. trade from estotiland, to Engroueland-skins, brimstone and
pitche. Gold, corn, and bear, or ale. Many cities and castles.
but especially they abound with gold. They have their trade in Engroueland
from whence they bring skins and brimstone and pitch: And he says that to ye
southwards, there is a great populous country very rich of gold. They sow
corn and make bear or ale, which is a kind of drink that the north people do
use as we do wine. They have mighty great woods, they make their buildings
with walls, and there are many cities and castles. They build small barks and
have sailing, but they have not the lodestone nor know not the use of the
compass. Wherefore these fishers were had in great estimation, insomuch that
the king sent them with 12. barks to the southwardes to a country which they
call Drogio: A country called Drogio.
but in their voyage they had such countrary weather, that they thought all to
have perished in the sea, but yet escaping that cruel death, they fell into
another more cruel. For they were taken in the country and the most part of
them eaten by the Savage people, which feed upon man's flesh, as the sweetest
meat in their judgments that is.

The 6. fisherme^ of frisland only saved, by showing the manner to take fish.
The chiefest of the 6. fishers, specified before his companions
But that fisher with his fellows showing them the manner of taking fish with
nets, saved their lives: and would go every day a fishing to the sea and in
fresh rivers, and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chief men
of the country, whereby he got him self so great favor, that he was very
well beloved and honored of every one.

The fame of this man being spread abroad in the country, there was a Lord
thereby that was very desirous to have him with him, and to see how he used
his miraculous art of catching fish, in so much that he made war with the
other Lord, with whom he was before, and in the end preuayling, for that he
was more mighty and a better warrior, In the space of 13. years in Drogi^.
the fisherman was sent unto him with the rest of his company. And for the
space of thirteen years that he dwelt in those parts, he says, that he was
sent in this order to more than 25. Lords, Sent to more then 25. lords, which
continually warred amongst the^ selves for the same fisherman.
for they had continual war amongst them selves, this Lord with that Lord
and he with an other, only to have him to dwell with them, so that wandering up
and down the Country without any certain abode in one place, he knew
almost all those parts. He says that it is a very great country and as it
were a new world, the people very rude and void of all goodness, they go
all naked so that they are miserably vexed with cold, neither have they the
wit to cover their bodies with beastsskins, with they take in huntinge, they have
no kind of metal, they live by hu^ting, they carry certain lances of wood, made
sharp at ye point, they have bows, the stringes whereof are made of beasts
skins: They are a very fierce people, they make cruel wars one with
another, and eat one an other, they have governors and certain laws very
diverse amongst them selves. But the farther to the South westwardes, the more
ciuility there is, the air being somewhat temperat, so that there they have
Cities, and temples to Idols, wherein they sacrifice men and afterward eat
them, they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver.

Now this fisher having dwelt so many years in those countries, purposed if
it were possible to return home into his country, but his companions
dispayring ever to see it again, let him go in Gods name, they kept them
selves, where they were. Wherefore he bidding them farewell, fled through the
woods toward Drogio, and was very well received of the Lord that dwelt next
to that place who knew him and was a great enemy of the other Lord, and so
running from one Lord to an other, being those by who^ he had passed before,
after long time and many trauelles he came at length to Drogio where he dwelt
three years. 3. years in Dr^gio.
When as by good fortune he heard by ye inhabitants, yt there were certain
boats arrived upon ye coast, wherefore entering into good hope to accomplish his
intent, Where by happ arrived certain boats from Estotsland.
he went to ye sea side and asking the^ of what country they were, they
answered of Estotiland whereat he was exceeding glad, and requested that they
would take him into them, He became interpreter for ye men that arrived at
drogeo in the boats of Estotilande. Afterward he frequ nted that trade with
them in such sort, that he became very rich. And so furnished a bark of his
own and returned to Frislande where he reported the story to his Lord
Zichmni. Zichmni minded to ^end M. Antonio Zeno with a flee^e toward those
parts of Estotilande. end of 3. letter.
which they did very willingly, and for that he had the language of the
Country and there was none of them could speak it they used him for their
interpreter.

And after that he frequented that trade with them, in such sort that he
became very rich and so furnishing out a bark of his own he returned into
Frislande, where he made report unto this Lord of that welthie Country.

And he is thoroughly credited because of the Mariners, who approve many
strange things, that he reports to be true. Wherefore this Lord is
resolved to send me forth with a fleet toward those parts, and there are
so many that desire to go in the voyage, for the novelty and strangeness of
the thing, that I think we shall be very strongly appointed, without any
public expense at all. And this is the tenor of the letter before mentioned
which I have here set down, to give intelligence of an other voyage, that M.
Antonio made, being set out with many Barks and men, notwithstanding he was
not captain as he had thought at the first he should, for Zichmni went in
his own person: and concerning this matter I have a letter in form as
follows. 4. letter begins from M. Antonio in frisland, to his brother Carlo
in Venice. The fisherman dead that should have bin guide and interpreter.
Certain mariners taken in his steed which came with him from Estotiland.
July I Will Ilofe.
Our great preparation for the voyag of Estotiland, was begun in an unlucky
hour, for three days before our departure, the fisherman died, that should
have been our guide: notwithstanding this Lord would not give over the
enterprise, but in stead of the fisherman took certain Mariners that
returned out of the Island with him, and so making our navigations to the
Westwards, we discovered certain Islands subject to Frislande, and having
passed certain shelues we stayed at Ledouo for the space of 7. days to
refreshe our selves, and furnish the fleet with necessary provision.
Departing from hence we arrived the first of July at the I Will of Ilofe, and for
that the wind made for us, we stayed not there, but passed forth, and being
upon the maine sea, there arose immediately a cruel tempest wherewith for eight
days space we were miserably vexed, not knowing where we were, and a great
part of the Barks were cast away, afterward waxing fair wether we gathered
up the broken pieces of the Barks that were lost, and sailing with a
prosperous wind we discovered land at West. Wherefore keeping our course
directly upon it, Zichmni his first discovery of the Island Icaria.
we arrived in a very good and safe harborough, where we saw an infinite
company of people ready in arms, come running very furiously to the water
side, Infinite number of people in arms.
as it were for defense of the Island. Wherefore Zichimni causing his men to
make signs of peace unto them, they sent ten men unto us that could speak
ten languages, but we could understand none of them, except one that was
of Island. An Island man in Icaria.
He being brought before our Prince and asked, what was the name of the Island,
and what people inhabited it, and who governed it, answered, that the Island was
called Icaria, Icaria Island. All the kings yt had reigned in that Ila^d were
called Icari after the name of the first king of ye place: which they say was
the son of Dedalus king of Scots. Icarius drowned. Icarian Sea.
and that all the kings that had reigned there, were called Icari, after the
name of the first king of that place, which as they say was the son of
Dedalus king of Scotland, who conquering that Island, left his son there for
king, and left the^ those laws that they retain to this present, and after
this, he desiring to sail further, in a great tempest that arose, was drowned,
wherefore for a memorial of his death, they call those Seas yet, the Icarian
Sea, and the kings of the Island Icari, and for that they were contented with
that state, which god had given them, neither whold they alter one jot of
their laws and customs, they would not receive any stranger, wherefore they
requested our Prince, that he would not seek to violate their laws, which
they had received from that king of worthy memory and observed very duly to
that present: which if he did attempt, it would redounde to his manifest
destruction, they being all resolutely bent rather to leave their life, than to
loose in any respect the use of their laws. Notwithstanding, that we should
not think they did altogether refuse the conversation and traffic with other
men, they told us for conclusion that they would willingly receive one of our
men, The people of Icaria desirous of the Italian tongue.
and prefer him to be one of ye chief amongst them, only to learn my
language the Italian tongue, and to be informed of our manners and customs, as
they had already received those other ten of ten sundry nations, Having
in that Island 10. men of ten sundry nations.
that came unto their Island. To these things our Prince answered nothing at
all, but causing his men to seek some good harborough, he made signs as
though he would come on land, and sailing round about the Island, he espied at
length a harborough on the East side of the Island, where he put in with all
his Fleet, the mariners went on land to take in wood and water, which they did
with as great speed as they could, doubting least they should be assaulted
by the inhabitants as it fell out in deed, for those that dwelt there abouts,
making signs unto the other with fire and smoke, put them selves presently in
arms and the other coming to them, they came al running down to the Sea side
upon our men, with bows and arrows and other weapons, that many were slain
and diverse sore wounded. And we made signs of peace unto them, but it was to
no purpose, for their rage increased more and more, as though they had fought
for life and living. Wherefore we were forced to depart and to sail along in
a great circuit about the Island, being always accompanied upon the hill tops
and the Sea coast with an infinite multitude of armed men, Infinite multitude
of armed men in Icaria.
and so doubling the Cape of the Island toward the North, we found many great
sholdes amongst the which for the space of ten days we were in continual
danger of loosing our whole Fleet, but that it pleased God all that while to
send us very fair weather. Wherefore proceeding on till we came to ye East
cape, we saw the inhabitaunts still on the hill tops and by the Sea coast
keep with us, and in making great outcries and shooting at us a far of they
uttered their old spiteful affection toward us. Wherefore we determined to
stay in some safe harborough, and see if we might speak once again with the
Islander, but our determination was frustrate, for the people more like unto
beasts than men, stood continually in arms with intent to beat us back, if we
should come on land. Wherefore Zichmni seeing he could not prevail and
thought if he should have perseuered and followed obstinately his purpose,
their victuals would have failed them, Zichmni departed from Icari^ Westwards.
he departed with a fair wind and sailed six days to the Westwards, but
the wind changing to the Southwest and the Sea waxing rough we sailed 4.
days with the wind in the powpe and at length discovering land, Sight of land.
we were afraid to approach near unto it, being the Sea grown, and we not
knowing what land it was, but God provided for us, that the wind ceasing
there came a great calm. Wherefore some of our company rowing to land with
oars, returned and brought us word to our great comfort, that they had found
a very good Country and a better harborough, upon which news we towed our
ships and small Barks to land, and being entered into the harborough, we saw a
far of a great mountain, ye cast forth smoke, which gave us good hope that
we should find some inhabitants in ye Island, neither would Zichmni rest,
although it were a great way of, 100. good soldiers sent by Zichmni to search
the country (which country is not named.)
but send a 100. good soldiers to search the Country and bring report what
people they were that inhabited it, and in the mean time they took in wood
and water for the provision of the Fleet, and caught great store of fish and
Sea foul and found such abundance of birds eggs that our men that were
half famished, were filled withal. Whiles we were riding here, began the
month of June, June. The air so te^perate and sweet, as impossible to
express it.
at which time the air in the Island was so temperate and pleasant as is
impossible to express, but when we could see no people at all, we suspected
greatly that this pleasant place was desolate and dishabited. We gave name to
the haven calling it Trim, Haven Trim.
and the point that stretched out into ye sea we called Capo di Trim. Capo di
Trim. The 100, soldiers returned which had been through the Island, report what
they saw and found.
The 100. soldiers that were sent forth, eight days after returned, and
brought word that they had been through the Island and at the mountain and
that the smoke was a natural thing proceeding from a great fire that was in
the bottom of the hill, and that there was a spring from which issued, a
certain matter like pitch, which ran into the Sea, and that there aboutes
dwelt great multitudes of people half wild, hiding themselves in caves of the
ground, of small stature, and very fearful, for as soon as they saw them
they fled into their holes, and that there was a great river and a very good
harborough. Zichimni being thus informed, and seeing that it had a wholesome and
pure air, and a very fruitful soil and fair rivers with sundry other
commodities, fell into such liking of the place, that he determined to
inhabit it, and build there a City.

But his people being weary and faint with their long and tedious travail
began to tumult and murmr, saying that they would return into their
Country, for that the winter was at hand, and if they entered into the
harborough, they should not be able to come out again before the next Summer.
Zichmni determining to remain in the new discovered land, kept with him his
barks with oars, and me^ that were willing and sent the rest away homewards:
Appointing Antonio Zeno chief captain of them. Antonio Zeno had sight of
Neome, and knew himself past Island. End of the 4. letter. A piece of a 5.
letter.
Wherefore he retaining only the Barks with Oars and such as were willing to
stay with him, sent all the rest with the ships back again, and willed that
I, (though unwilling) should be their Captain. I therefore departing, sailed
for the space of twenty days to the Estwards without sight of any land, then
turning my course toward Southeast in five days I discovered land and
found my self upon the I Will of Neome and knowing the Country, I perceived I
was past Islande: wherefore taking in some fresh victuals of the inhabitants
being subject to Zichmni, I sailed with a fair wind in three days to
Frisland, where the people, who thought they had lost their Prince, because of
his long absence, in this our voyage, received us very joyfully.

What followed after this letter I know not but by conjecture, which I gather
out of a piece of an other letter, which I will set down here underneath:
That Zichmni builte a town in the port of the Island that he discovered, and
that he searched the Country very diligently and discovered it all, and also
the rivers on both sides of Engroueland, for that I see it particularly
described in the Sea card, but the discourse or narration is lost. The
beginning of the letter is thus. Beginning of the letter.
Concerning those things that you desire to know of me, as of the men and
their manners and customs, of the beasts and the Countries adjoining, I have
made thereof a particular book, which by Gods help I will bring with me:
Wherein I have described the country, the monstrous fishes, ye customs and
laws of Frisland, Island, Estland, the kingdom of Norway, Estotiland, Drogio,
and in the end the life of master Nicolo, the knight our brother, with the
discovery which he made and of Groland. I have also written the life and acts
of Zichmni, a Prince as worthy of immortal memory, as any that ever lived,
for his great valiancie and singular humanity, wherein I have described the
discovery of Engroueland on both sides, and the City that he builded.
Therefore I will speak no further hereof in this letter, hoping to be with you
very shortly, and to satisfy you in sundry other things by word of mouth.
All these letters were written by master Antonio to master Carlo his brother.
And it greeueth me, that the book and diverse other writings concerning these
purposes, are miserably lost: For I being but a child, when they came to my
hands, and not knowing what they were, (as the manner of children is) I tore
them, and rent them in pieces, which now I cannot call to remembrance but to my
greef. Notwithstanding, that the memory of so many good things should not be
lost: whatsoever I could get of this matter, I have disposed and put in order,
in the former discourse, to the end that this age might be partly satisfied,
to ye which we are more beholden for the great discoueries made in those
parts, then to any other of the time past, being most studious of the
relations of the discoueries of strange Countries, made by the great minds,
and industry of our auncetours.

This discourse was collected by Ramusio Secretary to the state of Venice, (or
by the Printer Tho. Giunti.)

John Baptista Ramusio, died in Padua in July, 1557.

The true and last discovery of Florida made by Captain John Ribault in the
year 1562. Dedicated to a great noble man of France, and translated into
English by one Thomas Hackit.
WHere as in the year of our Lord God 1562. it pleased God to move your
honor, to choose and appoint us, to discover and view a certain long coast of
the West India, from the head of the land called Laflorida, drawing toward
the North part, unto the head of Britons, distant from the said head of
Laflorida 900. leagues, or there about: to the end we might certify you and
make true report of the temperature, fertility, Ports, Havens, Rivers, and
generally of all the commodities that be seen and found in that land, and
also to learn what people were there dwelling, which thing you have long time
ago desired, being stirred thereunto by this zeal: That France might one
day through new discoueries have knowledge of strange Countries, and also
thereof to receive (by means of continual traffic) rich and inestimable
commodities, as other nations have done by taking in hand such far
nauigations, both to the honor and prowes of their kings and princes, and also
to the increase of great profit and use to their common wealths, countries
and dominions, which is most of all without co^pariso^ to be considered and
esteemed. It seems well yt ye have been stirred hereunto even of God above,
and led to it by the hope and desire you have that a number of brutishe people
and ignorant of Jesus Christ, may by his grace come to some knowledge of his
holy Laws and Ordinances. So therefore it seems that it has pleased God by
his godly providence to reserve the care which he has had of their salvation
until this time, and will bring them to our faith, at the time by himself
alone foreseen and ordained. For if it were needful to show how many from
time to time have gone about to find out this great land, and to inhabit
there: who nevertheless have always failed and been put by from their
intention and purpose: some by fear of shipwrackes, and some by great winds
and tempests that drove them back to their merueilous grief. Of the which
there was one a very famous stranger named Sebastian Gabota Sebastian Gabota.
an excellent Pylot sent thither by king Henry, the year 1498. and many
others, who never could attain to any habitation nor take possession thereof
one only foot of ground, nor yet approach or enter into these parties and
fair rivers into the which God has brought us. Wherefore (my Lord) it may
be well said that the living God has reserved this great land for your
poor servants and subjects, as well to the end they might be made great
over this poor people, and rude nation: as also to approve the former
affection which our kings have had unto this discovery.

For ye late king Frances the first (of happy memory) a Prince endued with
excellent virtues. The year 1524. sent a famous and notable man a Florentine,
named Master John Verarzan, John Verarza^.
to search and discover the West parts as far as might be: Who departing from
Deep with two vessels little differing from the making and burden of these two
Pinnaces of the kings, which your honor has ordained for this present
navigations. In the which land they have found the elevation the Pole, an viii.
degrees. The Country (as he writes) goodly, fruitful, and so good
temperature, that it is not possible to have a better: being then as yet of no
man seen, nor discerned. But they being not able to bring to pass at this
first voyage that which he had intended, nor to arrive in any Port, by reason
of sundry inco^ueniences (which commonly happen) were constrained to return
into France: where after his arrival, he never ceased to make suite until
he was sent thither again, where at last he died. The which occasion gave
small courage to send thither again, and was the cause that this laudable
enterprise was left of, until the year 1534. at which time his Majesty,
(desiring always to enlarge his kingdom, countries and dominions, and the
aduauncing and ease of his subjects) sent thither a Pilote of S. Mallows, a
briton, named James Cartier, James Cartier
well seen in the art and knowledge of Navigations, and especially of the North
parts, commonly called the new land, led by some hope to find passage that
ways to the south seas: Who being not able at his first going to bring any
thing to pass, that he pretended to do: was sent thither again the year
following, and likewise Le sire Hemerall, and as it is well known they did
inhabit and build, and plant the kings armies in the North part a good way in
the land, as far as Tauadu and Ochisaon. Wherefore (my Lord) trust justly
that a thing so commendable and worthy to be with good courage attempted,
that God would guide and keep us, desiring always to fulfill your
commandment. When we had done your business, and made our preparations the
xviii. day of February 1562 through the favor of God we departed with our
two vessels out of the haven of Claue de Grace into the road Caur: and the next
day hoysted up sail (the wind being in ye East) which lasted so five days,
that we could not arrive at the nauch that is from between the coast of
Briton and England and the Isles of Surlinos and Wiskam: So that the Wind
blowing with great fury and tempest out of the West, and West Southwest,
altogether contrary to our way and course, and all that we could do was to
none effect, besides the great danger of breaking of our Mastes, as also to
be hindered in our other labors. Wherefore as well to shonne many other
inconveniences, which might follow to the prejudice and breach of our voyage,
having regard also to the likely danger of death, ye some of our gentlemen and
soldiers being troubled with fevers and whot sicknesses, might have fallen
into: as also for other considerations, we thought good to fall into the road
of Breast in Britain, to set there our sick folk on land, and suffer the
tempest to pass. From whence (after we had tarried there two days) we
returned again to Seawarde to follow our navigations, so that (my Lord)
albeit the wind was for a long season very much against us, and troublesome:
yet at the end (God giving us through his grace and accustomed goodness a
meetely favorable wind) I determined with all diligence to prove a new
course which has not been yet attempted: traversing the Seas of Oction 1800.
Leagues at the least, which in deed is the true and short course that
hereafter must be kept, to the honor of our nation, rejecting the old
conserved opion, which to long time has been holden as true.

Which is, as it was thought a thing impossible to have the wind at East,
Northeast, and keep the race and course we enterprised, but that we should
be driven toward the region of Africa, the Isles of Canaria, Madera, and other
lands there aboutes. And the cause why we have been the more provoked and
assured to take this new race, has bin because that it seemed to every one,
that we might not pass nor go in this Navigations without the sight and
touching of the Antillies and Lucaries, and there soiourne and take fresh
waters and other necessaries, as the Spaniards do in their voyage to new
spain: whereof (thanked be God) we have had no need, nor entered the channel
of Roham: which has bin thought impossible. Foreseeing also that it was not
expedient for us to pass through the Islands, as well to shune many
inconveniences that might happen in passing that way (whereof springs nothing
but innumerable quarrels, pleadings, co^fusions, and breach of al worthy
enterprises, and goodly nauigations, whereof ensues complaints and odious
questions between the subjects of the king and his friends and alies) as also
to the end they might understand, that in the time to come (God having showed
us such graces, as these his wonderful benefits first showed to the poor
people of this so goodly new framing people, of so gentle a nature, and a
country so pleasant and fruitful, lacking nothing at all that may seem
necessary for man's food) we would not have to do with their Islands, and
other lands: which (for that they first discovered them) they keep with much
jealousy: trusting that if God will suffer the king (through your perswation)
to cause some part of this incomparable country to be peopled and inhabited
with such a number of his poor subjects as you shall think good, there never
happened in the memory of man so great and good commodity to France as this,
and (my Lord) for many causes, whereof a man is never able to say or write to
the full, as under the assured hope that we have always had in executing
uprightly that which I had received in charge of you, God would bless our
ways and nauigations. After we had constantly and with diligence in time
convenient determined upon the way, we should have thought it noisome and
tedious to all our company, if it had before bin known unto any without
tourning or wavering to or fro from their first ententio^. And notwithstanding
that satan did often what he could to sow many obstractes, troubles and
lettes, according to his acustomed subtilties, so it is come to pass, that God
by his only goodness has given us grace, to make the furthest art and trauars
of the seas, that ever was made in our memory or knowledge, in longitude from
the East to the West: and therefore was it commonly said both in France and
Spain, and also among us, that it was impossible for us safely to ariue
thither, whither the Lord did conduct us. Al which persuaded but of igoraunce
and lack of attempting: which we have not bin afraid to give adventure to
prove. Albeit that all Mariners Cards do set the Coasts with shipwrackes
without ports or Rivers: which we have found otherwise as it follows.

Thursday the last of April at the break of the day, we discovered and
clearly perceived a fair Coast, stretchyng of a great length covered with an
infinite number of high and fair trees, we being not past 7. or 8. leagues
from the shore, the country seeming unto us plain without any show of hills,
and approaching nearer within four or five leagues of the land, we cast an
ancker at ten fadome water, the bottom of the Sea being plain with much
Ocias and fast hold on the South side, as far as a certain point or Cape
situate under that Latitude of nine and twenty degrees and a half, which we
have named Cape Francois.

We could epsy neither River nor Bay, wherefore we sent our Boats
furnished with men of experience, to found and know the coast near the
shore: who returning to us about one of the clock at after noone, declared that
they had found among other things viii. fadome of water at the hard bancke
of the sea. Whereupon having diligently wayed up our Anckers, and hoysted up
our sails with wind at will, we sailed and vewed the coast all along with
vnspeable pleasure, of the odorous smell and beawtie of the same. And because
there appeared unto us no sign of any Port, about the setting of the sun we
cast ancker again: which done, we did behold to and fro the goodly order of
the woods wherewith God has decked every way the said land. Then perceiving
toward the North a leaping and a breaking of the water, as a stream falling
out of the land into the Sea. For the which we set up sails again to
double the same while it was yet day. And as we had so done, and passed beyond
it: there appeared unto us a fair entry of a fair river which caused us to
cast Ancker again there nerer the land: to the end the next day we might see
what it was, and though that the wind blew for a time vehemently to the
shoreward: yet the hold and Anckerrage was so good, that one cable and one
Ancker held us fast, with out danger or sliding.

The next day in the morning, being the first of May, we assayed to enter this
Port, with two new barges and a boat well trimmed, finding little water
barges which might have astonished and caused us to return back to shipborde,
if God had not speedily brought us in. Where finding 36. fadome water, entered
into a goodly and great river, which as we went found to increase still in
depth and largeness, boiling and roaring through the multitude of all kind of
fish. This being entered we perceived a great number of ye Indians inhabitants
there, coming along the sands and Sea banks, coming near unto us, without
any taking of fear or doubt, showing unto us the easiest landing place: and
thereupon we giving them also on our parts thanks of assurance and
friendlinesse. Forthwith one of appearance, out of the best among them, brother
unto one of their kings, or governors, commanded one of the Indians to enter
into the water: and to approach our boats to show us the coasts landing place.
We seeing this (without any more doubting or difficulty) landed, and the
messenger (after we had rewarded him with some looking glass, and other pretty
things of small value) ran incontinently toward his Lord: Who forth with sent
me his girdle, in token of assurance and friendship, which girdle was made of
red leather, as well covered and colored as was possible: and as I began to go
toward him, he set forth and came and received me gently, and reised after
his manner all his men, following with great silence and modesty: yea more then
our men did. And after we had a while with gentle usage congratulated with him:
we fell to the ground a little way from them, to call upon the name of God, and
to beseech him to continue still his goodness toward us, and bring to the
knowledge of our savior Christ this poor people. While we were thus praying
(they sitting upon the ground, which was strawed and dressed with Bay bows)
beheld and hearkened unto us, very attentively without either speking or
moving: and as I made a sign unto their king, lifting up mine arm, and
stretching forth one finger, only to make them look up to heaven ward: He
likewise lifting up his arm toward heaven put forth two fingers: whereby it
seemed that he made us to understand, that they worshipped the Sun and ye
moon for Gods: as afterward we understood it so. In the mean time their
numbers increased, and thither came the kings brother, that was first with us,
their mother, wives, sisters and children, and being thus assembled, they
caused a great number of Bay boughs to be cut, and therewith a place to be
dressed for us, distant from theirs two fadom. For it is their manner to talk
and bargain sitting: and the chief of them to be apart, from the meaner
sort, with a show of great obedience to their kings, superiors, and elders.
They be all naked, and of a goodly stature, mighty, and as well shapen and
proportioned of body, as any people in ye world: very gentle, courteous, and of
a good nature.

The most part of them cover their raines and priuities with fair Hearts
skins, painted most commonly with sundry colors: and the fore part of their
body and arms, be painted with pretty devised works, of Azure, red, and
black, so well and so properly as the best Painter of Europe could not amend
it. The women have their bodies painted with a certain Herb like unto Moss,
whereof the Cedar trees, and all other trees be always covered. The men for
pleasure do always trim them selves therewith, after sundry fashions: They
be of tauny color, hawk nosed, and of a pleasant countenance. The women be
well favored, and will not suffer one dishonestly to approach too near them.
But we were not in their houses for we saw none at that time.

After we had tarried in this North side of the river the most part of the day
(which river we have called May, Why the river of May was so called.
for that we discovered the same the first day of the Month) we
congratulated, made aliaunce, and entered into amity with them, and presented
the king and his brethren with Gowns of blewe cloth garnished with yellowe
Flower deluces. And it seemed that they were sorry for our departure: so that
the most part of them entered into the water up to the neck, to set our boats
a flote.

Putting into us sundry kind of fishes, which with merueilous speed they
ran to take in their packs, made in the water with great Reeds, so well and
cunningly set together, after the fashion of a Laberinth, or Maze, with so
many turns and crookes, as it is impossible to do it without much cunning and
industry.

But desiring to employ the rest of the day on the other side of this river, to
view and know those Indians that we saw there. We trauersed thither, and
without any difficulty landed amongst them, who received us very gently and
with great humanity: putting us of their fruits, even into our boats,
Mulberies, Raspis, and such other fruits as they found ready by the way.

Soon after this came thither the king with his brethren, and others with
bows and arrows in their hands, using therewithal a goodly and a grave
fashion, with their behavior right souldierlike, and as warlike boldness as may
be. They were naked and painted as the other, their hair likewise long, and
trussed up (with a lace made of herbs) to the top of their heads: but they had
neither their wives nor children in their company. After we had a good while
lovingly enterteined and presented them with like gifts of habersher wares,
cutting hooks and hatchets, and clothed the king and his brethren with like
robes, as we had given to them on the other side: we entered and viewed the
country thereaboutes, which is the fairest, fruitfullest, and pleasantest of
all the world, abounding in honey, venison, wild foul, forests, woods of all
sorts, Palm trees, Cypress and Cedars, Bays ye highest and greatest, with
also the fairest vines in all the world, with grapes according, which without
natural art and without man's help or trimming will grow to tops of Oaks, and
other trees that be of a wonderful greatness and height. And the sight of the
fair meadows is a pleasure not able to be expressed with tongue: full of
Hernes, Curlues, Bitters, Mallards, Egrepths, woodcocks, and all other kind of
small birds: with Hearts, Hindes, Buckes, wild Swine, and all other kinds of
wild beasts, as we perceived well both by their footing there, and also
afterward in other places, by their cry and roaring in the night.

Also there be Conies and Hares: Silk worms in merueilous number, a great
deal fairer and better, then be our silk worms. To be short, it is a thing
unspeakable to consider the things that be seen there, and shall be found
more and more, in this incomperable land, which never yet broken with plough
yrons, brings forth al things according to his first nature, wherewith the
eternal God endued it. About their houses they labor and till the ground,
sowing their fields with a grain called Mahis, whereof they make their meal:
and in their Gardens they plant beans, gourdes, cucumbers, Citrons, peason,
and many other fruits and roots unknown unto us. Their spades and mattocks be
made of Wood, so well and fitly as is possible: which they make with certain
stones, oyster shelles and muscles, wherewith also they make their bows and
small lances: and cut and polish all sorts of wood, that they imploye about
their buildings, and necessary use: There grows also many Walnut trees,
Hasell trees, Cheritrees, very fair and great.

And generally we have seen, thereof the same simples and herbs that we
have in France, and of the like goodness, savor and taste. The people be
very good archers, and of great strength: Their bow stringes are made of
Leather, and their arrows of Reeds which they do head with the teeth of
fishes. As we now demanded of them concerning ye land called Seuola, whereof
some have written not to be far from thence, and to be situate within the
land, Seuola within xx. days travailing by boat of the river of May.
and toward the Sea called the South Sea. They showed us by signs that which
we understood well enough, that they might go thither with their Boats (by
rivers) in twenty days. They that have written of this kingdom and town of
Seuola, and other towns and kingdoms thereaboutes, say, that there is great
abundance of gold and silver, precious stones, and other great riches: and
that the people had their arrows headed (in steed of iron) with sharp
pointed Turquesses. Thus the night approaching, it was convenient for us to
return by day a shipboorde. We took leave of them much to their grief, but
more to ours without comparison, for that we had no mean to enter the rivers
with our ship. And albeit, it was not their custom either to eat or drink
from the Sun rising till his going down: yet the king openly would needs
drink with us, praying us very gently to give him the cup whereout we had
drunk: and so making him to understand that we would see him again the
next day, we retired to our ships, which lay above six leagues from the
haven to the sea.

The next day in the morning we returned to land again, accompanied with the
Captains, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, and other of our small trope: cariyng with
us a Pillour or column of hard stone, our kings arms graued therein, to
plant and set the same in the enterie of the Port in some high place, where it
might be easily seen, and being come thither before the Indians were
assembled, we espied on the south side of the River a place very fit for that
purpose, upon a little hill, compassed with Cypres, Bays, Paulmes and other
trees, with sweet smelling and pleasant shrubbes. In the middle whereof we
planted the first bound or limit of his Majesty. This done perceiving our
first Indians assembled, not without some misliking of those on the South
part, where we had set the limitte, who tarried for us in the same place where
they met with us the day before, seeming unto us that there is some enimitie
between them and the others. But when they perceived our long tarying on this
side, they ran to see what we had done in that place where we landed first, and
had set our limitte: which they vewed a great while without touching it any
way, or abassing, or ever speaking to us thereof at any time after. Howebeit we
could ska^t depart but as it were with grief of mind from this our first
alliance, they rowing unto us all along the river from all parts and presenting
us with some of their hearts skins, painted and unpainted, meal, little cakes,
fresh water, roots like unto Rinbabe which they have in great estimation, and
make thereof a potion of medicine: also they brought little bags of read
colors and some small spices like unto Vire, perceiving among them selves
fair things painted as it had bin with grain of scarlet, showing unto us by
signs that they had in the land gold and silver and copper: whereof we have
brought some, Gold, silver, and copper in Florida. Turquesses and abundance of
pearls. Marshes.
Also lead like unto ours which we showed. Also turquesses and great abundance
of pearls which as they declared unto us they took out of oysters, whereof
there is taken ever along the river side, and among the reeds, and in the
marshes: and so merueylous abundance as is skant credible: and we have
perceived that there be as many and as fair pearls found there as in any
country of the world. For we saw a man of theirs as we entered into our
boats, that had a pearl hanging at a collar of gold and silver about his
neck, Pearls as big as acornes.
as great as an Acorne at ye least. This man as he had taken fish in one of
their fishing packs thereby brought that same to our boats, and our men
perceiving the greatness thereof, one of them putting his finger toward it, the
man drew back, and would no more come near the boat: not for any fear
that he had that they would have taken his Collar and Pearl from him for he
would have given it them, for a looking glass or a knife:

But that he doubted lest they would have pulled him into the boat, and so
by force have carried him away. He was one of the goodliest men of all the
company. But for that we had no leisure to tarry any longer with them, the day
being well passed, which grieved us, for the commodity and great riches,
which as we understood and saw might be gotten there, desiring also to
employ the rest of the day with our second aliance the Indians on the
southside, as we perceiuer them the day before, which still tarried looking for
us: We passed the river to their shore, where as we found them tariyng for
us, quietly and in good order, with new paintings upon their face, and
feathers upon their head: the King with his Bow and Arrows lying by him,
sat on the ground strawed with boughs between his two brethren, which were
goodly men and well shapen and of a wonderful show of actiuities, having upon
their heads, one hair trussed upright of heyght, of some kind of wild beast
gathered and wrought together with great cunning, wrethed and fasted after the
form of a Diadem. One of them had hanging about his neck a round plate of
read copper well polished, with one other lesser of Silver in the midst of
it, and at his ear a little plate of Copper wherewith they use to stripe the
sweat from their bodies. They showed us that there was greatstore of this
mettell within the country, about five or six days journey from thence, both
in the southside and northside of the same rivers, and that they went thither
in their Boats. Which Boats they make but of one piece of a tree, woorking it
whole so cunningly and featly, that they put in one of these boats fifteen or
twenty persons, and go their ways very safely. They that row stand upright
having their ores short after the fashion of a Peele. Thus being among them
they presented us with meal dressed and baked, very good and well tasted, and
of good nourishment, also beans, and fish, as crabbes, lobstars, creuises, and
many other kind of good fishes, showing us by signs yt their dwellings were
far off, and if their provision had been near hand, they would have
presented us with many other refreshinges.

The night now approaching, we were feign to return to our Ship, very much
to our grief: for that we durst not hazard to enter with our Ship, by
reason of a bar of land, that was at the enterie of the Port, how be it,
at a full Sea there is two fadome and a half of water at the least, and it is
but a leap over a surge to pass this Bar, not passing the length of two
cables, and then forthwith every where within six or seven fadome water. So
that it makes a very fair haven, and Ships of a mean burden from
fourscore to a hundred tons may enter therein at all floodes, yea of a far
greater burden, if there were French men dwelling there that might skoure the
enterye as they do in France: for there is nothing lacking for the life of
man. The situation is under the elevation of xxx. degrees, a good climate
healthful, and of a good temperature, merueilous pleasant, ye people good, and
of a good and amiable nature, Gentleness must be used toward them.
which willingly will obey: yea be content to serve those that shall with
gentleness and humanity go about to allure them, as it is needful for those
that be sent thither hereafter so to do, and as I have charged those that be
left there to do, to the end they may ask and learn of the^ where they take
their gold, copper, and turquesses, and other things yet unknown unto us: by
reason of the time we soiourned there. For if any rude or rigorous means
should be used toward this people, they would fly hither and thither through
the Woods and Forests, and abandon their habitations and countries.

The next day being the third day of May, desiring always to find out
harbors to rest in, we set up sail again: And after we had raunged the coast
as near the shore as we could, there appeared unto us about seven leagues of
on this side of ye river of May a great opening or Bay of some river, whither
with one of our boats we rowed, and there found one entry almost like yt of
the river of May, and within the same as great a depth, and as large a dividing
it self into many great streams, great and broad stretchinges toward the
high land, with many other less, that divide the country into fair and
great lands and great number of small and fair Meadows. Being entered into
them about three leagues, we found in a place very commodious, strong, and
pleasant of situation, certain Indians, who received us very gently: How be
it, we being somewhat near their houses, it seemed it was somewhat against
their good wills that we went thither, for at their cries and noyses they made
their wives and children and hoshoulde stuff to be carried into the Woods: How
be it they suffered us to go into their houses, but they themselves would not
accompany us thither. Their houses be made of Wood fitly and close, set
upright and covered with Reeds: the most part of them after the fashion of a
pauilion. But there was one house amongst the rest very long and broad, with
settles round about made of Reeds trimly couched together, which serve them
both for beds and seats, they be of height two foot from the ground, set
upon great round pillars painted with red, yelowe, and blewe, well and trimly
polished: some sort of this people perceiving that we had in no manner wise
hurted their dwellings nor gardens which they dressed very diligently, they
returned all unto us before our inbarking, seeming very well contented by their
giving unto us water, fruits, and Heart skins. It is a place wonderful
fertile, and of strong situatio^, the ground fat, so that it is likely that it
would bring forth Wheat and all other corn twice a year, Great fertility.
and the commodities for liuelihood, and the hope of more riches, be like unto
those we found and considered upon the river of May, without coming into the
sea: this arm does divide, and makes many other Isles of May, as also many
other great Islands: by the which we travel from one Island to another,
between land and land. Note.
And it seems that men may sail without danger through all the country, and
never enter into the great sea, which were a wonderful advantage.

This is the land of Checere whereof some have written, and which many have
gone about to find out, for ye great riches they perceived by some Indians to
be found there. It is set under so good a climate, that none of our men
(though we were there in the hotest time of the year, the sun entering into
Cancer) were troubled with any sicknesses. The people there live long and in
great health and strength, so that the aged men go without slaves, and are
able to go and run like the youngest of them, who only are known to be
old by the wrinckles in their face, and decay of sight. We departed from them
very friendly, and with their contentation. But the night ouertaking us, we
were constrained to lie in our ships all that night, till it was day, floting
upon this river which we have called Seen, The river of Seen.
because that the entery of it is as broad as from hauer degrace unto
Honesleue. At the break of the day we espied out of the South side one of the
fairest, pleasauntest, and greatest medowe ground that might be seen, into
the which we went, finding at the very entry a long, fair, and great Lake,
and an innumerable number of footesteps of great Hearts and Hindes of a
wonderful greatness, Heardes of tame Hearts.
the steps being all fresh and new, and it seems that the people do
nourishe them like tame Cattle in great herds: for we saw the steps of an
Indian that followed them.

The Channel and depth of this river of Seyne, is one yt side of the medowe
that is in the I Will of May. Being returned to our ships, we sailed to know more
and more of this coast, goying as near the shore as we could. And as we had
sailed about six or seven leagues, there appeared unto us another Bay, where
we cast anchor, and tarrying so all the night, in the morning we went thither,
and finding (by our founding) at the entry many banks and beatings, we durst
not enter there with our great ship, having named the river Sum, which is 8.
9. 10. 11. fadome depth, dividing it self into many great Islands, and small
goodly meadow grounds and pastures, and every where such abundance of fish as is
incredible, and on the Weast Northwest side, there is a great river that
comes from the country of a great length over: and another on the Northeast
side, which return into the Sea. So that (my Lord) it is a country full of
havens, rivers, Good havens and rivers.
and Islands, of such fruitfulnes as cannot with tongue be expressed: and where
in short time great and precious commodities might be found. 7. Great and good
rivers.
And besides this we discovered and found also vii. rivers more, as great and
as good, cutting and dividing the land into fair and great Islands. The Indians
inhabitants there be like in manners, and the country in fertillitie apt and
commodious throughout to bear and bring forth plentifully all that men would
plant or sow upon it. There be every where the highest and greatest Firtrees
yt can be seen, very well smelling, and where out might be gathered (with
cutting the only bark) as much Rosen, Turpentine, and Fra^ke^sence, as men
would desire. And to be short there lacks nothing. Wherefore being not able
to enter and lie with our great vessels there, we could make no long abiding,
nor enter so far into the rivers and countries as we would feign have done:
for it is well known how many inconveniences have happened unto men, not only
in attempting of new discoueries, but also in all places by leaving their
great vessels in the Sea, far from the land, unfurnished of the heads and
best men. As for yt other rivers we have given them names as follows: and
unto the Islands joining unto them, the same name that the next river unto it
has, as you shall see by the portratures or Cards Maps and Sea Cards.
yt I have made thereof. As to the fourth name of Loire, to ye fifth Charnet, to
ye sixth Caro^ to the 7. river Belle, to ye 8. river Grau^de, to the 9. port
Royal, and to the tenth Belle Virrir.

Upon Whitsunday the xxvii. day of May, after we had perceived and considered
that there was no remedy, but to assay to find the means to harber our ships,
as well to amend and trim them, as to get us fresh water, wood, and other
necessaries, whereof we having opinion that there was no fayrer or fitter
place for the purpose, then port Royal. Port royal a most excellent haven.
And when we had sounded the entry and the Channel (thanked be God) we
entered safely therein with our ships, against the opinion of many, finding
the same one of the fairest and greatest Havens of the world.

How be it, Note.
it must be remembered least men approaching near it within seven leagues of the
land, be abashed and afraid on the Eastside, drawing toward the Southeast,
the ground to be flat, for nevertheless at a full sea, there is every where
four fadome water, keeping the right Chanel.

In this part there are many rivers of mean bigness and large, where without
danger the greatest ships of the world might be harbored, which we
found, no Indian inhabiting there aboutes. The Port and Rivers side is nearer
then ten or twelve leages vpwardes into the countries, although it be one of
the goodliest, best, and fruitefullest countries that ever was seen, and where
nothing lacks, and also where as good and likely commodities be found as in
other places thereby.

For we found there a great number of Pepertrees, Pepper tr^^^.
the Pepper yet green, and not ready to be gathered: Also the best water of
the world, and so many sorts of fishes that ye may take them without net or
angle so many as ye will. Also an innumerable sort of wild foul of all
sorts, and in little Islands at the entry of this haven, on the East
Northeast side, there is so great number of Egrepes that the busshes be all
white and covered with them, so that one may take of the young ones with his
hand as many as he will carry away. There be also a number of other fowls,
as Hernes, Bitters, Curlues. And to be short, there is so many small birds
that it is a strange thing to be seen. We found the Indians there more
doubtful and fearful then the others before: Yet after we had been in their
houses, and congregated with them, and showed courtesy to those that we found
to have abandoned there through boats meal, victual, and small household
stuff, and both in not taking away or touching any part thereof, and in
leaving in that place where they dressed their meat, Knives, Looking glasses,
little Beads of glass, A special note.
which they love and esteem above gold and pearls, for to hang them at their
ears and neck, and to give them to their wives and children: they were
somewhat emboldened.

For some of them came to our boats, of the which we carried two goodly and
strong aboorde our ships, clothing and using them as gently as it was
possible. But they ceased not day nor night to lament, and at length they
escaped away. Wherefore albeit, I was willing (according to your commandment
and memorial) to bring away some of them with us, A commandment.
on the Princes behalf and yours, I forbear to do so for many considerations
and reasons that they told me, and for that we were in doubt that (leaving
some of our men there to inhabit) all the Country, men, women, and children,
would not have ceased to pursue them for to have theirs again: seeing they
be not able to consider and way to what intent we should have carried them
away: and this may be better done to their contentation, when they have
better acquaintance of us, and know that there is no such cruelty in us, as
in other people and nations, of whom they have been beguiled under color of
good faith: which doing in the end turned to the doers no good. This is the
river of Iordain in mine opinion, The river of Jordan.
whereof so much has been spoken, which is very fair and the country good,
both for yt easy habitation, and also for many other things, which should be
long to write.

The twenty of May we planted another column or pillor graven with the
kings arms on the South side, in a high place, of the entry of a great
river, which we called Libourne: where there is a lake of fresh water very
good, and on the same side a little lower toward the entry of the Haven is
one of the fairest fountains that a man may drink of, which falls by
violence down to the river from an high place out of a red and sandy ground,
and yet for all that fruitful and of good air, where it should seem that
the Indians have had some fair habitation.

There we saw the fairest and the greatest vines with grapes according, and
young trees, and small woods, Exceeding fair and great vines
very well smelling, that ever were seen: whereby it appears to be the
pleasantest and most commodious dwelling of al ye world. Wherefore (my Lord)
trusting you will not think it amiss (considering the commodities that may be
brought thence) if we leave a number of men there, which may fortify and
provide them selves of things necessary: Fortification most necessary in all
new discoueries.
for in all new discoueries it is the chiefest thing that may be done, at the
beginning to fortify and people the country. I had not so soon set forth
this to our company, but many of them afraid to tarry there, yet with such a
good will and ioly courage, that such a number did thus offer themselves, as we
had much to do to stay their importunity.

And namely of our shipmaisters and principal pilotes, 30. left behind at
their own suite
and such as we could not spare. How be it, we left there but to the number
of thirty in all, Gentlemen, soldiers, and mariners, and that at their own
suit and prayer, and of their own free wills, and by the advice and
deliberation of the Gentlemen sent on the behalf of the Prince and yours.

And have left unto the forehead and rulers (following therein your good will)
Captain Albert de la Pierria, a soldier of long experience, and the first
that from the beginning did offer to tarry. And further by their advice, choice
and will, inskaled and fortified them in an Island They fortified in an Island.
on the north side, a place of strong situation and commomodious, upon a river
which we named Chenonceau, and the habitation and Fortress Charlefote.

After we had instructed and duly admonished them of that they should do (as
well for their manner of proceeding, as for the good and loving behavior of
them) the xi. day of the month of June last past, we departed from port Royal:
minding yet to range and view the coast until the xl. degrees of the
elevation: Forty degrees of elevation.
But for as much as there came upon us troublesome and cloudie weather, very
incommodious for our purpose, and considering also amongst many other things,
that we had spent our cables and furniture thereof, which is the most
principal thing that longs to them that go to discover countries, where
continually both night and day they must lie at ancker: also our victuals
being perished and spilte, our lack of Boateswaines to set forth our row
barges, and leave our vessels furnished. The declaration made unto us of our
Pilots and some others that had before been at some of those places, where we
purposed to sail, and have been already found by some of the kings subjects,
the danger also and inconveniences that might thereof happen unto us: Mistes
and fogs when they come.
and by reason of the great mystes and fogges whereof the season was already
come, we perceived very well whereas we were, yt we could do no good, and that
it was to late, and ye good and fit season for to undertake this thing already
past. Al these things thus well considered and wayed, and also for that we
thought it meet and necessary that your honor should with diligence be
advertised (through the help of God) to return homewards to make relation unto
you of the effect of our navigations. Praying God that it may please him to
keep you in long health, and prosperity.

FINIS.
Notes in writing besides more privy by mouth that were given by a Gentleman,
Anno. 1580 to M. Arthure Pette and to M. Charles Iackman, sent by the merchants
of the Muscouie company for the discovery of the northeast strayte, not
altogether unfit for some other enterprises of discovery, hereafter to be
taken in hand.
What respect of Islands is to be had, and why.
WHereas the Portingales have in their course to their Indies in the Southeast,
certain ports and fortificatio^s to thrust into by the way, to diverse great
purposes? So you are to see what Islands, and what ports you had need to have
by the way in your course, to the Northeast. For which cause I wish you to
enter into consideration of the matter, and to note all the Islands, and to set
them down in p^at, to two ends, that is to say, That we may devise to take
the benefit by them. And also foresee how by the^ the Savages or civil
Princes, may in any sort anoy us in our purposed trade that way.

And for that the people to the which we purpose in this voyage to go, be no
Christians, it were good that the mass of our commodities were always in our
own disposition, and not at the will of others. Therefore it were good that we
did seek out some small Island in the Scithian Sea, where we might plant,
Fortify, and Staple safely, from whence (as time should serve) we might
feed those heathen nations with our commodities without cloying them, or
without venturing our hole mass in the bowels of their country.

And to which Island if need were (and if we should think so good) we might
allure the Northeast navy, the navy of Cambalu to resort with their
commodities to us there planted, and stapling there.

And if such an Island might be found so standing as might shorten our course,
and so standing, as that the Navy of Ca^balu, or other those parties might
conveniently sail unto without their dislike in respect of distance: the^ would
it fall out well. For so, besides less danger, and more safety, our ships
might there unlade and lade again, and return the self same summer to the
ports of England or of Norway.

And if such an Island may be found for the stabling of our commodities, to the
which they of Cambalu would not sail, yet we might, having ships there,
employ them in passing between Cambalu and that stapling place.

Respect of havens and harbarowes.
ANd if no such Islands may be found in the Scithia^ sea toward the firm of
Asia, then are you to search out the ports that be about Noua Sembla all along
the tract of that land, to the end you may winter there the first year, if you
be let by contrary winds, and to the end that if we may in short time come
unto Ca^balu, and unlade and set sail again for return without ventering,
there at Ca^balu, that you may on your way come as far in return as a port
about Noua se^bla: That the Summer following, you may the sooner be in England
for the more speedy vent of your East commodities, and for the speedier
discharge of your Mariners: if you can not go forward and back in one self
same summer.

And touching the tract of the land of Noua sembla, toward the East out of the
circle Artick in the more temperate zone, you are to have regard, for if you
find the soil planted with people, it is like yt in time an ample ve^t of our
warm wolle^ clothes may be found. And if there be no people at al there to be
found, then you shall specially note what plenty of whales, and of other fish
is to be found there, to the end we may turn our newfou^d land fishing or
Island fishing, or our whalefishing, yt way for the aid and comfort of our new
trades to the Northeast, to the coasts of Asia.

Respect of fish and certain other things.
ANd if the air may be found upon that tract temperate, and the soil yielding
wood, water, land and grass, and the seas fish, then we may plant on that
main the offals of our people, as the Portingals do in Brasil, and so they
may in our fishing in our passage, and diverse ways yield commodity to
England by harboring and vitelling of us.

And it may be, that the inland there may yield mastes, pitch, tar, hemp,
and all things for the Navy, as plentifully as Eastland does.

The Islands to be noted with their commodities and wantes.
TO note the Islands, whether they be hie land or low land, mou^tanie, or
flat, sandy, grauelly, clay, chalchy, or of what soil, woody or not woody,
with springs and rivers or not, and what wyld beasts they have in the same.

And whether there seem to be in the same apt matter to build withal, as
stone free or rough, and stone to make lime withal, and wood or coal to burn
the same withal.

To note the goodness or the badnes of the havens, and harborowes in the Islands.

If a strait be found what is to be done and what great importance it may
be of.
ANd if there be a strayte in the passage into the Scithian Seas, the same is
specially and with great regard to be noted, especially if the same strait be
narrow and to be kept, I say it is to be noted as a thing that does much
importe, for what Prince soever shall be Lord of the same, and shall possess
the same, as the king of Denmark does possess the strait of Denmark, he
only shall have the trade out of these regions into the Northeast parts of
the world for himself, and for his private profit, or for his subjects only,
or to enjoy wonderful benefit of the toll of the same, like as the king of
De^marke does enjoy of his straites, by suffering the Merchantes of other
Princes to pass that way, If any such strait be found, the elevation, the hie
or low land, the havens near, the length of the straites, and all other such
circu^staunces are to be set down for many purposes: And all the Mariners in
yt voyage are to be sworn to keep close al such things, that other Princes
prevent us not of the same, after our return upon the disclosing of the
mariners, if any such thing should hap.

Which way the Savage may be made able to purchase our cloth and other their
wantes.
IF you find any Island or main land populous, and that the same people has
need of cloth: Then are you to devise what commodities they have to purchase
the same withal.

If they be poor, then are you to consider of the soil, and how by any
possibility the same may be made to enrich the^, that hereafter they may have
something to purchase the cloth withal.

If you enter into any main by portable river and shall find any great woods,
you are to note what kind of timber they be of: That we may know whether they
are for pitche, tar, mastes, deleborde, clapborde, or for buylding of ships
or houses, for so if the people have no use of them they may be brought
perhaps to use.

Not to venture the loss of any one man.
YOu must have great care to preserve your people, since your number is so
small, and not to venture any one man in any wise.

To bring home besides merchandise certain trifles.
BRing home with you (if you may) from Cambalu, or other civil place, one or
other young man, although you leave one for him.

Also the fruits of the countries, if they will not of themselves dure, dry
them, and so preserve them.

And bring with you the Curnelles of peers, and apples, and the stones of such
stone fruits as you shall find there.

Also the seeds of all strange herbs and flowers, for such seeds of fruits
and herbs coming from another part of the world and so far off, will delight
the fancy of many, for the strangenes and for that the same may grow and
continue the delight long time.

If you arrive at Cambalu or Quinsay, to bring thence the Map of that
Country, for so shall you have the perfect description which is to great
purpose.

To bring thence some old printed book, to see whether they have had print
there, before it was devised in Europe as some write.

To note their force by sea and by land.
If you arrive in Cambalu or Quinsay, to take a special view of their Navy,
and to note the force, greatness, manner of building of them, the sails, the
tackels, the anckers, the furniture of them, with ordinance, armor, and
munition.

Also, to note the force of the walls and bulwarks of their cities, their
ordinance, and whether they have any caliuers, and what powder and shot.

To note what armor they have.

What swords.

What pikes, halbertes and bills.

What horses of force, and what light horses they have.

And so throughout, to note the force of the country, both by sea and by land.

Things to be marked to make conjectures by.
TO take special note of their buildings, and of the ornaments of their houses
within.

Take a special note of their apparel and furniture, and of the substance
that the same is made of, of which a merchant may make a guess, as well of
their commodities as also of their wantes.

To note their shoppes and warehouses and with what commodities they abound,
the price also.

To see their shambles, and to view all such things as are brought into the
markets, for so you shall sone see the commodities, and the manner of the people
of the inlande, and so give a guess of many things.

To note their fields of grain, and their trees of fruit, and how they
abound or not abound in one and other, and what plenty or scarcetie of fish
they have.

Things to be carried with you, whereof more or less is to be carried for a
show of our commodities to be made.
KErsies of all orient colors, specially of stamel, brode-cloth of orient
colors also.

Frisadoes, motleys, bristowe frices, spanish blankettes, bays of all
colors, specially with stamell, wosteds, carels, says, wedmoles, flanelles,
rash, etc.

Feltes of diverse colors.

Taffeta hats.

Deep cappes for mariners colored in stamell, whereof if ample vent may be
found, it would turn to an infinite commodity of the common poor people by
knitting.

Quilted Cappes of leuant Taffeta of diverse colors, for the night.

Knit stocks of silk of orient colors.

Knit stocks of Iersey yerne, of orient colors, whereof if ample vent might
follow the poor multitude should be set in work.

Stocks of kersey of diverse colors for men and for women.

Garters of Silk of several kinds, and of colors diverse.

Girdels of Buffe, and all other leather, with gilt and vngilt Buckles,
specially wast girdels, wast girdles of velvet.

Gloves of all sorts, knit and of leather.

Gloves perfumed.

Points of all sorts of silk, thread, and lether, of all manner of colors.

Shoes of spanishe leather, of diverse colors, of diverse lengthes, cut and
uncut.

Shoes of other leather.

Velvet shoes, and pantoples.

These shoes and pantoples to be sent this time, rather for a show then for
any other cause.

Purses knit, and of leather.

Night cappes knit and other.

A Garnishe of Pewter, for a show of a vent of that english commodity,
Bottelles, flagons, spoones, etc. of that metal.

Glasses of english making.

Venice glasses.

Looking glasses for women, great and fair.

Small dials a few for proof, although there they will not hold the order they
do here.

Spectacles of the common sort.

Others of Cristall trymmed with silver and otherwise.

Owre glasses.

Commes of Iuorie.

Commes of Box.

Commes of Horn.

Linen of diverse sorts.

Handkerchewes with silk of several colors wrought.

Glasen eyes to ride with against dust.

Knives in sheathes, both single and double, of good edge.

Needles great and small of every kind.

Buttons greater and smaller, with mouldes of leather and not of wood, and such
as be durable of double silk, and that of sundry colors.

Boxes with weightes of gold, and of every kind of the coin of gold, good
and badde, to show that the people here, use weight and measure which is a
certain show of wisdom, and of a certain government settled here.

All the several silver Coins of our English moneys, to be carried with you
to be showed to the governors at Cambalu, which is a thing that shall in
silence speak to wise men more then you imagine.

Locks and keys, hinges, boltes, haspes, etc. great and small of excellent
workemanshippe, whereof if vent may be hereafter, we shall set our subjects
in work, which you must have in great regard. For in finding ample vente of
any thing that is to be wrought in this realm, is more worth to our people
besides the gain of the merchant, then Christ-church, Bridewel, the Sauoy, and
all the Hospitals of England.

For banketing on Shipborde, persons of credit.
FIrst the sweetest perfumes to set under hatches to make the place sweet
against their coming aborde, if you arrive at Cambalu, Quinsey, or in such
great cities and not among savages.

Marmelade.

Sucket.

Figs barelled.

Reysings of the sun.

Comfets of diverse kinds made of purpose, that shall not dissolve by him that
is most excellent.

Prunes damask.

Dried peers.

Walnuttes.

Almondes.

Smalnuttes.

Olives to make them taste their wine.

The Apple John that dureth two years to make show of our fruits.

Hullocke.

Sack.

Vials of good sweet waters, and casting bottels of glasses to besprinckel the
gests withal, after their coming aborde.

Sugar, to use with their wine, if they will.

The sweet oil of Santie and excellent French vinegar, and a fine kind of
Biscuit, stiped in the same do make a banketting dishe, and a little Sugar cast
in it cools and comfort, and refreshes the spirits of man.

Synomome water is to be had with you to make a show of by taste, and also to
comfort your sick in the voyage. Imperial water is to be had with you to make
a show of by taste, and also to comfort your sick in the voyage.
With these and such like, you may banquet where you arrive the greater and best
persons.

Or with the gift of these Marmelades in small boxes, or small violles of
sweet waters you may gratify by way of gift, or you may make a merchandise of
them.

The map of England and of London.
Take with you the map of England set out in fair colors, one of the
biggest sort I mean, to make show of your Country from whence you come.

And also the large map of London, to make show of your City. And let the
river be drawn full of ships of all sorts, to make the more show of your
great trade and traffic in trade of merchandise.

Ortelius book of mappes
If you take Ortelius book of mappes with you, to mark all these regions, it
were not amiss, and if need were to present the same to the great Came, for it
would be to a Prince of merueilous account.

The book of the attire of all nations.
Such a book carried with you and bestowed in gift, would be much esteemed,
as I persuade my self.

Books.
If any man will lend you the new Herball, and such books as make show of
Herbs, Plants, Trees, Fishes, Fowls and Beasts of these regions, it may
much delight the great Came, and the nobility, and also their merchants to have
the view of them: for all things in these parties so much differing from the
things of those regions, since they may not be here to see the^, by mean of
the distance, yet to see those things in a shadow, by this mean will delight
them.

The book of Rates.
TAke with you the book of Rates, to the end you may prick all those
commodities there specified that you shall chance to find in Cambalu, in
Quinsey, or in any part of the East, where you shall chance to be.

Parchment.
Rowles of Parchment, for that we may vent much without hurt to the Realm, and
it lies in small room.

Glewe.
To carrye Glewe, for that we have plenty, and want vent.

Red Oker for Painters.
To seek vent because we have great mines of it, and have no vent.

Soap of both kinds.
To try what vent it may have, for that we make of both kinds, and may
perhaps make more.

Saffron.
To try what vent you may have of Saffron, because this Realm yeeldes the
best of the world, and for the tillage and other labors, may set the poor
greatly in work to their relief.

Aquauitae.
By new devise wonderful quantities may be made here, and therefore to
seek the vent.

Black Conie skins.
To try the vent at Cambalue, for that it lies toward the North, and for
that we abound with the commodity, and may spare it.

Threade of all colors.
The vent thereof may set our people in work.

Copper Spurs, and hawks belles.
To see the vent, for it may set our people in work.

A note and a caveat for the merchant.
That before you offer your commodities to sale that you endeavor to learn
what commodities the Country there has. For if you bring thither velvet,
taffeta, spice, or any such commodity that you your self desire to lade your
self home with, you must not sell yours dear, least hereafter you purchase
theirs not so cheap as you would.

Seeds for sale.
Carry with you for that purpose, all sorts of Garden seeds, as well of
sweet strawing herbs and of flowers, as also of pot herbs, and all sorts for
roots, etc.

Leadde of the first melting.

Leadde of the second melting of the slagges.

To make trial of the vent of Leadde of all kinds.

English iron, and wire of iron and copper.
To try the sale of the same.

Brymstone.
To try the vent of the same, because we abound of it made in the Realm,

Anthimoney a mineral.
To see whether they have any ample use there for it, for that we may lade
whole nauies of it, and have no use of it unless it be for some small portion
in founding of belles, or a lithel that the Alcumistes use, of this you may
have two sorts at the Appoticaries,

Tinder boxes with Steel, flint, and matches, and tinder, the matches to be
made of Gineper, to avoid the offense of brimstone.
To try and to make the better sale of Brimstone by showing the use.

Candles of wax to light.

A painted Bellows.
For that perhaps they have not the use of them.

A pot of cast iron.
To try the sale, for that it is a natural commodity of this Realm.

All manner of edge tools.
To be sold there or to the less civil people by the way where you shall
twich.

What I would have you there to remember.
To note specially what excellent dying they use in these regions, and
therefore to note their garments, and ornaments of houses: and to see their die
houses and the materialles, and simples that they use about the same: and to
bring Musters and shows of the colors and of the materials, for that it may
serve this clothing realm to great purpose.

To take with you for your own use.
All manner of Engyns to take fish and foul.

To take with you those things that be in perfection of goodness.
For as the goodness now at the first may make your commodities in credit in
time to come: So false and sophisticate commodities shall draw you and all
your commodities into contempt and ill opinion.

Notes framed by a Gcntleman heretofore to be given to one that prepared for a
discovery, and went not: And not unfit to be committed to print, considering
the same may stir up considerations of these and of such other things, not
unmeet in such new voyages as may be attempted hereafter.
THat the first Seat be chosen on ye seaside so as (if it may be) you may have
your own Navy within Bay, river or lake, within your seat safe from the
enemy. And so as the enemy shall be forced to lie in open rode abroad without,
to be dispersed with all winds and tempests that shall arise. Thus seated you
shall be least subject to annoy of the enemy, so may you by your Navy
within, pass out to all parts of the world, and so may the ships of
England have access to you to supply all wantes, so may your commodities be
carried away also. This seat is to be chosen in temperate Climat, in sweet
air, where you may possess always sweet water, wood, seacoles, or curse,
with fish, flesh, grain, fruits, herbs and roots, or so many of those, as
may suffice very necessity for the life of such as shall plant there. And for
the possessing of mines of gold, of silver, copper, quicksiluer, or of any
such precious thing, the wantes of diverse of those needful things may be
supplied from some other place by sea, etc.

are to be looked for as things without which no City may be made nor people
in civil sort be kept together.
Stone to make Lyme of. Slate stone to tile withal or such clay as makes
tyle, Stone to wall withal if Brycke may not be made, Timber for building
easily to be conveyed to the place, Reed to cover houses or such like, if tile
or slate be not.
The people there to plant and to continue are either to live without
traffic, or by traffic and by trade of merchandise. If they shall live
without sea traffic, at the first they become naked by want of linen and
woollen, and very miserable by infinite wantes that will otherwise ensue, and so
will they be forced of them selves to depart, or else easily they will be
consumed by the Sp. by the Fr. or by the natural inhabithantes of the
country, and so the interprice becomes reproachful to our nation, and a let
to many other good purposes that may be taken in hand.

And by trade of merchandise they can not live, except the sea or the land
there may yield commodity for commodity. And therefore you ought to have
most special regard of that point, and so to plant, that the natural
commodities of the place and seat, may draw to you access of Navigations for
the same, or that by your own Navigations you may carry the same out, and
fetch home the supplye of the wantes of the seat.

Such navigations so to be employed, shall besides the supply of wantes, be
able to encounter with forreyne force.

And for that in the ample vente of such things as are brought to you out of
engl. by sea, stands a matter of great consequence, it behooves that all
humanity and courtesy and much forbearing of revenge to the inland people be
used, so shall you have firm amity with your neighbors, so shall you have
their inland commodities to maintain traffic, and so shall you wax rich and
strong in force. Diverse and several commodities of the inland are not in great
plenty to be brought to your hands, without the aid of some portable or
Nauigable river, or ample lack, and therefore to have the help of such a one
is most requisite: And so is it of effect for the dispersing of your own
commodities in exchange into the inlandes.

Nothing is more to be endeavored with the Inland people then familiarity. For
so may you best discover all the natural commodities of their country, and
also all their wantes, all their strengthes, all their weakness, and with
whom they are in war, and with whom confiderate in peace and amity, etc.
which known, you may work many great effects of greatest consequence.

And in your planting the consideration of the climate and of the soil be
matters that are to be respected. For if it be so that you may let in the salt
sea water, not mixed with the fresh into flattes, where the sun is of the
heat that it is at Rochell, in the Bay of portingall, or in Spain, then may
you procure a man of skill, and so you have won one noble commodity for the
fishing, and for trade of merchandise by making of Salt.

Or if the soil and clymate be such as may yield you the Grape as good as
that at Burdeus, as that in Portingale, or as that about Siui in Spain, or
that in the Islands of the Canaries, then there rests but a woorkeman to put
in execution to make wines, and to dress Resings of the sun and other, etc.

Or if you find a soil of the temperature of the South part of Spain or
Barbary, in which you find the Olif tree to grow: Then you may be assured
of a noble merchandise for this realm, considering that our great trade of
clothing does require oil, and weying how dear of late it is become by the
vent they have of that commodity in the West Indies, and if you find the
wild olif there it may be graffed.

Or if you can find the berrie of Cochenile with which we color Stammelles,
or any Root, Berrie, Fruit, wood or earth fit for dying, you win a
notable thing fit for our state of clothing. This Cochenile is natural in the
west Indies on that firm.

Or if you have hides of beasts fit for sole Lether, etc. It will be a
merchandise right good, and the savages there yet can not can Lether after
our kind, yet excellently after their own manner.

Or if the soil shall yield Figs, Almondes, Sugar Canes, Quinces, Orenges,
Lemons, Potatos, etc. there may arise some trade and traffic, by figs,
almonds, sugar, marmelade, Sucket etc.

Or if great woods be found, if they be of Cypres, chests may be made, if
they be of some kind of trees, pitche and tar may be made, if they be of
some other then they may yield Rosin, Trupentine, etc. and al for trade and
traffic, and Caskes for wine and oil may be made: likewise ships and houses,
etc.

And because traffic is a thing so material, I with that great observation
be taken what every soil yields naturally, in what commodity soever, and
what it may be made to yield by endeavor, and to send us notice home, that
therevppon we may devise what means may be thought of to raise trades.

Now admit that we might not be suffered by the savages to enjoy any whole
country or any more the^ the scope of a City, yet if we might enjoy
traffic and be assured of the same, we might be much enriched, our Navy
might be increased, and a place of safety might there be found, if change of
religion or civil wars should happen in this realm, which are things of
great benefit. But if we may enjoy any large Territory of apt soil, we might
so use the matter, as we should not depend upon Spain for oils, sacks,
resinges, orenges, lemons, Spanish skins, etc. Nor upon France for wood,
baysalt, and gascoyne wines, nor on Estlande for flax, pitch, tar, mastes,
etc. So we should not so exhaust our treasure, and so exceedingly inriche our
doubtful friends, as we do, but should purchasse the commodities that we
want for half the treasure that now we do: but should by our own industries
and the benefits of the soil there cheapely purches oils, wines, salt,
fruits, pitch, tar, flax, hemp, mastes, boordes, fish, gold, silver,
copper, tallowe, hides and many commodities: besides if there be no flates to
make salt on, if you have plenty of wood you may make it in sufficient
quantity for common uses at home there.

If you can keep a safe haven, although you have not the friendship of the
near neighbors, yet you may have traffic by sea upon one shore or other,
upon that firm in time to come, if not present.

If you find great plenty of timber on the shore side or upon any portable
river, you were best to cut down of the same the first winter, to be seasoned
for ships, barks, botes and houses.

And if near such wood there be any river or brook upon the which a sawing
mill may be placed, it would do great service, and therefore consideration
would be had of such place.

And if such port and chose^ place of settling were in possession and after
fortified by art, although by ye land side our Englismen were kept in, and
might not enjoy any traffic with the next neighbors, nor any vittel: yet
might they vittel themselves of fish to serve very necessity, and enter into
amity with the enemies of their next neighbors, and so have vent of their
merchandise of England and also have vittel, or by means hereupon to be used
to force the next neighbors to amity. And keeping a navy at the settling
place, they should find out along the tracte of the land to have traffic,
and at diverse Islands also. And so this first seat might in time become a
stapling place of the commodities of many countries and territories, and in
time this place might become of all the provinces round about the only
governor. And if the place first chose^ should not so well please our people,
as some other more lately found out: There might be an easy remove, and that
might be rased, or rather kept for others of our nation to avoid an ill
neighbor, etc.

If the soyles adjoining to such convenient haven and settling places be found
marshie and boggie, then men skilful in draining are to be carried thither. For
art may work wonderful effects therein, and make the soil rich for many
uses.

To plant upon an Island in the mouth of some notable river, or upon the
point of the land entering into the river, if no such Island be, were to great
end. For if such river were nauigable or portable far into the land, then
would arise great hope of planting in fertile soyles, and traffic on the one
or on the other side of the river, or on both, or the linking in amity with one
or other petie king conte^ding there for dominion.

Such rivers found, both barges and boats may be made for the safe passage
of such as shall perce ye same. These to be covered with doubles of course
linen artificially wrought, to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from
the rower.

Since every soil of the world by art may be made to yield things to feed
and to cloth man, bring in your return a perfect note of the soil without and
within, and we shall devise if need require to amend the same, and to draw it
to more perfection. And if you find not fruits in your planting place to your
liking, we shall in v. drifats furnish you with such kinds of plants to be carried
thither ye winter after your planting, as shall the very next summer following,
yield you some fruit, and the year next following, as much as shall suffice a
town as big as Callice, and that shortly after shall be able to yield you
great store of strong durable good sider to drink, and these trees shall be able
to increase you within less then vii. years as many trees presently to bear,
as may suffice the people of diverse parishes, which at the first settling may
stand you in great stead, if the soil have not the commodity of fruits of
goodness already. And because you ought greedily to hunt after things that
yield present relief, without trouble of carriage thither, therefore I make
mention of these, thus specially, to the end you may have it specially in
mind.

FINIS.
The names of certain commodities growing in part of America, not presently
inhabited by any Christians from Florida Northward, gathered out of the
discourses, of Verarzanus, Thorn, Cartier, Ribalt, Theuet, and best, which
have bin personally in those Countries, and have seen these things amongst
many others.
Beasts.
LLeopardes. Stagges. Hearts. Dear. Bears. Hares. Wildeswine. Connyes. White
bears. A beast far bigger then an ox. Wolves. Dogs. A kind of beast like
a Conny. Beuers. Marterns. Foxes. Bagers. Otters. Weesels. A beast called Su
being like a Bull.
Birds.
Hawks. Bitters. Curlewes. Herons. Woodcockes. Partridges. Small birds.
Plenty of foul for all pleasant game. Aporates. Blackbirdes. Cranes. Crows
like Cornish Thoughts. Duckes. Godetes. Geese. Pigions. Margaues. Feasants.
Swannes. Thrushes. Turtles. Fintches. Nightingales. etc.
Fishes.
Coddes. Salmons. Seals. Makerels. Tortoyses. Whales. Horsefishes. A fish like
a grayhound good meat. Lampreys. Crabbes. Crefishes. Lobsters. Eeles. The
rivers full of incredible store of all good fish.
Worms.
Silk worms fair and great.
Trees.
Bay. Cypres. Damson. Palm. Many trees yielding sweet savor. Oaks. Nut trees.
Fur. Vines. Cahent good against poison. Cedars. Hasell trees. Cheritrees.
Walnuttrees. Pepper trees. Ameda which heals many diseases.
Ash. Box. Cidron. Yewe. Elmes. Whitelmes. Pynes. Willowes.
Filbird trees better then ours. Whitehornes bearing a berrie as big as a
Damson. Vines bearing a great grape.
Fruits.
Cowcumbers. Cytrons. Raspis. Guordes. Mulberries. Almonds.
Apples. Damsons. Melons. Figs.
Reasons great and small. Musk melons. Orenges. Lemons. Dates very great.
Strawberries. Gooseberries red and white.
Gummes.
Rosen. Turpentine. Frankencense. Pitche. Tar. Honnie. Wax.

Spices and Drugges.
Pepper. Small spices like to vire. Reubarbe in Florida: diverse other kinds.
Herbs and flowers.
Many sorts of herbs differing from ours. Many simples like those of France.
Hemp. Pat^^ley. Roses. Read. White. Damask.

Grain and Pulse.
Corn like Ric. Oats. Peason. Myllet. Beans of diverse colors.
Another strange corn of good nourishment. Maiz.
Metalles.
Gold in good quantity. Silver. Coper. Lead. many (...) al matter.
Precious stones.
Turqueses. Rubies. Pearls great and fair. Precious stones of diverse colors.
Esurgni a stone much esteemed there. Kiph a kind of stone shining bright.
Other stones.
Marble very hard. Alabaster. Jasper. Freestone.
Quarries of glistring stones.
Colors.
Yelowe. Blewe. Read. Scarlet. Roane color.
Dear skins wrought like branched Damask. Hearts skins painted and died of
diverse colors Bags of red colors. A root called Auaty that they dye red
withal in Florida.
So as the commodities already known, besides many yet unknown are these,
and that in great quantity.
Flesh. Fish. Fruits. Grain.
Beueradges or drink of diverse sorts. Gold. Silver. Copper. Lead.
Pearls. Spices. Drugges. Furs. Feathers. Gummes. Oils.
Silk. Hides undressed. Beasts skins wrought like Damask. Lether died. Hearts
skins painted. Stones for fair building. Precious stones. Colors. All kind
of good wood.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Davvson.
1582.

GRadus 180. demercationis Portugalens^ a terri^ isto {timeperf-prolatimperf-x}
oppositis incipiunt, ac termina^t^r in gradus 160. huius cattae ve^lus
o^^e^t^m, s^^dum compota^^^ne^ H^panorum. Et sic insulae Thars^ and Ost^r
d^issi. maevidentur extra illorum demercationem cadeit. Portugalen^es vero ^^^m
elcuationem a terra isto signo oppositis incipere aiunt, and terminate in
gradus 180. hu^^s catte, vt videantur predictas insulas v^enque attingere, and
gradus 180. demercationis Hispanorum a prio^e signo {timeperf-prolatimperf-x}
secund^m Hispinorum coputationem Vel incipiunt a posteriore secundum
Portugalen^es verlus occ^^c^tem, and ^^^minator in gradus 160. secundum
Hispanos, vel 180. ^ecundum Portugalen^es ^t sic, l^ce^ ^^^ulae T^arsis and
Ophi^ videntur attingere Portugalense. tamen in^ule Capo verde dictae, quae
intra supradicta signa {timeperf-prolatimperf-x} cadunt, videtur omittere. Et
sic dum insulas Capoverde retinere volunt Portugalenses, illas Tharsis and
Offi^ non possunt attingere.

This is the form of a Map sent 1527. from Smill in Spain by master Robert
Thorn merchant, to Doctor Ley Ambassador for king Henry the 8. to Charles
the Emperor. And although the same in this present time may seem rude, yet I
have set it out, because his book could not well be understood without the
same. The imperfection of which Map may be excused by that time: the
knowledge of Cosmographie not then being entered among our Merchants, as now
it is.



ILLVSTRI VIRO, DOMINO PHILIPPO SIDNAEO MICHAEL LOK CIVIS LONDINENSIS HANC
CHARTAM DEDICABAT:. 1582.



