OF GOLDS KINGDOM, AND THIS VNhelping Age.

Described in sundry Poems intermixedly placed after certain other Poems of
more special respect:

And before the same is an Oration or speech intended to have been delivered by
the Author hereof unto the Kings Majesty.

Ipse licet venias Musis comitatus Homere,
Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.
Though Homer, thou do come thy self
with Muses waiting on thee,
Yet Homer, if thou nothing bring,
then Homer, God be with thee.
Animus virtutis studiosus ad^nuenit artem Carminum ad la^dandum bona: ad
vituperandum vero (...). Arist. De poet^^ lib. 1. THOU SHALL LABOR FOR


Imprinted at London (...)

A SPEECH INTENDED TO HAVE BEEN MADE UNTO THE KINGS MAJESTY, in the Town of
Windsore, but not spoken.
MOST Gracious and renowned King, if we your Highness subjects of this place,
be (for the present) to seek in what sort to applaud the incomparable blessing
of your royal presence: we are most humbly to beseech your Highness to impute
the same unto two causes: The one, the consideration we have of our own
imperfections, as the same are now to be exposed unto the censure of your
Princely perfections: The other, the abundance of our joy which has so
possessed every part of our thoughts, as that thereby we are unable to retain
in our speaking either Method or Decorum: For it cannot be told (most gracious
Sovereign) with what insatiable power of our minds we do embrace and
entertain this joyful time of your Majesty's personal repair into this
land, and now particularly to this your Town and Castle of Windsore: This
time I say, most brightsome and clear, not ouercast with any the least cloud
of either trouble present, or danger to come: For it may truly be said of your
Majesty (and that to the glory of God) as it was sometimes said of M^urici^^
the godly Roman Emperor: that true piety and felicity have so met together
in your royal person, as that true piety has forced felicity to be present at
a l your royal solemnizations whatsoever: And why? surely, because your
Majesty has not only covered your head with the Imperial Diadem, and
inverted your person with the Royal Ornaments of the Crown, but has also
adorned your mind with the inestimable Jewels of true Religion and Justice: But
what shall I say? Among all the inexplicable blessings which we are now by the
goodness of God to enjoy by your Majesty, there is one amongst the rest so
full of blessedness, as that it ouerreacheth the measure of common
comprehension to dilate it in speech: And what is that? Even the knitting
together of your two Kingdoms England and Scotland, which are now so closed in
one Harmony as well of Religion, as of their confining borders and agreeing
languages, as that (according to the saying of the Prophet) Bone is joined to
Bone, and Joint to Joint: Most gracious king, our most beloved Sovereign,
there is one thing that your Majesty may hold as an undoubted certainty: namely
this, that you are entered into your rule and reign over England, with as great
co^formity of hearts of English subjects as ever King or Queen within this
Realm. Long may your Highness live: Long may the Scepter sway in your
Princely hands: And unto the King of Kings we bow the knees of our hearts, that
he will vouchsafe to grant unto your Majesty a long, a peaceable, and renowned
Reign over us.

I will not take upon me to particularize unto your Majesty the Nature of
Englands government, but generally (under your Princely favor) this thereof
may be said that by the most ancient usage of England, the king has bin
accounted to be persona mixta, hoc est, vnita cum Sacerdotibus, aunswerable to
that of Homer and Aristotle: Suprema potestas antiquitus fuit regia and
Sacerdotalis. And for that that is holden thereof ciuilly at this day, it is
this: we say that our supreme power is principatus tam regalis quam politicus,
the one respecting times of war, and the other times of peace. And we say
also that principatus regalis and politicus paris sunt potentiae, sed
principatus regalis difficilioris est exercit^ and (...) securitatis. But of
this as also of the Equity of your Majesty's Common laws o^ Engl^^d, and ^o o^
the Equity of your ^ig^ Court of Chauncery with their differences, and
therewithal also of Equity in general as the same is to be used in every
humane law, I your Majesty's most humble subject, a professor of those Common
laws some certain years past did employ my labors in writing a plain and
open Treatise thereof in English, whichbe ing here contained in this written
Volume, if it might This book herein mentioned, the Author has delivered to
the Kings Majesty, but not by way of dedication.
stand with your Princely pleasure to vouchsafe your reading of it, I make no
doubt but that your Majesty will find sundry things therein not impertinent,
no nor yet unnecessary for your Princely perusing: The simplicity of the
handling always excepted, for the which I must and do most humbly beseech your
Majesty's gracious pardon.

After this, there should have followed some private and particular matters on
the behalf of the said Town.

TO THE RIGHT WOR'SHIPFVLL HIS very kind and courteous friend Edward Uaughan
Esquire, Deputy Officer of the Office of the Pipe of the Kings Majesty's
Eschequer.
GOOD Sir, my occasions staying me so long in London this last vacation, as
that according to the bill of Certificat there died above 19 hundredth of the
Plague in one week: Although I then thought it not fit to employ that time in
any serious Study, yet I was vn^^lling to pass it wholly over without some
exercise of my Pen. Whereupon resorting to a few odd trifles which I had
penned about a year or two since, I added every day for diverse days
together sundry others unto them. And causing my man to write them out after
me, in the end I found the whole thereof to arise unto a proportion of a little
Book: which (thus written as it is) I send unto you, as a token of my assured
goodwill, being ready from time to time to express the same by better means
as I shall be enabled thereunto. And whereas in one or two places of the book
I have made mention of outrageous fees, let that light where it will: As for
you, you are known to be a giver of fees: But an extreme exacter of fees I am
persuaded in my heart you never were, nor ever will be. And so with my best
wishing unto you, I cease: This First of January 16^^.

Your true and hearty welwiller, E. Hake.

The Authors Prologue to such of his Poems in this book as concern Golds
Kingdom.
ALthough that Gold can closely creep
where the air could never come,
And cause that vice and virtue be
of equal poise with some,
Yet noble and true gentle minds
with Gold will not be won,
To do the thing that is unjust
or leave good things undone.
A proof hereof me self have seen
in one that noble is,
And holds place of high respect
as he well worthy is:
A poor man with Petition
annexed to his case
To him repaires, not having help
of any friend in place:
Which when he had exhibited,
although that noble man
Had great employments of the State
yet mark what followd than:
Not full two days expyrd, before
the poor man did receive
An Answer to his full content,
And thence did take his leave,
Not rendering gifts to any one
nor Secretaries fees,
But hasting home unto his Hiue,
rejoiced with his Bees.
A year thence after, troubles came
about that passed gift,
As that some sought to frustrate it
by friends or fained shift.
The poor man for his help again
prefers his complaint,
And by his only writing does
that Lord therewith acquaint,
Himself unable through disease
in person to be seen.
This noble man, as if the case
had then like present been,
What he had passed erst before,
Confirms with greater force:
Right noble surely was this deed
and full of true remorse.
Yea, as before, no penny went
out of the poor man's purse,
So now again, no penny he
to any did disburse.
Patron to pupils is that Lord,
(so does his office lie)
Amongst whose virtuous deeds this one,
the poor man's case did try.
And since that I an Actor was
to pen that poor man's case,
I therefore write it as a note
of virtue in that place.
The rather, for because this Age
vnhelping is, and why?
Few men will help in cases where
they see no profit lie.
So that to speak what I conceive,
I fear, no Gold, no Good,
No, not perhaps for such as have
adventured their blood.
And for the man at home, who has
of good deserving been,
Nor works nor worth can him advance
if Gold come not between:
For now, as good to beat the air
as fill the ears of some
Who Suits prefer: Nay, fill their hands,
else look to find them Mum.
Yet write I not with mind to touch
men of superior place:
Nor do I know particulers
that any should deface.
Many complain and many cry:
God knows where the fault does lie.
HVMBLE PETITIONS OF GOOD SVBIECTS TO THEIR GOOD KING against the Parliament.
Confirm Religion as the Ark of God:
Preserve the places where the same shall rest:
Then laws for life, and manners as the Rod,
Wherewith offense of Sin must be suppressed,
So shall the land assuredly be blessed.
But fiery Spirits are not for that charge,
Nor such as seek their profits to enlarge.
Next, for the Commonwealth (as is begun)
Take off oppressions from the Subjects back,
And to the Commons do not always run
For every thing that Commonwealth does lack,
For so poor Subjects still shall go to wrack,
And yet must Subjects Caesar's duties pay:
No faithful Subject will thereof say nay.
As for the Lawyers faults and griefs thereby,
The peoples plaints suffice to make them known,
And how huge monstrous fees on Suitors lie,
Which Officers and Clerks claim as their own:
But if you ask quo iure they are grown,
The man (say they) must sell who first did buy:
A case to be redrest as cause shall lie.
In brief, the sores and sicknesses that are
In Englands state, which grieved men will show
In Parliament, will move the Princes care
To find the fountains whence the same do flow,
And fountains found, to purge them all arow.
The God of heaven preserve our blessed King,
That he to Church and Realm true peace may bring.
Astra Deo nil maius habent, Nil Caesare Terra:
Sic Caesar Terras, vt Deus Astra regat.
The Subjects love is the riches and safety of the King.
IT is recorded in this wise:
At Worms aGermaine Town,
When all the Princes there were met
And all were sitten down
To talk of matters of the State
At length they took in hand,
Each one to praise and to extol
The goodness of his land.
Baua^ia Dukes their Cities praysde,
The Saxons praysd their Mines,
Duke Palatine his fertile Soyles
And fatness of his vines.
Duke Eberard of Wittenberg,
Who likewise was in place,
And silent sat by Frederick,
Who had the Sovereign grace.
As Saxon Duke required was
To tell his Countries praise:
And he obeying modestly,
(As loath himself to raise)
My Lords (said he) it is nothing that
By me can be declarde,
Who^am the lowest in this place
And might full well be sparde:
Nathlesse this one thing do I know,
And knowing, do protest
That I in any Subjects lap
Of mine can take my rest,
Although in open fields from prease:
Whereby our mutual louesincrease.
A notable example of integrity in a King, between himself and his Subjects.
LEwis King of France was accustomed to sit iudicially Io. Manlius de
Magistrat^ page 593.
in the hearing of his own causes: And if he found any to flatter him therein,
and to say his cause was good: Let us hear the same (said he) whether Justice,
or your benevolence has swayed most therein: And oftentimes when he found
their Sentence to be with him, he would pronounce the contrary, and would
bitterly chide those who had attributed too much to his side.

Another notable example of integrity in a Prince.
Frederick Duke of Saxony had certain woods 10. Manlius de Magistratu page
592.
near adjoining unto Wittenberg, which had been sometimes purchased by his
progenitors. Anhaldine mother of those Princes of that name, who then lived
(being wise and a good Oeconomist) required those woods to be restored unto
her, because they had been at the first but mortgaged. The Duke although it was
very hard for him to depart with the woods, insomuch as he had rather have
given more money for them, then to have forgone them (in respect that the price
of woods did then daily increase) yet he would by no means vex or disquiet
that most honest Matron, or hold her long in suspense: And therefore albeit he
had counsel and pretextes propounded unto him, how by a show of right he might
retain them, yet he would by no means burden his conscience, by admitting of
any of the said pretextes for the retaining of them: and such was his
integrity, as that he willingly restored the same to the house of the
Anhaldi^es.

And has not James our Englands King
Showed forth like Princely mind,
Who farms of fines and forfeitures,
Which Subjects backs did grind,
With Monopolyes, lycences
And privileges large,
Whereby he might have been enricht
(Though to his Subjects charge)
Has royally released from
His English Subjects backs,
Not minding to enrich himself
By his poor Subjects wrackes?
What good so great has erst been done,
As by King James is now begun.
A Case of Difficulty in the Royal Administration.
GReat Difficulty may be found in this
Unto the Prince, where Subjects do complain
Of any that in office does amiss,
As that percase he should some wrong maintain:
For as the Prince is bound to aid the right,
Without respect of any Subjects might,
So, meet it is that where he gives power,
He should support the same, and still uphold
Th'authorized, for why? Else every hour
Th'vprightest men, and men of purest molde
Might be traduced, and besides, his Grace
Would be surchargd with plaints in every place.
Then what to write, or speak in such a case,
Few men can tell, but fewer will (I fear)
The Inferior once offended, will deface
Superiors, and such as office bear:
Again, the mighty they are full of friends,
And as friends be, so often the matter ends.
Put case the King upon complaint preferred
Against the mighty, by the lower sort,
Of his great grace should cause to be referd
The in-sight of such plaints to men of Port:
Say that the mighty with the mighty hold, Re^erments of cau^^s dangerous.

So that to aid the poor none durst be bold.
What should then here be done, can any tell?
The Inferior he goes down. But is that all?
No, no, he is blamde because he durst to mell
With such as on the earth men Gods do call.
O case of cases to be seen into,
Which does concern the Prince what he should do.
And since a wiser Prince this land nere had,
Nor better bent to hear the poor man's cry,
What needs my pen thus move a case so sad?
His Highness knows where all the help does lie:
For least the matter should so go awry,
His grace himself must help, or else perhaps
The poor Complainant shall feel after claps.
James the fifth of that name King of Scotland, Graund-father to our most
gracious King, was called the Poor man's King.

The unfortunate Courtier.
TWo Courtiers living long at Court,
The one of good desert,
The other meanly meriting,
Yet (vt fortuna fert)
The meaner had the better luck,
By th'emprour well aduanst,
Which to the other brought great grief:
But mark ye how it chanst,
The noble S^gismundus he
(So was the Emperor named)
Informed of this matter, and
How he was only blamed,
As not to bear an equal hand
In giving of reward,
Advised himself thereof, and with
A Princely due regard
For answering of the matter, did
Resolve upon this course:
Two ch^sts he filled, the one with gold,
The other, stones or worse.
And calling for the Courtier which
Had found himself so grieved,
Declared unto him that now
His case might be relieved.
If Fortune were not in the fault:
Choose here (said he) of two,
A chist of gold, or one of stones,
And think well what to do,
For I Will be hence forth quite of blame,
(The fault thou say is mine)
And if thou choose the stones, then say
The fault is rather thine,
Or if not thine, yet Fortunes fault:
And who can that redress?
The Courtier chose, and chose the stones:
(Alas, unluckiness.)
But shall I say my mind herein?
Good Kings will have respect,
Whom they advance, whom they reward,
And whom they do reject.
For why? All Is one to raise the ill,
And not to help the honest still.
Three things very grievous to good minds.
THree things there are that breed much grief,
And discontent of mind:
The worlds mishaps, untrust of friends,
The third, that Gold does bind,
Nay bind and loose, though not with all,
yet greatly with the most:
And for the first of these three things,
what man on earth can boast
That he has past his days in peace,
not crossed with worlds missehap?
Not one I think, though best men most
do taste of sorrows sap.
The King has cares to cross his joys,
home strises to cross his peace,
And traytrous hearts conspire his hurts,
while Subjects loves increase.
If pleasures for his health he take,
what interruptions are
Unto his pleasures and disportes
by suites, that breed his care
In causes of his Subjects states,
perhaps their lives and lands:
The strong does still oppress the weak,
the help's in Princes hands.
Yea day by day occasions rise
of common wealths redress,
And day by day abuses grow,
which Princes should suppress.
And yet if Princes should not have
their pleasures and delight.
Alas, alas, what were their case?
of all men worst in sight:
Only the King that fears God,
and seeks to spread his praise
Shall have his seat and State securde,
his soul shall see good days.
Then if the King in this worlds course,
where all men him obey,
Finds worlds unrest, of lower States
how firm can be the stay?
Next for the faith and trust of friends,
where is the friend whose faith
As well in hard as happy state
in friendship firmly stayth?
Swallows men are, whose Summers glee
retains in friendships band,
And Winters woes drive clean away:
So does men's friendship stand.
Examples here of infinite
the world does daily show,
And how men's loves are wrongly placed
and from wrong causes grow:
For were true virtue their loves cause,
then what could it remove?
No, no, it is gain, or vain respect,
that most where causes love:
The rich holds friendship with the rich,
the lecher with his like,
And pot companions with their mates
great league of friendship strike.
Blind Zeal also to maintain Sects,
and to impugn the truth,
Does lincke it self in friendships bands:
but what thereof ensu^th?
Disturbance of the Churches peace,
contempt of King and law,
And all that with such friends is found,
is only to withdraw
From uniform consent of faith,
and from true serving God:
O, out, alas, what love i^ this?
Such league from love is od.
The third and last is sway of Gold,
which so still hinders all
That to the well deserving man
should for his Guerdon fall,
As that no gifts of learning, nor
of skill which in him are,
Can do him good, because perhaps
his state is something bare.
Fair speech and sugared words are ri^e,
but if thy state be poor,
While others prease and come in place,
look thou to stand at door.
I^t office that thou seek friend?
why offices are bought:
An Office is a Nemo scit,
and should it come for naught?
But be it small or great that thou
do labor to obtain:
Assure thy self that i^ there be
therein a sent of gain,
Though nere so small, and yet perhaps
the matter full of toil,
Unless with gifts thou get thee friends,
be sure to catch the foil:
For if thou stand upon desert,
thou may put up thy pipes:
There is a fellow calde Giffe Gaffe,
that in such cases gripes.
And so we see that Gold and gifts
In suites must do the deed,
And how that no man for desert
of any thing can speed.
Audacious, proud, and flattering mates
I grant you may do much;
And many things of good respect
are often bestowd on such.
Again, we see that some there are,
who willingly are led
By men of slender gifts: And why?
because by them are fed
The humors whereunto they be
inclined, and most what
For that they please them with delights,
and servile are to that.
And sooner will they give to those,
Then unto men of price.
If such one ask, he straight way speedes,
and has it with a trice.
But if I should run over all
that might be said in this,
How Gold has Sovereign power in suits,
and chief effecter is
Of men's desires, and that desert
(as of it self) shall fail,
I might employ much speech therein,
And little should prevail:
For howsoever men of place
and honor are enclinde
To further and promote a man
that is of honest mind,
Yet are the means so difficult
that must be made to such,
And favorites so many that
therein does look for much,
As that a man far better were
to live with bread and grew,
Then with a thrid-bare purse to seek
or for pre^erment sew.
And so I end my doleful song
of threefold grief and pain,
As worlds unrest, next, friends untrust,
the third, that all is for gain.
Of true Nobility.
OF true Nobility do we enquire?
It Is that that does excel the common sort
In virtuous Acts whereto it does aspire,
And shows it self abroad with noble port:
For noble port must show the noble State,
It fits not Noble minds to be at common rate.
But what for that? does Noble therefore wrong?
Does he oppress or seek a common hurt,
Whereby to raise himself or make him strong?
No fie, the Noble reckons that as dirt:
For as the world is cheered by the Sun,
So from true Noble comforts dailyrunne.
Does Countries service call the Noble forth?
Most what he is prepared for the same,
For that is a mean to show his noble worth:
And that accomplished wins him noble fame.
To God, to King, and Country is he chargde
To see the Honor of them all enlargde.
Is noble near the King? who else should be?
Then nobly does he service to his Grace,
As both his honor and his safety to foresee,
For which his eyes are open in each place,
Detracting none that are of good desert,
But helping all out of a noble heart:
And chiefly unto suitors does he show
A noble affability, and why?
Because from Prince, as from a spring does flow
The Subjects help, which helples else might lie:
Then if this Noble keep poor suitors back,
Vnnobly does he cause poor suitors wrack,
And to proceed, does he in Country dwell?
No party factions does he there support,
Much less, prepares plots how to rebel,
Nor graceth any of suspected sort.
But honors law, and Judges does assist,
And makes not law to serve him as he list.
To the most reverend and right Honorable, the Primate of all England.
TRue Pattern of piety, with true hearts good will
My pen does presume to speak of thy grace
Whose virtues and goodness right well do fulfill
The honor and greatness that is in thy place,
Gladness of conscience may thee embrace,
Whose zeal has been peaceful with censures discreet,
Whose life has been blameless with doctrine to meet.
Pride sitting below thee in envious chair,
Does swell at thy greatness, yet feign would be great:
And Momus the wretch that all would impair,
His head about mischief and malice does beat,
But care of the truth shall stablish thy seat.
Thus vertuesregard has employed my pen,
Not Moneys reward, nor pleasing of men.
The Judge must be truths Patron.
THe Judge that sits on the bench
to judge of wrong and right,
Should have the high Tribunal seat
prefigur'd in his sight,
Least that the Lawyer with his skill
and argument preparde
Well sounding to the sense of man,
and subtly declarde
Should have the hap to harbor in
his well entending breast,
Where naught but truth, and truths defense
for evermore should rest.
For this is sure, that some there are
in this our learned age,
Whose force is great with witto win
the judgment of the sage:
Then ought this rule be always held
in all judicial things,
That neither Art, nor laws dispute
which learned Lawyer brings,
Do draw a present judgment on
in question of the law:
For sudden judgments of tentimes
may from the truth withdraw.
And (Lord) how grievous were the case,
if goods were l^st, or lands
Upon a point of lawe^ dispute
which argumentiue stands,
Without well ripping up the same
with due and deep regard,
Foreseeing that the Princes case
in judgment be not sparde?
As (for the purpose) were it thus:
A Statute law there is
Of Chauntries (so entitled)
whereon the case be this:
A man gives lands to one by Will,
he finding evermore
A yearly Obite for the souls
of some deceast before,
And paying for that Obites charge
a certain yearly sum,
And for default thereof a pain
out of those lands to come.
Admitting also that the lands
of greater value ar,
Besides Reprises of the same
then th'Obites charges far,
Then say those lands are claymed for
the King in this degree,
As that the use thereof by law
should superstitious ^e:
Although I take not on me to
affirm how it should go,
Yet this I say, that if such case
should into question gro,
For that the wait thereof perhaps I have heard of such a case in que^^ion at
this day, and that it is of no less importance to the subject the defendant
then is here mentioned.

unto the subject may
Be such as that those lands in suit
are his all only stay:
And eke for that the Lawyers s^ill
in case of Laws dispute,
Is leuelled to win the cause
and to obtain the suit
Upon the side he is retaind,
and not to bend the same
For Rights defense (for so perdy
his Client might him blame)
What need then has this case of (...)
of Judges holy aid,
As by the which full often and often
the Right had need be swaid?
For howsoever counsel urge
the matter for the king,
The Judge has his respect to Right
as to the chiefest thing.
And as for Coplatiues and Disiunctiues
in Wills, why should they sway?
For as the Sun shines not by night
as it does by the day:
So men in sickness have not sense
as in their health they have:
Sun setting brings darkness, and
sense fails at the grave.
Again, should points or periods
destroy a Subjects state?
The King himself seeks no man's land
as such an easy rate.
Especially, if there have bi^
like cases formerly
Adi^dgde for Subjects: but for that
Let Law such matters try:
My speech is not to prejudice
The Judgments of the Grave:
I, as a mean Professor speak
The knowledge that I have,
Submitting all that I have said
Concerning point of Law
To such, as from whose learned Breasts
My learning I must draw.
For were the foresaid case mine own,
My minds resolve should be
To take in worth what ere fell out,
Wer'^ good or ill for me,
And to return where I began:
The Judge that has Gods Seat,
Protects the Right while Lawyers heads
Upon preuailings beat.
I honor Judges from my heart,
And love all Lawyers of desert,
A Caveat to peremptory speaking Lawyers.
ANd do thou speak (friend Faber) for thy fee?
Speak not with mind to bear the matter down:
Think not that Law should come from none but thee,
For many a one that wears a thridbare gown,
Although his gift be not in speaking well,
Yet may his judgment many times excel.
To Astilius Regius the learned and highly employed Lawyer.
SVch gifts of skill as few men apprehend,
Must needs be great to dignifie the man,
To whom it pleases God such gifts to lend,
Though but one gift: If so, what say we the^
Where sundry gifts of equal great degree
In one self person well conjoined be?
Laws knowledge of it self withouten more
Has made some great, yet not without desert.
And has it so? what say we then to store
Of Laws great skill, and depth of learned Art?
I say that he in whom such gifts are ^ound,
Is great by Right upon true Reasons ground:
Such one are you: O still, then still abound in righteousness.
Of the most commendable and honorable government of the City of London, in
the late times of the sickness and decease of the most gracious and renowned
Queen Elizabeth.
Fear, horror, trembling, and dismay of heart
Were each where seen upon reports that went
That our late Queen lay sick. O dreadful smart
Redoubled still as new reports were sent.
Most men to flit and change their soiles were bent,
But where to seat or where to be secure,
Alas, alas, no casting could procure.
The vpland man, thought safest in the Town,
The towns man thought him best that was at large,
And he that erst sat warm in long furd gown,
Could well have brook^ the steering of a barge,
Not one of other then would take the charge,
But each suspecting other, all dismayed,
Not for defense, but for destruction stayed.
O London then (to thy still lasting same)
So prudently thy Government was set,
As that how ever news then went and came,
Naught could thy grave foresight or compass let
Wisdom and courage so in thee were met,
As that the Peaceful had his quiet rest,
And few men fe^rd that they should be oppressed.
No troops by day nor lurkings in the night
Could gather head, but straight they were descryde:
Each officer so held his course aright,
As that no doubtful person durst abide.
And for the care that was at waterside,
It was to all great joy to understand
What rules were there for setting men on land.
In fine, when certainty of death was known
Of her our Queen, did hurly burly rise?
No none at all: A bud then straight way blown
On self same Stalk did London well suffice
To measure all things with an upright Size.
The keys were kept for him who did succeed,
And naught was heard that discrepance might breed.
Then I as one partaker of that Good,
Who with my wife and family did stay
Within the City where I understood
Th'occurrents of those times and Cities sway,
Found cause of sweet content whereas I lay,
Observing there the orders of that place,
Which with my heart I highly did embrace.
No gold no goodness.
O Gold that go in and out,
That rul'st and raignest at thy will,
O thou that bring things about,
Why art thou absent from us still?
But O our God, O where art thou
That suffrest Gold to conquer now?
You earthly men who unto men
Naught give where you can nothing take,
I speak to you, regard me then,
Your Gold and Goods your God you make:
For whereas Gold is, you are won,
But where Gold is not, you have done.
Be honest, learned, skillful, wise,
Be what thou can, if Gold thou want,
Thou may lie still, thou shall not rise,
For nothing proves where Gold is skant:
For Gold it is that does the dead,
But nothing prospers where is need.
What, shall I then lie down and die?
Alas I cannot when I would:
Or shall I sit me down and cry
And with my tears my grief unfold?
Lament and cry, do what thou will,
Thy cause is lost for lack of Gilt.
Yet say I not that all men look
To be rewarded for their deed:
But this I say, that few men brook
To help a man that is in need:
For though he write with Homers i^ke,
Yet go he shall before he drink.
The same of this vnhelpping Age.
WHere is the man on whom thou may depend
To work thy good or to assist thee so,
As by his help thou may thy state am^nd,
(Though by thy own desert?) Not one I tr^.
In words they will give thee (yea) In deeds still (No)
My self have had the proof with men of choice,
Who wished me ever well, but all in voice:
For when it came to proof, to write or speak
In matters which themselves thought good and right,
Good Lord, how were those friends of mine grown weak
And how small joy took they of me the sight?
If twere a matter for me to endite,
I could report hereof a tedious Tale
And yet the moral might be worth the sale:
But this (in sum) I say and make it known,
That if my case require more help then view,
Except I give, or can, I look for none:
For if thou stand upon desert, Adieu:
Mark well my speech, for thou shall find it true,
This age affoordeth naught but words and wind,
The rich shall be preferred, The poor shall stay behind.
The same complaining of his want of friends.
Waking in my bed I wept
And silently complaind,
The cares that (...) crept
All hope of sleep restraind,
I called (...) my hap,
I cried on my chance,
Will none stand in the gap?
Will none my state advance?
My woe that never ends,
My w^nt that never dies,
My state that never mends,
My soul that ever cries,
All these are but the loome
That warpeth up my death,
All these presage my doom,
The loss of later breath.
But is there not a Joy
That worldly Joy excels,
That helps all annoy
And worldly woe expels?
There is no doubt, God grant it me
So shall those woes extinguished be.
Droupe and die, Look up and live.
BE drouping N. and die my (...) friend:
For who regards him whose joys do end:
Look up and live, make show of greatest store:
If little thou possess, make show of more:
Be modest, simple, bashful in thy deed,
Assure thy self of nothing thou shall speed:
But stout va^^t parler stirring in the State
Will have his passage through a Princely Gate.
Answer.
Ah God my God, and must it needs be thus?
Will nothing come by plain and simple course?
Must Nature change her self and loose her I^s?
Must humble mind be proud? Nay (which is worse)
Must virtue servile be to stalcke upon the Stage?
Ah Lord my God, how grievous is this Age?
I Will never live to make such fained shows:
I Will rather live where peace of Conscience grows.
Natura pauca, opinio mult^ requiri^.
Trust to thy self and not to thy friends nor kinsfolks.
THe mother L^rk^ that ^^^sted on the ground
With all her Brats her little birds about her,
Abroad she flew where victuals might be ^ound,
But ere she went, because she aid misdoubt her
That in her absence some thing might be said
For cutting down the C^rne wherein she stayed,
She therefore thus ga^ speak unto them all,
My birds (quoth she) this crop does ripe apace
And in mine eye does for the reapers call,
Who when they come will you and me displace,
And more then that, our lives will they invade
Unless in time (...) seek some other glade:
And yet to leave (...) soil before we need,
Full (...) I am: my mind therefore is this,
That when you hear the owner come, take heed
What words he speaks and what appointed is
For felling of this field, the time and manner how,
Looks well (...), and so I lea^e you now.
No sooner go^^, but comes the Farmer thither,
And thus he spoke aloud unto his man:
Sirrah (said he) you see this goodly weather
Get reapers go, with all the speed you can.
I t^ow my neighbors will not say me nay:
Request them all and tell me what they say:
The self same night when mother Lark came in,
The silly birds with low and fearful voice
Related all: Tust, tush (quoth she) a pin,
If master Farmer make no better choice
Then neighbors help, this field will not go down,
Neighbors will help themselves throughout the Town.
Next morning when she was to go again,
The like precept and charge she left behind:
At noone the owner came, but all in vain,
His neigbours Sycles no where could he find.
All cha^ing then, he called unto his man
Who said that they would come, but knew not when.
Well well (quoth she) I Will trust no Neighbors aid,
Go now to such my Cosins and my Kin:
I know with them this matter will be waide:
And here to morrow let them all begin.
This fearful Summons when the Dam returned,
The little Larkes declard, and then they mournd.
Not this (quoth she) as yet shall make us fly:
Will kinsfolks help? No no the'yle help themselves,
And therefore yet a while here will we lie.
Cease therefore cease your moan you whi^pring el^^s
And mark to morrow when he comes again
What ^e gives forth and how ^e does complain.
The morrow came, and (as he did before)
The owner of the field returned, and finding none
About the Corn, Lord how he swet and swore
For being told of kins excuse, and how each one
Was faint and cold and stood^ upon delay,
He ^^^de and fretted, and in fi^e did say.
That he no longer neighbors, ki^red, nor
Ought sa^^ himself thenceforth would trust unto:
And therefore now (quoth he) to cure this d^r,
Do thou therein as I shall bid thee do:
To morrow morning call my men together
And with their Harnest weapons bring them hither.
Those news at night when Beldam came to neast,
The birds did tell as they had done before:
Yea now (quoth she) this matter is increast,
For after this, delays must be no more:
This night with speed we must go change our seat
And so she did with pains and travel great.
And now to show the moral of this tale,
As Lark that neasted in another ground,
Not fenst about with hedge, nor ditch nor pale
Did yet abide a twice most doleful sound
Of kin and neighbors coming to the place,
But when she saw that altered was the case,
As that the Owner of the field would come,
Or send his servants on the morrow day,
Then thought she ti^e to leave that borrowd room
And with her young ones thence to pack away:
Such is the case of all men that do lay
Their hope of help in kindred or in friend,
For such a one lies helples in the and.
The dolorous man being still crossed in his estate bewaileth his mishaps.
DRooping and dying in depth of despair,
Wasted and wearied with sorrow and smart,
Pinched and pained in penc^full chair,
Yet dare not discover the thoughts of my heart.
To keep them or show them brings grief alike to me,
To keep or to show them alike does undo me.
O days full of dolor, O nights of unrest,
O times full of trouble, O seasons unkind,
If ought could be added, or ought be decreast,
Then might th^^^ be hope some comfort to find:
But resolute Ruin still standing at door,
Death cannot have entrance nor life be secure.
O God if thou do it to punish my Sin,
I am thy poor servant, the work of thy hand:
All frail and unstable without and within,
Unable without thee one hour to stand,
But since thou have promised to help where is need,
Lord, keep thou thy promise, and help me with speed.
Thou know what I lack, thou know what I ail^,
O Father of mercy, O Fountain of Grace,
Since none that has sought thee, did ever yet fail^,
Lord, let not me only be thrust out of place:
But look thou on me as thou look on all,
And help thy poor Servant that lies in thrall.
Igraunt, of my merits I may be ashamed:
Not mercy but judgment does fit my des^ri
My life has been loose, my thoughts all untamed,
And what so was holy, that did I pervert,
Not therefore for me, but for thy name sake
Vouchsafe me thy mercy my sorrow to slake.
Of dissembling friends.
WEll spoke that chosen of the Lord
Who viewing friends by proose,
Compared those that in our woes
and sorrows stand aloof,
To water brooks, whose moisture Heat
in Summer dryes to naught
And winters Frost likewise suckes up
When help thereosis sought.
Contrariwise, in time of Rain
When each small pit is full,
Then flow they fast and send forth store
each hollow gappe to gull.
A careful Debtor.
I Live in debt, yet l^ue not to do so,
I pay no debt, but not because I would not:
It Is debts disease that breeds all my woe,
It kills my heart (alas) because I could not.
But hence I go to seek some change of soil
Whereby to pay my debt with bodies toil.
Of one near dead through thought.
THought is a secret that does kill
And with the dead it self does die
As with his ruin Sampson fill
Himself and all with him perdie,
And is not my poor case much nigh,
Near dead through Thought both Thought and I?
I Thought no Thought could have preuaild
Against my cheerful mind,
But cross with cross has so assaild,
That now not so I find:
For Thought is come and joy is gone,
The body pines and death draws on.
The liberal man's Expostulation with Gold.
WEre my desire to hoerd thee in my chist,
Or wished I thee to feed my lustful paunch,
Or that by thee I might do what I list,
And into seas of banefull pleasures launch,
Or were my mind to lash thee out in law,
By brabling suites which all good things withdraw:
Then had thou (Gold) good cause to shun my sight,
And keep thy presence from my longing eye:
But since in seeking thee my Thoughts go right,
Why should thou then disdain my Thoughts to try?
Believe me as thou list, this is my mind:
If thou make choice of me, the poor shall find
Not penny help, or slender alms at door,
But pounds of aid, if need shall so require:
A full relief I Will give unto the poor.
My needy friend shall have his hearts desire,
And every case that helpless lies for Gold
Shall have my sure support as power can hold.
To Booke-men wanting means, both hands shall give:
The unprovided Preacher sound of life
Shall find how far my zeal my purse can drive,
But not to nourish Sects, or maintain strife.
In sum, what good so'ere thou Gold can do,
My hand shall not withhold my help thereto:
But here I cease, least thou should think I woo thee with my words.
The Golden Swaggerer.
Crowns, Crowns, cries Swaggerer: Then healthes are had
Of soundest liquor that those Crowns can find,
It boots not then to tell him he is mad.
His heads chiese care is how himself to blind,
Great suppers then so soon as he has dinde:
And late at night new banquets are preparde,
So rundell-wise his Crowns he does discarde,
Not to advance his state perdy: But how
To glut himself with pleasures long desirde.
He sowes no seed, though deep he sets his Plow,
But down he sinkes until his feet be mirde,
And fast he sticks when he should be retirde:
Then Gold, what goodness have thou done hereby
To make him now cry Crux, who Crowns did cry?
To all Worthy and well deserving Soldiers.
TRue Martial men despair not in the times:
Nobility of you must have a care.
Live still untouched of infamy and crimes,
And high Iehoue will help you where you are.
Are you the men who never yet would spare
Nor life, nor lim, for Prince and Countries good?
You are the men, the men whose loss of blood
With wounds and skars does still on you appear
Though clothed and covered with your best array:
But is that all? no, this besides I hear
That what remains of life or lim, you say,
You are content to spend it any way
At Princes pleasure, speak he but the word.
Ah good sweet hearts, what more can breath afford?
Write down your names, your services write down,
And say that you deuoutely do remain
Pressed for the field, and to forsake the Town,
If new employments call you forth again.
That being done, then with the same retain
Some one that is true Noble for your aid,
Upon whose mediation all be laid:
But let him be like her who sometimes said
Non ignara Mali, miseris succurrere disco
So help will come from service or from fisco
Though wit be the woer, Yet gold is the speeder.
Fre Fibbus, fie, now fie upon thee fool,
What meaning have thou by thy wooing so?
Think thou to speed with that thou broughtst from school,
Or that by Art thou can her over go?
If thou say yea, assure thee i will say no.
She hears thee speak, but when thy tale is told,
She Will give thee love as thou can give her gold,
Except that flesh for flesh may hap be sold, Then lock to that.
A Sale of Sin.
BVm-braka Lady of the slimie Snailes,
Out skowting still, does seek where she can win,
Then in she draws her booty by the tails,
And puts foul flesh to flesh in filthy sin:
Yet gilt she will have before they do begin:
O damned creature clapped in Satan's hold,
Who damnes her self and many mo for gold if Grace come not between.
A Memorial of the worthy and Right Worshipful Gentleman, Richard Louelace,
late of Hurley, in the County of Berke, Esquire, Liefetenant of the Castle and
Forest of Windsor.
Some live, who never loving were
to kiss nor yet to kin,
But Louelace he by loving all
unloving hearts did win.
I speak of that that I well know,
who knew him to his end:
His Country did not bear a man
more loving to his friend.
What, to his friend? yea poor as rich
according to his power
His Town of Hurley, where he dwelt
affirms it to this hour.
His Town of Hurley where he cold
endure the poor to dwell.
What dwell? yea oftentimes rent-free
the Country knows it well.
And more then that, for having woods
and wastes that spacious were,
He could abide the poorer sort
to plant them dwelling there:
Not for enlarging of his rentes
(a thing far from his mind)
And yet unto those Cotagers
be land ofttimes assignde.
And as unto his friends and poor
he thus expressed his love,
So for his servants, wife, nor child
could him from them remove:
For when his Copy-holds came void
he struck not up the drum,
Nor gave them to his children, as
I know is used by sum.
But as they fell into his hands,
he gave them to his men:
My self have made them Copies often,
was he not loving then?
What should I say? A firmer man
in kindness then was he
I have not known, nor at this day
a firmer man can see.
And what I write thus in his praise,
I write not for reward,
But to the end that other of
his sort might have regard
To sample out their deeds by his
in gentlemanly love,
Which though it bring no profit here
shall breed them gain above:
For they must dye, as he is dead,
Though near so high they bear their head.
Quid sumus (O miseri) nisi puluis motus ab aura,
Et fragili vitro similes, vmbraeque fugaci?
What are we (O wretches) by nature and kind,
But ashes and dust blown about with the wind?
And sampled by semblance, much like brittle glass,
And like to the shadow that swiftly does pass?
Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi gloria coeli,
Et dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Thy death, Christ's death, the worlds deceit,
with hels infernal pain,
And glory of the heavens above
let thy deep thoughts retain.
Viue diu, sed viue Deo, nam viuere Mundo,
Mortis opus, viua est viuere vita Deo.
Live long, but live unto the Lord,
for to the world to live
Is dying life, but life to God
a living life does give.
Quod sibi quisque serit praesentis tempore vitae,
Hoc sibi messis erit, cum dicitur, ite, venite.
What each one sows to himself
While he on earth is living here,
That shall he reap, when it is said,
You had be gone, you good come near.
Heu viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Et velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Men live (alas) as though they should not dye,
And even as though hell fire were a lie.
To a foul and common swearer.
Thou swear'st (vile man) as though thou were to pay
A sum of oaths to Satan for thy soul,
Thy tongue and lips that so blaspheme always,
In helles black book thy judgment do enrowle
To suffer torments there and endless dow^e:
For cursed swearing in this mortal life
Will there have tearing and eternal strife.
To a Common Liar.
THy lies come from thee by the load,
The carriage of them easy is.
Where so thou make thine abode,
Of lies a man shall hardly miss.
But will thou know what comes of this?
Though thou speak truth, yet men will cry,
Believe him not, he tells a lie.
To an old man loosely living.
Prauus eras paruus, malus et nunc magnus haberis:
Esto bonus tandem, non decet esse malum:
Englished thus.

Thou lewdly liu'dst a little boy,
now old, th'ar^ called a knave:
Be good at length, it is too too bad
so vile a name to have.
Ad hypocritam.
Dic mihi, cum Christus tibi sit tam multum in ore
Cur vita Christum (flagitiose) negas?
Come tell me now, since in thy mouth,
of Christ thy words are rise,
Why do thou still deny him then
so lewdly in thy life?
Ad Christum.
Tabesco desiderio tua Regna videndi:
Hac tu (Christ) tamen da mihi tabe mori,
I waste with longing Lord
To see thy kingdoms hie,
Yet grant me (Christ my God)
Such wasting death to dye.
A lively description of Ingratitude by a Fable of a Serpent and a wayfaring
man.
A Serpent fast enclosed in a Cave,
Upon the mouth whereof a stone did lie,
Did piteously complain and succor crave
Of such as then by chance were passing by.
A man there was that did regard his cry,
And to the Serpents suite this answer gave:
Thou will invade my life if thine I save.
The Serpent then unto the man replide,
O no, not so, but rather if by thee
My life be saved, which else is here destroyde,
I Will give thee then the chiefest thing that ye
Of humane race and kind accustomed be
To give to those who have done for you most:
O save me man, else here my life is lost.
The man much pitying his distressed case,
Removed the stone and let the Serpent out:
Who being out, did straight his limbs embrace
And with his hissing wound his legs about:
Herewith the man grew into fearful doubt,
And asking what his meaning was thereby,
To kill thee (quoth the Serpent, here to dye:
For such is the reward (quoth he) that men
On earth do give and every where bestow
On those who unto them most firm, have been:
Ingratitude from each ones breast does flow,
And there is none from whom requitals grow.
The man denying this, they both agreed
That Judges should decide the case: so on they yeede,
And as they pass, they meet an aged horse,
Deaths picture sure was he, whom late before
The owner had thrust forth without remorse:
They in this case of theirs his help implore
The feeble horse all galde, which grieved him sore,
Accepted of the charge, and thus began:
There was a time (quoth he) my self know when,
For many years a master I did serve,
Who in my youth was glad to use me well,
But being old, he gave me leave to stern,
Because that old, I lame and feeble fell:
And though in youth I bare away the bell,
And was esteemde, yet now, my labor past,
He thrusts me forth an Abject at the last.
Lo, thus you hear (quoth Serpent) what he says:
The like requital must thou have of me:
Not so sir) said the man: This horses praise
Is of himself: And yet you plainly see
His ill deserts, not Age the causes be,
And being now enlargde from former toil,
Here may he shift to live upon this Soil.
And therefore from his Sentence I appeal,
And will be tried by one that is upright:
This idle Jade decideth not of zeal,
But what he speaks, he speaks in despite,
And would much more if malice were of might:
The next we meet therefore shall hea^e the strife,
For why (quoth he) it does concern my life.
Then forward still they pass till at the length
They meet a dog, whom also age had worn,
A sily Curre was he clean void of strength,
And one who many miseries had borne,
An halter lately this poor dog had torn,
For why, the end then compassed his neck,
Whereby it seemed he had escapte a check.
The matter then unto this dog declarde,
Like doom he gave, as did the horse before,
Whereat the Serpent as a victor farde,
But yet for this the man would not give ore,
But took exceptions nothing less, but more:
This halters end (quoth he) does well reveal
What this dog is: wherefore I do appeal
From him as from the horse: that halters end
Does show, that he condemned was to die
For some offense, though fortune as his friend
That fate of his has turned clean awry,
And ^ent him strength from halters strength to fly.
The Serpent seeing this to be so plain,
Could not reply, but gave consent again
That this their cause should once more be referd
To him whom: next they met. And so content
They onward walk, and as they then conferd,
They met a courteous Fox who gravely went Referment of a cause to a Fox, is a
dangerous re^^^ment.

In long Furd gown, he to them hearing lent.
Which done, withdrew himself that he thereby
Might better use advise to judge truly,
And secretly unto the man mean while thus spoke:
My friend (said he) thy life lies in my hand:
Will thou therefore agree if for thy sake A corrupt Judge.

I judge the cause (which doubtfully does stand)
Upon thy side, that I by promise band
Shall have the Poultry which thou do possess,
I say thy Poultry be they more or less?
My Poultry? (quoth the man) how can the same
Serve as a Guerdon for my lives release?
There shall not one, not Pertellot by name,
Be kept from thee, nor ever will I cease
To yield thee year by year of my increase.
Suffices (said the Fox) thus will I do,
I will require my self to go into
The Cave to see how there the Serpent lay,
And when the Serpent is come in to express
The manner how, I Will quickly whip away,
And being gone, then work thine own redress,
Roll on the stone before he forward press.
The matter thus agreed, the Fox retires
Unto the Serpent, and of him requires
As is in sort declarde: They go yfeere
Into the Cave, the Fox soon skippeth out,
The man who then was standing very near,
Rolls on the Stone: So things are brought about.
The Stone once on, not all the learned Rowt
Of Foxes, nor of Serpents in that feeld
Could stir the same or any comfort yield
Unto that traitrous worm enclosde again.
Then there he lies. And now I will proceed
To show the rest that hereof does remain,
New dishes often, new Appetites do breed,
And many a one of later course does feed,
It Is tragical that refleth to be told:
What then? beet good or bad, our course we will hold.
The Fox and man together thence do go
In friendly sort unto the good-mans house
About the bargain of the Powltry tho.
But will thou go poor Fox? auisa vous.
Thy bargain will be scarcely worth a louse,
Th'vnthankfulnesse that reigns in this Age,
I fear me Fox, must be thy deaths presage.
But well, what is foreset, must come to pass:
Not only death appointed is to all,
But eke the manner how, as here it was:
For naught to man or beast by chance does fall,
There is none such as men do Fortune call.
Against black death no craft nor cunning swayes:
The Fox for all his craft must end his days.
The honest man repeates unto his wife
The fearful hazards he had late been in,
And how the Fox preserved had his life,
And while he spoke the tears ran down his chin,
Which tears with sobbes and sighs he often did blin.
His wife attending all the while his tale,
At length chaungd color and waxt wondrous pale:
O man (quoth she) now blessed be that beast
By whom thou art restorde to me alive:
Half that we have is with the very least
That we unto that blessed Fox should give:
We must make reckning never here to thrive,
If unrewarded this kind beast should be:
O how my soul does long his face to see.
Sweet wife (quoth he) thou speak naught but truth,
For what can be too much for life's great gift?
And since I see that thou thereon have ruth,
I will disclose to thee an honest stift,
Not doubting but thou will allow my drift.
Thou know the Fox no riches does regard,
I Will show thee then what shall be his reward:
Two Cocks and thirteen Hens I think we have,
And these thou know I count not in our State,
And if with these a greater gift we save,
Then shall we pass it at an easy rate:
For who that would have said to me of late,
What will thou give me if I save thy life?
I would have said, take all except my wife.
The wife that erst before such Zeal had showde,
As you have heard, now when it came to proof,
That words must go with deeds, Lord how she cr^wd,
Each word she spoke flew up above the roof.
The husband half afeard, began to stand aloof:
Why man (quoth she) our goods and gold are thine,
But for the Cocks and Hens, they all are mine.
Give what thou will, but give it of thine own:
A custom it is that men do never mell
With Cocks and Hens which in the house have grown,
For such small wares the wife does buy and sell:
I tell thee man, if thou do wish me well,
Let no such thought once creep into thy heart:
For I will dye before I Will see them smart.
Alas, good man, what should he now reply?
This peremptory speech has crossed all:
The Fox for answer stays abroad hard by,
Expecting still what share to him should fall,
He little thinks what speech is in the hall.
Well, yet the man a manly courage took,
And thus he answered with a manly look:
And will thou (wife) withstand my wills decr^^?
I tell thee woman I have past my word.
Say what thou will, the matter needs must be,
And if thou caust in kindness it afford,
I will regard thee both at bed and board,
But if thou seek to thwart my true intent,
It shall be done, and yet shall thou repent.
Which words of his so spoken, had such power
To quench the fire of her ho^e burning spreete,
As that her speech, which had been stern and sour,
Grew instantly to be both calm and sweet.
Well husband then (quoth she) if you think meet,
Let it be done: yet thus much let me crave,
That he may come by night his pray to have:
For if I should behold, or hear the cry
That I am sure the sily fowls will make
When they shall see themselves drawn forth to dye,
Full sure I am that heart and joints would quake:
Grant this therefore (sweet husband) for my sake,
That he may come at midnight, not before,
And I of purpose will leave open the door.
This suite of thine sweet heart (quoth he) is small,
The Fox I know will readily assent.
So cheerfully he trudged out of the hall,
And to the Fox that lay hard by he went,
Fuil soon he found the vermin by the sent,
And making known to him his wives request,
The Fox agreed and held it for the best.
But in this while the wife casts by deceit
And plots how she her pu^lens lives may save:
In the end she does resolve that at receipt
His life who saved her husbands life she will have.
O cursed wretch whose deed does so deprave
The virtue that should be in humane race,
As that for virtue vice does come in place.
But what ensures? the Stratagem is set,
The Fox at midnight comes to have his fee,
And thinking (wretch, that he should have no let,
Within the house the mortal Engines be,
And were so placed because he could not see,
That he was caught, and caught, was put to death,
So he poor Fox resigned up his breath.
And thus we see the Serpents saying here
Is verifide that men to men do give
Ill turns for good: for so it does appear,
The Fox is killed, the man he saved does live:
Mark well the Moral whereunto we drive,
Ingratitude the Monster of our days,
In men more then inbeasts it self displayes.
And also note (as to our purpose fit)
That as the man was moved much by gift
To save the Serpents life, and saved it,
So was the Fox likewise procurde to shift
To save the man: which to our former drift
Is this, that lives relief is little waide,
If for the same be nothing paid.
Mediocria firma, with advice to Constancy.
IN height beware of peoples hate,
In wealth beware of bitter want,
To rich may be a doubtful State,
To ill is Sat that is to skant.
The two extremes are always hard,
The mean t'weene both is always best:
And so each State with truth confard,
The mean degree still brings rest.
But whither bale or blithfull bliss
Betide unto thy changing lot,
The surest way for thee is this
And by no means to be forgot:
Not to be proud of sl^ppry hap,
Nor to repine at pinching woe,
But as Dame Fortune ch^ngeth Sap,
So let Dame F^rtune come and go.
And so though States do chop and change,
As often they change and chop indeed,
Thy mind shall never wandering range,
But constantly in things proceed.
Fortunam reuerenter habe, quicunque repent
Dives ab exili progrediere loco.
The same in English.

Who so thou be that suddenly from poor degree art raisde,
Embrace thy fortune reu'rently, and see thy God be praysde.
In Scurram pauperem.
Scurra vbi iam fures totam sibi nocte videret
Scrutantes magna sedulitate Domum,
Risit, et O, media quid vos hic nocte videtis,
Miror ait, media nil ego cerno die.
The same in English.

A scoffing Swayne perceiving thieves
to search his house by night,
Laughed loud, and to the thieves he said,
O sirs, your brains be light:
What mean you at this seeld to search,
as though you could ^spy
At midnight that, that I at noone
^ould never yet come by?
A return to Gold.
ANd now to Gold I bend my speech again:
Go pack thee hence, Corrupter of our (...),
Enclose thy self in Mines, let earth retain
Thy tyrant corpse, that so on earth d^st rage,
That make great ones serve thee as a Page,
That what thou will, by thee is quickly won,
And what thou will, in like degree is done.
Thou setst th'vnlearned in the learned Seat:
Th'vnfaithfull Shepherd in true Shepherds place,
Who feeds no flock, but of the flock does eat:
Thou make the fool the wiseman to disgrace,
And him that is lewd the honest to deface.
Woe worth thee wretch, the troubler of our time,
By whom the virtuous are held back, and vassals clime.
And though there be of high and worthy States
That wey thee not, but wey true virtue more, I have heard of some honorable,
who upon their advancement, have bin most careful in the choice of their
seru^nts for fear of bribery. God (...)

Yet through Gehesi and his bribing mates,
There Is little had for such as be but poor:
Where thou set'st foot, the worthy wait at door,
While claw-backe Iackes, as brag as body-lowse,
Are entertaind in every room ath'house.
It Is to be read what was in Athens wrought,
By Phillippe king of Macedon, who thee
Imployde to bring that gallant state to naught,
By bribing those that were of best degree
Within the same. The like who might not see
In Englands State, of years not many past,
As also what became of them at last?
It were too long to reckon up the whole,
How Gold corrupts by manifold degrees,
And how for it full many pill and pole,
And Lawyers some, do take excessive fees:
Thou Gold can make men fly about like Bees.
But more then that, (would God that were the wurst)
Thou make men swell with pride as they would burst.
And yet hereby I touch not Lawyers State,
Nor have intent to quippe the learned sort:
That were an Office for a scurrile mate,
For there are Lawyers of most worthy Port,
Who still hold out as does a fensed Forte,
Well getting Gold, and not enclinde to Pride,
For which good sort due Honors do abide.
And for the Judges of our Common law,
I speak it from my heart, and so I hold
That there are none can say, they ever saw
One Judge that is now alive corrupt with gold.
God grant that they in like sort may be bold
To keep the Balance tyte twixt small and great, Grandibus exigu^ sunt pisees
piscibus ese^.

Least else the small should be the great ones meat.
I will conclude. Not every State of men,
But some almost in every State there are,
Who may be wrought the good with bad to blen,
If gold, thou gold can grow unto their share:
And though that some of them perhaps have care
To do no wrong, yet wrong they will permit,
As when they should give help, they silent sit.
But for as much as many men are led
By many ways to start aside for Gold,
And that the mischiefs which are daily bred
By Moneys sway, are great and manifold,
So great I fear, as hardly can be told,
Therefore I end my endless plaint with this,
That God must mend what gold has made amiss.
Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacrafames.
To what thing is it that Goldene can
Constrain the thirsting heart of man?
The heart of man as hard as stone,
Which yields not to any move,
But as ^he same with gold is bound,
So is affection in it found,
To bring about what may be had,
Let be the matter good or bad.
Omnia venalia Nummo.
Seek gold, seek gold, (good friend) seek gold,
For gold can all things bye,
Both virtue, vice, (and else what not?)
To sale for gold do lie.
Omnia nummatis loculis sopita quiescunt,
Cum volet ipse Deus, fiet amaena Dies.
To him that has the golden bags
all things in quiet rest,
But God can give a golden day
when he shall think it best.
Omnia Dives habet, nam praestat omnia Nummus.
The rich has all that heart can crave,
For he with gold all things can have.
When vices all wax old in man,
His love of gold grows youthly than.
To the Right Worshipful and of high deserving Sir Julius Caesar Knight, one
of the Masters of the Requests to the Kings Majesty.
THough griefs arise in men of troubled hearts,
Yet when the same by skill of pen are plaste,
Petition-like in writing with the parts,
Good God, how then such Suitors griefs do waste,
As though that then their help would come in haste
But if their Suits do happen on delay,
Faint grows the hope whereon their hearts did stay.
If toylesome pain procure dispatch of Suits,
What plowman takes greater pains then yea;
An open Truth a slanderous lie confutes,
So what I write, apparently is true:
And yet (good sir) this sequel may ensue,
Unless the Suter do his Suit obta^ne,
Ill words may come for recompense of pain.
For why it happens often, that he who sues,
Because his mind runs wholly on success,
If that he hap to ^^are contrary news,
Then weying no man's travel more or less,
Away he goes with great unthankfulness.
So thanklesse thoughts and peeches that ^epraue
Often Mediators unto Prin^es have.
Alphensus king of Naples was wont to say of Mediators of Requests unto kings
and p^inces, that they are like unto those who having their dwell^ngs in the
middle rooms of a house, are besprinckled with ^rine by those that are above
them, and annoyed with filth by those that are below them. Sic plerunque
Mediatores vtrinque leduntur, sicut vespertili^ Laceratur a mur^bus and autbus.



The Author.
ANd here my Book shall have his end
with my complaint of Gold;
God grant that high and holy thing*
in sound estate may hold
And as the seat of Justice is
At this day firm and pure,
So passages unto the same
may be both plain and sure,
Not clogd with shifts and falsitie:
by such as have to deal
Inferiourly with Justice in
our English commonweal
That Sut^rs may be (...)
before they be oppressed
With bribes and charges in their sute^
and so for all the rest,
That Gold may never bear the sway,
But that true virtue flourish may.
FINIS.

