DIVINE MEDITATIONS, AND ELEGIES. By JOHN HAGTHORPE Gentleman.

LONDON Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1622.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES, BY the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
John Hagthorpe in all humble duty, and zealous affection, wishes all Health,
and Prosperity in this World, and eternal Happiness in the World to come.
PArdon mighty Prince my boldness, thus presuming into you^ presence with ^o
lame an Oblation. Having a suit to your Majesty (which is not for Money, but a
few good words), and having no Friend in Court, I thought a Petition might
miscarry, and this therefore the safer kind of begging to make (...) speak for
her self. Whereas therefore I am much impouerisht through suites of Law
(wherein I have been ten years holden from mine own, by the malice of a
stronger Adversary) and many other bad Debtors, who by their ill dealing,
compel me to transport my self and Family into Virginia, or New England; my
suit is, that your Gracious Majesty would be pleased to speak a good word
for me, that I may obtain the benefit of Master Suttons charity for a little
Son of mine, whom I would gladly leave behind me ^o increase an ancient (and
not igno^^le) name again in your Maiestys Dominions wherein there is not a man
living of that name beside myself and mine. For which your gracious clemency, I
shall not fail daily to pray for your Maiesty's health and prosperity in this
world and eternal happiness in the world to come.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Svbiect John Hag'^horpe.

TO THE READER.
REader I present to thy view some few things most ^buious and most necessary
^or every man's contemplation. Namely,

^ Time, Folly, Reason, with the mu^abilitie of all things.

2 Nature and Art, the two Parents of all things.

3 Wealth and Poverty the ^wo balances of all things.

4 Sin and Virtue, the recompensers of all things.

With the descriptions of most of them ab effectis.

The first shows, how Folly first enter^ (...) us (...) en^rance into the
house of Time, delu^ing v^ with a more certain assurance of things most
^n^ertaine (...) Reason approaching, brings us (...), showing the mu^abilitie,
vncetain^^ and change of all things.

In the, Art and Nature seem to vie (...) Nature.

The third objects a contentious litigation between Wealth and Poverty, with
the most frequent objections used on either part, their events and accidents
incident, wherein I must entreat the indicious Reader not to think me
Satericall (as perchance some carper will) but rather that I aim at the Ideas
of the things, which I protest is truth.

The last seems to demonstrate the misery which Virtue suffers under the
burden of Sin: Wherein Sin seems to erect four Altars to her self, where
she receives adoration and sacrifice from the high and mighty. What the scope
of this is, the Reader may quickly see, and it is concluded with that which
concludes all things; the last Judgment.

Now for this way of expression that I seem thus to present things past,
present, and to come; the beginning progress, continuance and end of all
things in a Dream. Let no man marvel, for this life is no better, whether
you respect the shortness and uncertainty. Prosperity is a pleasant Dream,
Adversity a troublesome: only the good or bad event is all. To which (gentle
Reader) I leave thee, wishing thee as my self, not what thou desire, but
deseruest.

TO THE READER.
HOnest Reader (for such I suppose thee) (or else thou will be gone like a
Swine from a clean room at the first word,) perchance thou think it strange
to see so sad matter, as Meditations d^e^'t in Ve^se; not (...) Music that
plays your span^ is sometime fitted to a (...) That thou ^ndshere so many
kinds (...) one continued matter, manuell (...) prevention for sa^^etie. It
(...) Instrument or many strings, from (...) of sounds arises but one ha^mo^^^
(...) If I have like (...) Tailor, (...) suited good (...): for my pu^pose was
to do (...), that gui^d their Physic, to make it g^^ down the better. But the
Lawyers have trans^formd me to Gall, and my Debtors to Copper. Therefore now
Gentle Reader take it as thou find it, and welcome: thou shall find nothing
here to make thee worse, but something to better thee, or it is thine own fault.
And so farewell.

Thine, if thou be thine own Friend, ^ohn Hagthorpe.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THE exceeding shortness of Man's life, in respect of other Creatures;
and how prodigal Man is of Time, esteeming it far more bastly then any other
thing: with the necessity of bestowing it well, since our eternal misery or
happiness seems to depend thereon. 1 II. Shows, that Man's Heart, the seat of
the affections, is as a Tenement for term of life, demised and set over to
the government of Reason, by whom it ought to be tilled and cultiuate; so that
in stead of hurtful Weeds, it may bring forth profitable Herbs. 4 III. The
difference between a rude neglected Mind, and one directed by Grace, and
gouernd by Reasons discipline: instanc't by example of difference of Grounds. 6
IV. The best things, abused, most dangerous: for Understanding, which in Man's
first estate made him little less then Angels; being now depraved, makes him
many times more miserable then Beasts. 8 V. The co^bat betwixt Reason, and the
sensual appetites. 10 VI. An amplification of the same by way of comparison to
a Fort besieged, and betrayed. 15 VII. The blindness and stupiditie of Man
above all other creatures which every one know, and by all means oppugn that
enemy, which Nature has assignd them: only he admits and lodges in his
bosom that enemy, which alone has most power to destroy him, Sin. 17 VIII.
The praise of Innocence. 19 IX. A deploration of Man's misery subject to so many
tribulations and errors in this life more then other creatures. 21 X. A further
exemplification of Man's misery by comparison to Flowers, to Leaves, to Fishes.
22 XI. Man's estate in this present world resembling a Ship, tossed upon the
water, described with her Tackling; what it is, and what it ought to be Written
at Sea, as a Sea-compasse for Saylors^ but may serve for any Profession. 2^
XII. The benefit of Constancy for those that must sail in these dangerous
waves. 26 XIII. A further expression of the incessant troubles and sorrows, to
which men are subject i^ this life, and especially those men that mean^ best:
with the benefit of Patience. 28 XIIII. The description of Sorrow. 29 XV. The
number of our Sorrows which seem infinite, till they be compared with the
number of our sins, whose numberless number, nothing equals but the
infinite mercies of Almighty God. 32 XVI. The great comforts in Gods excellent
mercies, in which we may find rest after all our miseries. 34 XVII. The
greatness of his Bounty. 35 XVIII. His Bounty further enlarged. 37 XIX. His
Beneficence. 38 XX. His Magnificence not only affording Man things necessary,
but heaping his benefits upon him with so great variety, that the
understanding of Man cannot utter it. 40 XXI. No place empty and unfurnished of
Creatures for Man's behoof, but all full without scarcetie, or scant, that man
(for this fulness and bounty of external things, might return a proportionate
fullness in his affections toward God. 42 XXII. But Man returns his Maker
nothing but Ingratitude. 44 XXIII. Man's Ingratitude that peruerts the very
benefits themselves, to be instruments of displeasing him that gave them;
still presuming, that because he sees not God, therefore God sees not him. 46
XXIIII. Gods Omniscience, from whose all-piercing eye nothing lies hidden. 47
XXV. Gods Patience, of which Man has ever a perverse consideration, abusing
this as he does all therest to his own undoing. 49 XXVI. The great goodness
and clemency of Almighty God, that stays and expects our repentance so long,
since the Scripture testifies of him, that he is a consuming fire. 51 XXVII.
That the Pagans for tempor all benefits of Heat and Light, worshipped the Sun
and Fire. 53 XXVIII. Yet the darkness of mere natural men's minds is such,
that they cannot see the true light indeed. God; which gives all things their
light, and is himself the light of Wisdom, and the warmth of Charity. 54
XXIX. Gods Wisdom. 56 XXX. His Power. 60 XXXI. Man by his sinful condition,
the Wretchedst, and the worst of all creatures. 64 XXXII. Fair without, foul
within. 66 XXXIII. We praise substances, but pursue shadows. 69 XXXIIII. We
follow gain, not goodness. 71 XXXV. We dote on earthly pleasures, and seek
happiness in them, which notwithstanding are but shadows of those true joys
that are above. 74 XXXVI. And all earthly torments and miseries, no more but
shadows of those that remain for the damned in Hell. 78 XXXVII. A comparison
betwixt the great and little world. 82 XXXVIII. A^ Elegy upon the death of the
incomparable Prince Henry. 88 XXXIX. An Elegy upon Mast. Candish. 90 XL.
Tears for Sir Tho. O.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS.
CHAP. I.
The shortness of man's life in respect of other creatures, yet how prodigal
man is of time, esteeming it far more basely then any other thing,
notwithstanding the necessity of bestowing it well since our eternal misery
or happiness depends thereon.
Viue memor quam sis aeui breuis:
Horat. lib. 2. Sat. 6. Singula de nobis anni predantur euntes.
Idem. Labimur saeuo rapienti fato.
Ducitur semper noua pompa morti.
Seneca in Oedip.
HOw short's man's life, compared with other lives,
The Elephant two hundred years suruiues
His time, so does the long lived Heart,
And nature to the Raven does impart
Three lives of Hearts, and Elephants, although
The Hamadryad Nymphs thrice hers outgo*
The longest date that most men here attain
Is eighty years stretched out with grief and pain,
And yet, of this, how ^^all a (...) we live,
Sleep ch^llenges (...) to him to give:
And youthful days of (...)
A thir^ of what (...) gain
No little s^are; and do^age all the rest.
So of our days, our ^o^s poss^^^e the best,
And we our selues^ en^oy a share most small,
Nothing, yet of that nothing prodigal.
There are not many that do freely lend
Their vtens^les, and rayments to their friend.
Because they know ^ime all things wastes and wears,
Yet do we ^end our selu^s for many years,
With small ^^^eatie. One persuades, to day
To hawke and hu^^. Tomorrow he toth' play.
This friend to's ma^^iage, earnestly enuites,
That to solemnize his dead parents ^tes.
Another crew, they tempt us to partake
In quarrels, where our whole times, at the stake.
A thousand pull us into game, and wine.
Thus do we lend, and give our precious time
Time in whose use, eternal joys do dwell,
Or woes for things most base we give and ^ell.
How much do we bestow in fruitless vice?
In seasts, in fashions, curiosities.
In beastly lusts, nocturnall ^oule desires.
How much to feed our passions flaming fires?
How much in trim^ning up the head and face,
In singing, dancing, gaming, and things base.
In fruitless studies, fraught with toys and lies,
Fabulous stori^s, impertinencies?
Which times so spent, we cannot say that we
Do live, but that we sleep, or dreaming be.
How many childlesse men, each where appears,
Who having spent their youth, and best of years,
In quest of gain, and gold so much accursed,
That also loose their latest times; and worst
In grief of heart, in anguish, and in pain,
In broken sleeps, in sweat and travels vain,
Only to settle their ill gotten pelfes
Where it might no^ be lost, yet loose themselves?
This body takes up ^ll our time, and care.
How many spend whole years, here to prepare,
(Even for themselves) their marble monuments,
Which in their whole age shewde no providence
Nor forecast for the soul? Alas we see,
Nothing but what is obuious to the eye
Our understanding parts, in sense, are drowned,
How many be that for gain circle rownde
The whole worlds frame, and come home fraught with years,
As well as wealth, to whom no time appears
Fruitful, themse^ues to compa^le and to gain?
Who can account the innumerable train
Of those, that give their time, to others use?
That go, or sit, or sleep, when others choose,
And ea^e still at another appetite?
That by command do either lo the, or like?
How many that give up their times, and life's,
Still to be conversan: in endless strifes,
In following, or directing the affairs,
And suites of other men? Which never cares
For that expense of time that brings them coin?
They swear, accuse, defend, bribe, and pu^loyne,
Like Salamanders, living in the fire
Of other men's contentions. Yet desire
Nothing so much as time, which still they leese,
And fondly sell, to others businesses.
We lavish time, as if it had no end.
No man will share his money with his friend
But time with every one, we throw away:
We loose each present time, and fay rest day
For good occa^io^s, and dispose of hours,
Both days, and ^eeres, which often prove not ours.
What dark clouds ouershade the minds of men?
How cross affections are assigned to them?
When old age comes, and death to claim his due,
How young they be to learn to dy^, how new?
And time that was still vendible before,
They then cry out, us to be bought no more.
We never know ti^e spends, till ti^e be gone,
Then we would give plate, gold^ possession,
To the Phi^^tion but for some few hours.
We wring his (...). Such is this wit of ours.
The time that Nature gives us is not small.
We make it little. Spending vainly all.
We live not to our selves. Those only live
That do themselves to contemplation give,
To virtuous actions: Practice, and endeavor,
To live well, so to die well, and live ever.
* Nymphae Hamadriades: quoru^ longissima vitae est. Ausonius

CHAP. II.
That man's heart the seat of the affections is as a tenant for term of life,
demised and set over to the government of Reason, by which it ought to be
tilled, and cultiuate; so that in stead of hurtful weeds, it may bring forth
profitable he arbs.
MAn has a garden that's not very large,
nor very narrow, and it is his charge.
To dress the same, to prune and look unto it,
Least weeds (instead of wholesome herbs) ^^regrow it.
It Is not his own, he has it but for life,
And hence, God knows, proceeds his care, as strife:
For tide he is, ^ach day, some fruits to bring,
For this, to him that did demise the thing.
But he (alas) can no way pay his rent,
Tho for the same he knows he shall be s^ent.
For tho he ^oyle, and labors to his power,
To kill ^he weed^, that soring there eu^^y hour;
Yet still they multiply, and still grow more,
Out of old roots, comes new not known before
So thick, that one of several kinds may take
Handfuls at once, but must inquiry make
A long long (...) for any wholesome plant;
For in this Garden those be wondrous seant:
No Palms or Vynes grow here for ^ouers true;
No R^semarie (an hearb^ to Hymen dew;
No h^auenly thrift this Garden does b^g^t;
Nor honesty (by Nature) near a whit;
Their grows not int a dram of any Sage;
Some Time, but much neglected till old age:
Roses once grew therein, and Lillies toe,
But in their rooms Hemlocks and Deaths herbs now:
Hysop, that's given by heaven to wash us clear,
Often withers through dispairing Willowes near.
And bitter Rue that brings our ^hiefest gains,
This hardly grows with industry and pains:
For all this ground's with such foul weeds grown over,
That each judicious eye may plain discover,
The Gardiners most manifest neglect,
Or in the ground some natural defect.
Both must we grant (defective all herein)
That we by show, not substance measure them*
Things fair, tho hurtful, so the sense beguile,
That we them nourish, tho they kill the while.
Unto our Landlord lets therefore resign
Our interest: Dispose it Heaven, it is thine;
And He auens bright eye that once wept tears of blood,
Shower grace down on our hearts, and make the^ good.
CHAP. III.
The difference between a rude neglected mind, and a mind directed by grace,
and gouernd by reasons discipline, instant by example of difference in grounds.
THe dunghill base neglected ground, that breeds
Nothing but stinking Hemlocks, and vile Weeds;
Butdocks, Briers, Brakes, and contemptible things,
Differs not more from Gardens of great Kings,
Where Art and Nature friendly seem to vie,
Which should each others work most beau ^ ifie;
Where cunning Artists hand ingrasts, and stock^
The Pistachene, the Peach, or Aprikocks;
Where shadie Groves, rare Fruits, and fragrant Air,
Soft downie Carpets, burbbling Fountains clear,
Conspire to make a sensual happiness,
The rude vnpollisht earth differs from these
Not half so much (I say), as does that mind,
Which sen^uall lusts and appetites do bind,
Captiuing reason that should be their King;
Differ from those where artfull pollishing,
All vagrant lusts and ^oule desire have tide,
Subdued by Grace, to Reason sanctified.
But as earth does not of it self produce
Those things that are most needful for man's use,
Which by much toil and tillage are acquired.
So those things that by Heaven are most desired,
And sought for in our selves, they do not grow
From our corrupt affections; but do flow
From the reflection of that light Divine,
Without which, darkness does our souls confine;
Without which, these our hearts most vile fruit brings,
Even Lusts, Rebellions, Treasons, and worst things:
For earth and man, for sin together cursed,
Nor earth, nor man, seem what they were at first.
Poor man seems now like Ierusalems (a) Phane,
The place where God was thought once to remain^,
And to inhabit, that is become a den
Of thieves, a propugnacle for vile men,
(Gods enemies, that lies for truth believe)
From whence both God and all his Saints they grieve.
So man's heart that created was to be
A Phane, or Temple for the Deity;
A Castle, and a Fortress is become,
To harbor treasons and rebellion
Against God and goodness. This a Fort is made,
From whence vnclean^ desires and lusts invade
The Understanding, and deprave the Will:
So that, that knows not good, this follows ill.
(a) The Temple of Jerusalem, now a (...) Moschet.

CHAP. IIII.
The best things ab^sed most dangerous: for understanding which in Man's first
estate, made him little less then Angels; being now depraeued, makes him many
times more miferable then beasts.
THe fairest and best things thus misapplied,
Seem fo^le, and all their native beauty hide.
Gold, that seems fair for health, or ornament,
Seems foul when it betrays the innocent.
Beauty that's good with chastity and grace,
Seems vile bestowed upon th'immodest face:
And understanding which by fa^^e transcends,
All else wherewith Dame Nature us befriends,
(The Sun that should irradiate the soul)
How fair it was pure? But now depraved, how foul?
The beasts that do en^oy no more then sense,
Do seem to this, to offer less offense,
Then we to reason: for their appeti^e
Does in it is proper objects most delight.
The Silk worm that for ornament is g^u^a,
Her appetite is still the same to spin:
The Bees alone her hony-house to frame;
Both Hawke and Hound have each their proper Game?
Th'Apodes do not seek to go or swim;
Air serves alone to keep and nourish them.
The Dolphin ner^ attempts the earth to know.
For if he touch the earth, he dies so.
Nor seeks the silly Mole to swim or fly,
But in the earth alone to delue and die.
And those same Flies in Cyprian furnac^ found
(Bred in the fi^e) hate water, air and ground.
All things, but Man, are straight in their desires;
He only wrong, where rightnes Heaven requires:
God made him upright, with erected brow
To look at H^auen, and not with beasts to bow
To earth. God gave him Angels mind and face,
But he alone seeks things terrean, and base.
The object of our intellect is (a) Truth,
And therefore chiefly God. Put Man pursewth
Nothing so much as falsehood, folly, lies,
Instead of substance, shadows, nullities.
The object of our will is also (b) Good,
And goodness self the chiefest good, that's God:
T^o still our minds, and thus depraved will,
Nothing so much affect as what is ill.
God is the object of each perfect mind:
But Hell and blacknes in the most we find.
Ou^ m^nd^s, like Clocks, composde of many wheels,
Each day new change, and alteration feels,
Either they go too fast, or else too slow;
^d^e they rust, in action fairly show.
^ach day we must with tears of penitence,
W^sh them from foul dust of concupiscence,
And ^ ligen^ly wind them up with care
And meditation, else they fruitles are.
(a) Cum veritas sit obiectum intellectus, idcir^o id erit maxim obiectum
intellectus quod est maxim veritas, essentialiter, and originaliter nem^e Deus.

Cur ^rgo intellectus hominis tam difficulter apprehend^t Deum, ipso Arist.
test. nam 2. Metaphis. cap. 1. inquit. intellectus hominis habet se adea quae
sua natura sunt manifestissima, non secus ac occuli vespertilionum ad lumen
meridianum? Respondetur sicut sol sua natura est maxim visibilis, quia per
solemn omnia siunt visibilia, ita quoque Deum sua natura esse maxim
intelligibi^^m, quia per Deum omnis humanus intellectus illuminatur. Quod autem
sol a vespertilionibus non recte videacur, id soli penitus per acdidens esse,
and totum oriri a defectu in oculis vespertilionum, at que ade^ quod Deus ab
homine non it a clare intelligatur id non esse a natura Dei, sed a defectu, qui
est in homine. Keckerman. Sest. phiss. l^. 4.

(b) Vt Deus quoque tanquam prima veritas est maxim intelligibilis, sic vt
prima bonit as est sum volibilis, ibidem: prout enim cognoscimus it a volumus.

CHAP. V.
The combat betwixt Reason and the sensual appetites.
Diis proximus ille est,
Quem Ratio, non Ira mouet.

THe eruell Bears amongst themselves agree,
The Wolf to Wolves is not an enemy:
But man to man is still the greatest foe;
Nay, man himself unto himself is so,
Whose faculties seem into parties sided,
Irrational from ^ationall divided;
Like camps of enemies that quarter keep
With watchful Sentinels that seldom sleep,
Fearing surprisall and invasion:
For (a) Reason in the head which has his throne,
Obedience of the heart as Prince requires:
But (b) th'he art of r^bell lusts and foul desires
Of passions and deprau'd affections seat
Shakes off all duty, and does ill entreat
Reason her King; inuading so the mind,
That Reason seems to yield, and to resign
His sovereignty; op^rest with force and might
Of those, that should obey by law and right.
Reason in vain persuades this crew to law,
To patience, to obedience and just awe
Unto the King of Kings, which has him sent
His lawful substitute in government.
For th're bell Passions and Desires accursed,
All bonds of duty and obedience burst,
Trampling the l^yall subjects underfoot,
Hu^ilitie by Pride is beaten out,
And Love by Hatred; and Co^^upiseence
To Temperance commits no less offense,
Despair wounds Hope; Cruelty, Mercy kills;
Pr^ph^nenes weighes down P^e^ie with ills.
^uarice locks up Bounty; ^npudence
Whips away Modesty; Maleuolence,
Beneu^lence; and what is most unjust,
White Chasteti^ is slave to filthy Lust.
Reuen^e cries out for murder, and for blood;
Reason persuades, and counsels, it is not good:
But Anger brusts forth to the palace flies,
And there sets all a fire, the face and eyes,
Envy like venombde Aspes in dust which lies
Unseen, or spied, stings reason secretly.
Pleasure charms him with her sleepie spell,
That so Security at ease may kill.
Ambition bears him then with wings on high,
Above the Mountains and the lower Sky,
To some high precipisse, where servile Fear,
The last, and worst, insults upon him there.
Yet sometime Reason does her foes conuin^c,
Displaying th'ensigne of white Innocence,
And guarded by fair Virtues, does in fight
Vanquish, and put these hell black bands to flight:
Tho much more often their strengths so equal seem,
That whose the victor is, not clearly seen.
But (d) Reasons appetite seldom preuailes,
For that of Sense, this violently hales
Upon the wings of ^oule desires to ill,
Most often without the minds discourse or will;
Because that moves without this, this not so,
Till free from this her instrument she go.
They chase each other; sometime these decline,
And sometime those, then gaint another time,
Th'enlightned mind would meditate or pray,
But th'appetite that all for ease cries, nay.
So when this moves for pleasure, lust, or sleep,
Then that relucts. Thus wars they ever keep^.
Who maruels then that houses often flame,
Where Guests so contrary inhabit them:
When the affections strive to tumble down
Reason, whom Nature gave so fair a Crown,
With purpose that all things should it obey.
But how is this war? do contraries bear sway
In the souls simple essence? Can there be
In Reason an irrationalitie?
Or do three souls divided us possess,
As learned Plato sometime did profess?
Or is it our sensual appetites that still
Pervert our minds, sin darkened, and our will,
Which look but at time present and object
Things proper to themselves to th'intellect,
In stead of proper objects, and true good,
Persuading to false objects, and false good.
The Affections these depraved, darken the mind:
Desires that should be bound our souls fast bind
In Gyues of sin, till Grace illuminate
The mind, and free it from this captive state.
(a) Cerebrum esse solium animae rationalis, and sedem omnium animalium
facultatum. vide Galen. de placitis lib. 3.

(b) Cor omnino est fons affectum in quo and oriuntur and de sinunt ideo sacra
scriptura frequentissime cor pro aff^ctibus sumit, and saluator noster inquit
ex cord oriri cogitationes bonas vel malas, non quasi in cord sunt proxima
instrumenta cogi^andi (illa ^nim sunt in cerebro) sed quia cor est ^edes and
instrumentum appetitus sensualis sieve affectus, and commouet animum, ad
cogitationem vel ^onum, vel malum. Keckerman sestem. phi. lib. 3. ^ap. 26.
Sicut humorum generatio non est posita ^n arbitrio and voluntate hominis ex
omni part it a ^uoque affectum ebullitio non erit omnino posita in ^ominis
potestate, quia homo non tantum homo est, sed and animal est atque adeo
instrumenta and causas proritantes affectuum perinde patitur, vt and alia
animalia theorema. 6. Ibid.

(c) Inter^um vel diuina luce radiata, vel exculta disciplinis, vel vsu
excercitata at que in s^ collect a, perinde at que facto globo de pellet
hosts, Scaliger. excert. 307.

(d) Duae sunt species appetitus intellectiuus qui vocatur voluntas and
sensitiuus qui appellatur cupiditas. Quod autem appetitus moueat sine
intellectu, patet: quia cupiditas, quae est alias species appetitus, mouet sine
intellectu imo plerumque repugnat intellectui. Arist. de an. l. 3. c. 11.

Deliberandi vim appetit us sensitiuus non habet, vi^cit autem interdum and
mouet voluntatem: quamdogue autem illa hunc, siculi sphaera, appetitus scilic^t
appetitum quando incontin^ntia fit, naturaliter vero facultas superior est
potior, et mouetur. adeo vt tribus lationibus iam moueatur. Arist. de anima. l.
3. c. 11. tribus lat^onibus, et sicnti sphaera. i. qua volunt as and cupiditas
pugnant. 2. qua volunt as victoriam acquirit. 3. qua cupidit as vincit. Julius
tamen S^aligerus in hanc sent entiam, nullo modo duci queat. haec sunt enim
eiusdem verb. 1. Non tam esse aquae contrarium ignem arbitror quam to logecon
to alogo anima and Quocirco vt est eadem vis, qua suscipit verum and faisum:
quae falsum delet superuentu veritatis, ita erit eadem facultas animae, quam
non bona species move at primum: mox vero bo na vellicet, ad non bon am
expellendam, etc. exce ^t. 307. 5.

Attamen incontinentiae exemplo (vt mihi videtur) opti^e designauit Aristoteles
motuum horum contrarietatem. Adulter enim per vicum, sieve iuxta aedes, amasiae
suae transiens occasion commoda annuente, temptatione eadem vocante,
cupiditate eadem and libidine stimulante, aliquando intrat, aliquando non,
vincente nempe ratione aliquando, iterumque Cupidine.

(e) Cu^ autem appetitus fiant inter se co^trarij (quod quidem accidit, quum
ratio and cupiditas contrarij appetitus sunt, ac fit in ijs quae temporis
sensum habent: intellectus enim propter id quod est futurum, reluctari iubet:
cupiditas autem est propter id quod iam est. ^uia quod iam est, iucundu^,
videtur and simpliciter iucu^du^, et simpliciter bonu^, propter ea quod no^
videt quod est futuru^. Arist. de anima. l. 3. c. 11

CHAP. VI.
An amplification of the same by way of comparison to a Cittadell besieged and
betrayed.
THus man is like a Town fortified well
With circling walls and high built Cittadell
^n place most eminent, where Warders stand
Still pressed to act their Governors command,
^n fitting service ready to expose
Their safeties to repel their open foes,
And to gives blows for blows most readily
To each professed and open enemy.
But when deceit puts on a friendly face,
And offers gold, or greatness, in this case,
They rock the Conscience, and with seeming gain,
Do selfe-consuming treasons entertain.
Yet because these cannot so freely do,
Except the Governor consent thereto:
They run with no small tumult to ask leave,
That instantly they may themselves bereave
Of happiness and freedom, for some ends
Obi^cted by their foes, but seeming friends:
Which if the ruler, Reason do deny,
The affections straight fall into mutiny.
Malice bursts forth (and armd with ancient grudge)
Persuades the rest, that Reason's no fit Judge
Of this their present grieuance: for while they
Labor with wants and wounds both night and day,
He feels not these misfortunes. Avarice
The money and rewards she amplifies.
Ambition speaks of dignities and place,
That will be got by yielding in this case.
Despair and Fear then muster all our wants,
And still the forces of our foes advance,
Up to a triple number. So that here
The Captain both affail'd with Hope and Fear
Seems doubtful, which they taking for consent,
Force him to accomplish this their worst intent,
Tho not to yield the place, yet to take in
(In stead of Innocence and Goodness) Sin
Rebel^^ous Lusts, and Treasons base and ill,
Against God, which gave this mansion to his will,
The Senses and the Members servants fit,
To operate and do the precepts writ,
In Reasons tables, tho too often they
Themselves, and this their sovereign do betray
Both to their own and Gods foes, and are sold
For base de^ires, and thirst of cursed Gold.
CHAP. VII.
The blindness and slupiditie of man above all other creatures which ^uery one
know, and by all means oppugn that enemy which Nature has assigned them;
only he admits and lodges in his bos^ me that enemy, which alone has most
power to destroy him, namely, Sin.
HOw much are men then beasts more foolish still?
We know not friends from ^oes which work our ill,
The Owl, t'auoyd the Crow, travels by night.
The Vulture shuns the Kingly ^^les sight.
The (a) Egithus torments the Ass her foe,
Because her scrubbing does so o^t orethrow
Her younglings, and the ^error of her bray,
Frighes them so, that to the earth down dead fall they,
The' Elephants noce the sod where man's foot treads.
The Crocodile th'lchnewmon knows and dreads.
Th'Aspe shuns the Spider, and Camelion
The Raven knows, and fears the (b) A esalon;
Which (tho a little Bird) her time still spies
To take the lives of her young enemies.
The Hyen fears man's footing, and does know
(Tho never seen before) that he is her foe.
Nature to beasts imparts this wit and light,
That they discern their foes at the first sight.
But man, then beasts more blind, and more unwise,
Cannot distinguish friends from enemies.
^ poisonous serpent lodges in his breast.
Few will believe that such a noisome guest
Harbors so near. But Iuie not entwines
The Oak so fast, as this our heart strings binds;
Where piety and virtue should have place,
Our greatest ^oe, this serpent we embrace.
Tho folly is not Youths more constant Page,
Disease and dotage nearer kin to age,
Then is destruction to the Serpents sting.
The Serpent that I mention here, it is Sin;
An egg first by that worst of Serpents laid,
Which more then all the Serpents has decayed.
The As^e and two-headed Am^hisbena;
The Ba^iliske and Catablepha.
The horned Cerastes, Alexandrian Sckincke,
Dipsas and Drynas, causing thirst and stincke^
The ^yper, Scorpion, and Sallamander,
The (c) Remora, Torpedo, Scolopender,
(d) T^rantula that wines effects procures,
Mirth, sadness, madness, all which music cures.
The amorous (e) Pederotes manlike faest,
The (f) Higoana, delicate in taste;
The monstrous Boae, harmless vnprouokt,
The fearful Dragons, in self knots fast yokt,
Their teeth and stings this flesh alone annoy:
But these both bodies do, and souls destroy.
(a) Aegitho prelium cum asino est proptereae quod asinus spin^tis sua vlcera
scabendi causa atterat. tum igitur ob eam rem, tum etiam, quod si vocem
rudentis audierit oua abigat per abortum, pulli etiam metu labantur in terran^.
itaque ob eam iniuriam aduolans vlcera eius ros^ro excauat. Arist. Hist. de
animal, l. 9. c. 1.

(b) Plin. and Arist.

(c) Haec tria refert Arist. inter serpentum genera. Hist. an. l. 2. c. 14.

(d) Ex morsu Tarantulae aliqui sopore occupantur, sed non pauciores perpetuis
vigillijs distrahuntur. Alij flent: alij risu diffunduntur quidam currunt. non
nulli inertes sedent. Sunt qui sudent, qui vomant, qui insaniant, etc. Scal.
excert. 185.

(e) Octonum pedum sunt serpents in mallabar, aspectu horribiles innoxij tamen
nisi irritentur. Puerorum amore capiuntur quocirca pederotes eos libuit
appellare. pueros enim diut urno content oque aspectu, sine maleficio
contuentur. Dum iacent Anguillina eorum facies est. vbi surrexerunt, ita dilat
ant illam, vt ad humanam effigiem propius accedat. Scal. excer. 183.

(f) Higoana longus est pedes amplius ternos. pro delicatissimo cibo venalis
est in mercatibus. ibidem.

CHAP. VIII.
The praise of Innocence.
Blessed Innocence, how fair a thing art thou?
Thou needst not fear the Maurita^^an bow:
A brazen wall thou art, that do defend
From dangers all, thy Owner and thy Fr. en^.
For when by chance the impious shooter hits;
Thy wounds redounds to thee, as benefits.
In poverty and want the worldling faints:
But these with hope and patience thee acquaints.
In Storms at sea, in Earthquakes and in Thunder,
Then quakes the guilty man, and cleaues in ^under.
But Innocence no change at all does feel
At sight of tyrants, tempests, fires, or steel.
Blessed Innocense, then Lillies far more white,
The vernall Roses are not half so sweet;
More clear, and fair, then all those beauties go^,
On Crystal fronts, of Thames, of Scy^e, and Po^.
The Silks of T^urus, cloth of Tyrus die,
Are ornaments of no such dignity,
The Cypress, Ceader, and the Ebene locks,
The stateliest Towers with Chyan marble tops,
Reach not so near to heaven. The flowrie green
So flourishing and fresh, does never seem.
The Mines of Peru and of Ophir, be
Unto their owners not so rich as thee,
Which then the bright Carbuncles of Cambai^,
And stones, do far more brighter beams display.
The seats of Kings, and most resplendant throne,
With beams more bright then thine, they never shone.
Oh holy Innocence, which good men love;
The Manna of the Saints, and souls above!
How poor are all these things to show thy praise?
Yet still we tell thee for the worst of these.
CHAP. IX.
A deploration of man's misery, subject to so many tribulations and errors in
this life, more then other creatures.
OH then what tongue can speak, what wit discri^
The wretched state of man's sad misery!
Begot in sin, and formed in groans and tears;
Brought forth with pain, bred up with cares and fears*
Pollisht in youth, ofttimes with fruitless Art,
In riper age to give each better part,
To feed of pride and lust, the fatal fires,
We pine our souls, to feast our foul desires.
We kill our friends, to fe^de and cloth our foes,
And at their lure we stoop to greatest woes.
Blind in our selves, deprived of heavenly light,
We praise the day, but yet pursue the night,
We health commend, yet dear dis^^ses buy.
We honor wealth, yet run for poue^tie.
We wish for ease, ye^ seek our own (...),
We cover Kingdoms, yet forgo the best
For trash and toys: then Indi^ns more unwise,
That sell pure Gold for basest merchandise*
Oh happy you in liberty created,
That to disease and death were never ^ated!
Man only may lament, that lives exiled
From Heaven his country, and is forced to buil^
These brittle mansions in this barren clay,
Where mists and dampie vapors every day,
Cause us our path directed homeward miss,!
And often to fall from ^ome high precipise.
Down to the center; often in foul myres fall,
And there like swine st^ll wallow; Often call
In vain for mortal help. The wisest err,
Being still misled b^ this ^ild wanderer:
And most, when most of all o^ H^^uen they tell,
And think they touch the Gates, then knock at Hell.
O^ God how blessed were man (...) be were w^e?
But as he is, how full of miseries?
You scaly creatures in the (...), deep,
Which know not what it is to ^igh or weep:
You flying armies in the air that houer;
Yo^, you are blessed that men's griefs nere discover.
You Herds are happy, that one hills do ^eed,
Free from the woes that human hearts do breed.
You smiling Flowers, in colors freshly seen;
You lowly Valleys, clothed in lovely green;
You fruitful Olives, se^ in comely ranks,
You long lived Cedars, on Grot ^^^es banks,
Your state is blessed; you flourish, fade and die,
And know not any future misery.
CHAP. X.
A further exemplification of man's misery by comparison to flowers, to leaves,
to fields, to fishes.
THe race of men is like the leaves of trees,
The greatest part whereof in ditches fall,
Or straw the durtie earth, tossed by the brize
Of wanton winds that spor^ themselves withal:
Few do they lay aloft on towers of state,
Much fewer thence do not precipitate.
The race of men are like the Flowers, that be
By Nature given their mother Earth t'adorn^
As well with beauty, as variety
Of their indowments. Some have comely form:
But little virtue. Noble some, not fair;
Some great, but weak; some small, whose force most rare.
Oft-times misplast. The cordial Violet
And fragrant Rose in ditch or highway side:
And Henbane, and Cicuta rank, unset,
In fairest Gardens, are not seldom spied.
But most in this do we resemble Flowers,
We spring, we flourish, wither in few hours.
The race of men are like the scaly train,
Of nimble Fish, in silver Iourdans stream,
That while they follow prey, or sportfull game,
(Ignorant of the danger nearest them)
Fall with the sliding waves, that swiftly fli^
Into the Mare Mortuum, and die.
The world's a stream, most pleasing to our e^es,
But from our sights much faster, swifter gliding,
Then Iourdan to the Mar^ Mortuum flies,
The Fish are men, that in the same are biding,
Who while in Pleasures streams they bathe and dwell,
Are carried down therewith, and slide to Hell.
Now for the Leaves and Flowers, they may accuse
The Winds, that most their beauties does deface.
The Fish, of apprehension most obtuse,
May challenge Nature for their wretched case.
But man, that little less then Angels knows,
Can blame none but himself for all his woes.
CHAP. XI.
Man's estate in this present world, resembling a ship tossed upon the waters,
described with her tackling, what it now is, and what it ought to b^; written
at Sea, as a Sea-compass^ f^r Saylors, but may serve for any profession.
THis flesh is but the bark unto the soul,
Whose Harbour's Heaven, and the ^arth her Sea;
Her lading's sin, which when the weather's foul,
Still shoores and hazards ruin instantly:
Tho it misdoubting neither threatening skies,
Nor wants, nor hapless Pilot onward (...).
Tho all wrong s^ted Sails and M^s^s all wrong,
Her Shrouds are Vanity, her rigging, Pride;
Her M^s^s, Youth, Strength; ^he Sail that b^a^e her on,
Custom and Ignorance. She knows not tide
But th'^bs and Floods of Fortune which (...) prove her,
Love, Hate, Fear, Hope, these be the winds that move her.
Her Houlds ill manned, there Ease and barren Sleep,
Se^uritie and Unbelief lie sn^rting:
Scor^e, Stubborn^esse, Revenge the Hatches keep,
And Au^ries her ^^earesman still stands porting.
Desire the Master, Sensual appetite
Her Compass, from the right way wander equite.
Her Ordnance are Oaths; Pikes Policies
Cables and Anchors, Fortunes various measures.
While thus accommodated, swift she flies,
About the world to seek the Ports of Pleasure
And Game. ^ho missing these she ofter hit
Destruction and Dispatres sad Rocks, and ^plit.
Therefore this way to ruin leading just,
Needs must this tire and ^ackle altered be.
R^penta^ce therefore be her lading must;
Then must Humil^^^e and Modesty
Be Shrouds and Tackle for her. Patience
Must be her Masts; and snow-white Inno^ence.
Wisdom and Knowledge ought the Sails to be:
The Tides t'obserue, are th'ebbs and floods of Grace;
Her W^nds are Thank fullness and Piety:
Love, Char^tie, which drive to heaven apace.
Her men are Vigilancie, Wariness,
Diligence, Constancy, Contentedness.
Her Stearesman must be Providence herein;
Gods Spirit her Master, Compass Holy Writ;
Her Ordnance they must be Sighs for ^in:
Pikes, Prayers; Bullets, Tears: thus must she fight.
The ^ables whereupon she may depend,
Are Faith and Hope in Christ her only friend.
Obedience is her Port and place of stay;
And Honesty and Virtue, there is her freight;
Where if she lade, bright Bethlems Star both day
And night, shall guide ^er course from dangers straight;
Unto the Port of ^oy, to live with him
In his Caelestiall Jerusalem.
CHAP. XII.
The benefit of Constancy for those that must sail through these dangerous
Seas:
NOw you that in this worlds wide sea do sail,
Still trusting that fair wind, and happy tide,
Calm weather, and smooth sea shall never fail,
But friend you still: you reckon mainely wide.
The waves of this our constant seeming Ocean
Are most unconstant, rolled with restless motion.
One while a swelling surge bears us on high,
As if to Heauen-ward it would make our way:
And, that past by, another instantly
Seems in the lowest center us to lay.
Still are we tossed, and fear: but nothing arms
Us, saving constancy, from these their harms.
For tho the storms increase, and weather thick;
Tho seas and winds seem rebels to their Lord;
Yet Constancy will to her tackling stick,
When desperate men amazed leap ouer-board;
And (fearing one) do into two deaths run:
But Constancy will keep her cargazon.
Some minds are but with earthly objects fed:
But perfect souls do fly a higher pitch:
In deepest waves they bear aloft their head,
(While many a worldling drownes in every ditch;)
Tho pressed by wants, and enuies waves, oft-times
Half swallowed: yet are such minds rich as Mines.
For these live ever, those exhausted be,
Or lost by death: but these all times survive,
While carrion wits, which only at dung fly;
When Fortune frowns, even (a) Lotos like they di^e
In the cold frozen streams of sad dispare,
And till she shine again they buried are.
But Constancy with no false fears can welt:
No sad Despair can lodge within her mind;
Nor is she like those leaden souls that melt,
When to the fires of trial they are assigned:
For she reflects all sorrows, and to death
At last gives thanks for taking of her breath.
(a) The Lotos of Euphrates is one of the Solisequij, in the morning when the
Sun rises she puts up her head above the water, as it were to look upon the
face of her Lover, and to congratulate his return, and still more and more
advancing her head till the Sun come to the Meridian, and then as he begins
to decline, it declines, and at his setting puts her head under water, and so
discending still lower and lower till midnight, at which time the Watermen can
hardly find it with their longest poles and crookes. Pliny.

CHAP. XIII.
A further expression of the incessant troubles and sorrows to which men are
subject in this life, and especially those men that mean best; with the
benefit of Patience.
But should we now on fate, or our selves plain,
Since every thing has limit save man's woe?
Time does the winter, spring, day, night contein^
In bounds. Storms blow not still. Seas sometime flow
As well as ebb. But unto some men fall,
Save Winters Darkness, Ebbs, Storms naught at all.
Time gives the busy Be a time to rest:
The Halcyon having built her house lies Inn.
The wary Ant in winter keeps her neast.
The silly Silkeworme does not eue^ pinn.
The easefull Horse knows night, and painful Ox,
Is then but seldom forc^^ to bear the yoaks.
Th'Obdorians die but once a year with frost*
The Ceremissi have not ever night.
The sunne-burnt Negroes do not always roast
In Phoebus Kitchen: nor the Hungars fight.
The Tiuitiuas and The Egyptians Bear,
Their Vtensyles to trees but once a year.
Amongst the scaly creatures is but one
That never rests, the Dolphin musicks lover.
Of beasts except the slaves poor Ass, there is none,
Only of birds Moluccacs plumy rouer:
And of men, those that best themselves maintain
For God and virtue, these no peace here gain.
The numbers of their tribulations far exceed
The numbers of the busy swarms that dwell
In the Sarmatian Woods, or spawnes that breed
In Neptunes mansions, or the Oceans shells:
The number of their sorrows does surmount
Th'Atlantique sands, or thoughts most swift account.
These men resemble Forts beleagured strait,
Without with fresh assaults, and batteries pressed;
Within by traitors, whom the foes fair bait,
Tempt still to yield, to gain a seeming rest
From Sorrows rage, which those men only harms
That fight, but have not Patience for their arms.
CHAP. XIIII.
Description of Sorrow.
FOr Sorrow like a tyrant fierce and keen,
Destroys all that this heavenly patience miss:
For every day she sifts them with fresh teene,
And plowes them up with her new miseries,
And wears them, as the wheel the yielding clay,
Except they paue with patience every day.
Me thinks I gladly would to Sorrow frame
A face, and give it such a shape and form,
As once it had, that to my fancy came
In darksome night, when sleep was from me torn
By boiling cares, that banished from my breast
Repose, and left my minds sick thoughts distressed.
Me thought she was a woman lanke and bare,
But yet composde of bones, and sinews strong;
Her hands and feet like Harpies, armed they were;
Two sable wings upon her shoulders hung:
Her breast was glass, half clear, and half obscure:
That showed her heart, this forms false and impure.
A Chaplet boar she on her head forlorn
Of Oak grown (a) Iuie, and of Cypress bough,
Wouen with the shaper twigs of the Black-thorne,
To stay her dangling tresses, white as snow:
The Mantle that she woare was wrought of Skins
Of (b) Sallamanders, and of (c) Reremy^e wings.
Her eyes like toth' (e) Hyena's eyes appears:
Her voice to (f) Screech owls, and to Mandrakes-like;
And of (g) Torpedoes skin, a whip she bears
In hand; wherewith what folk so ere she strike,
Turn either Gold or Iron. (h) The Other hand
A Deadly Mace of Iron does command.
Some of a hill in Iseland, Hecla tell,
(i) Hels mouth for strange fires, and lost souls plaints famd)
Their in a cave of (k) Scyros stone's her Cell
When she is at home. Her Porter Loss is named.
Her page Desertion is. Dissease her seed,
Clamor Torpour. Blood her drink. Hearts her feed.
I am dolor in more^^ venit meus: vtque caducis
Percussu crebro, saxa cauantur aquis,
Sie ego continuo fortunae vulneror ictu,
Vix qu^ habet in nobis iam noua plaga locum.
Ne^ magis assidu^ vomer tenuatur ab vsu:
Nec magis est curuis Appia trita rotis,
Pectora quam mea sunt serie calcata
Malorum. -- Ovid.
Now Sorrow to a habit's turned in me:
For as the stones by often drops are cleft,
So by th'incessant strokes of Fortune I
Am wounded, and no place in me is left
For newer wounds. The Plough-shares not more worn*
With daily v^e, nor th'Appian way more torn
With wheels, then my breast with this tract of ills.
(a) Sorrow adornes her self with those things that signify destruction, mixed
with thorny cares that ever keep her waking.

(b) And, like the Sallamanders that extinguish fire, with the coldness of her
melancholy disposition seems to put out the fires of love and ^erriment.

(c) Shuns the light as the Bat, and as it were clothes her self in darkness.

(d) Making those she looks on with her eyes, heavy and lumpish.

(e) Her discourse and conference being just, as seasonable and pleasing, as
the Screech-howles to any, but those that have with her community of occasions.

(f) Those that are but afflicted with the loss ^f temporary things, as
health, friends, fortunes, ^r all these, with holy Job, they seem but to be a
little benumbd only with the chastisment of her whip.

(g) But those which loose Gods grace, favor and mercy, with Judas, those
she seems to kill, and utterly to destroy with her Mace of Iron.

(h) Plaste at Hel-mouth, because she leads either to despair (who k^^pes at
(...) entrance of hell) or ^lse to Repentance by whom we pass, (...) by the
Gates of hell to heaven.

(i) F^igned to live in a Tombstone, or Sarch^phage, because the house where
sorrow does inh^^bit, is to this flesh no better then a perpetual consumption,
and a grave. The stones called Sarchophagiare found in a Country of Asia, in a
place called Sciros. Pliny.

CHAP. XV.
The member of our sorrows which seem infinite, till they be compared with the
number of our sin^es, whose numberless number nothing exceeds but the infinite
mercies of A^mightie God.
I Wish I could man's sorrows sum, and ^enne,
Bandied like balls, twixt faults and punishments,
Whose punishments so close succeed his sin,
As shadows do the substance, that fore-went
Beauty, strength, wealth and wit, the gifts of heaven
To be lost at these hazards, often are given.
The miseries and sorrows, cares and fears,
That here assault him every day and hour,
In number like the Russian swarms appear;
In nature like the ^ygers that devour;
Or Nubian Lions, feeding on his heart,
Disfiguring the face and eu^ry part.
The poisons wherewith they infest our minds,
Tormenting more then all the banefull weeds
That do enrage or stupifie. The kinds
Of Serpents, Dipsas, Drynas less pain breds:
Man's own heart to himself so much does yield,
Of sins and sorrows the most fertile field.
The number of which sorrows does surmount
(Excepting sins) all other terren things.
The grass, the leaves, the sand, in sins account:
The s^alie train, and creatures that have wings,
Fall short, compared with this. Of numbers none
Exceeds the number of our sins, but one.
Gods mercies, which as Heavens bright tapers are,
Or silver dewes of Hermons fertile hill,
More fair then Ormu^ Pearl or Diamonds far;
More sweet then all the Balsams that distill
Out of the Plants the Memphyan Gardens hold;
Richer then Chyna's Mines, or Congian Gold.
Gods mercies are as many as our words
And thoughts: for every word and thought is sin.
Thence since each sin, eternal death affords,
And by his mercies these so often forgiu'n;
Who can Gods mercies infinite express,
For boundless woes, who gives eternal bless?
CHAP. XVI.
The great comfort in Gods excellent mercies, in which we may find rest after
all our miseries.
GOds mercies are the deluge of his love:
For as his Justice once did ouerfloe,
And sad destruction to the world did prove.
So does the deluge of his mercy now
Flow freely over all men, and to all
That for the same with constant faith do call.
Not mighty Volga with her seventy mouths,
Not Greekish Danow, on whose sides there stands
Those regal Towns; not Nyger that by droughts
Is twice devoured of Affricks thirsting sands:
Zayr, Nile, and Magn^ce, all vni^ed, are
Not with this Rivers vastnes to compare.
Not clear Maragnon with her silver waves,
Not R^wleane, nor Plate, which from the Mine
Within Peruuian Mountains intrals laues
Rich Grauel (fearing sore the Ocean Queen,
As empty handed vassals to appear:)
These be not half so rich, nor half so clear.
The Bramme^es, and the Heathen Indians, who
In (a) Ganges seek their sins to wash, and elense,
The virtues of this River do not know,
Nor they that do themselves in Indus rense.
But we in this alone perfection find,
Health, Beauty, Wealth, and Bounty all combind.
The Prophets and the holy Patriarchs
Washed in this ^^urdane, and therein found health:
So did the Saints and Churches great Nauerches:
And ^o do we, who me^^^ with no less wealth:
All drink, or may, for this is never dry,
Because the Fountain is E^er^i^ie.
Some of two Phrygian Fountains ^e^l strange things,
(b) Cleon and Gelon; the one exciting tears,
The other gladness. But two stranger Springs
More opposite in humain flesh appears;
Sin that both tears and death it self procures,
And Merry in Christ's blood, which life assures.
(a) The Indians have a superstitious conceit of Ganges, and think themselves
much sanctified by washing therein, and give great gifts to the poor, when
they come on pilgrimage thereto. Hier. Xab. and they do the like to the River
Indus.

(b) Plin. lib. 30. cap. 2.

CHAP. XVII.
The greatness of his Bounty.
But hence appears another River now
Great as the former, which does also spring
From the same Fount, and does as largely flow
Through all this All, bedewing every thing.
Gods loving bounty which does all things cherish,
Which all things made, and all things still does nourish*
Which to express an hundred tongues need I,
Archimides his engines all are vain:
(a) Strabo the hundred part could never see
Of this great River, which seems such a Main,
That Latitudes and Altitudes prevail
Nothing; to measur't all dimensions fail*
The Macedonian Prince I call to mind,
That thought not what he gave, but what was meet,
And diverse Caesar's that unto their friends,
To part with Kingdoms have reputed light
But human bounties all too short they be;
They give their friends, Heaven gives his enemy.
For God tho he foresee, and well foreknow,
That man his vassal will turn enemy,
And a rebellious refractorie foe,
Ungrateful fraught with deep impiety:
Yet for him frames this fabric great and high,
Full stored with blessings, crowned with roialtie.
Oh boundless praise of true magnificence,
That does not seek his foes to overcome
By force, but to reclaim them, and convince
By bounties, and by benefits alone:
And to that end does every day us prove,
With streams of gifts, to win us to his love.
With many a present does he hourly woe us,
From every danger charie to defend:
Much like a wounded lover seems he to us;
Tho wretched we neglect our dearest friend,
Which does at no peculiar profit aim.
What Is lost we loose: if ought be gaind, we gain.
(a) Pliny and Solinus report, that one Strab^ from a promontorie of Sicily
could see and count the ships setting forth of Carthage, distant eighty miles.
So Linus, lib. 7. cap. 5. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 20.

CHAP. XVIII.
The same bounty further enlarged.
OH that my Muse could on her nimblest wings,
Mount you alo^t beyond the foggy air,
Past the reflection of all terrene things,
And sublimate your souls to things more fair;
That touching these terrestrial beauties, we
Might rather, hear, think why, then what they be.
First, what a spacious and maiestick Hall,
Full of officious se^uan^s for your use,
Has Heaven ordained to entertain you all?
Wherein if any want, it is but the abuse
Of foul excess, whose surfets wastes the store,
That might supply the needies wants twice or^.
With what a downie Carpet has he spread
The flowrie earth, to entertain your feet;
Where every plant and flower that shows his head,
Brings with it profit, wonder and delight?
How many a pretty fly with spotted wing,
Upon there slender stalks their Canzons sing?
How many fruitful Champains feeding flocks?
How many beauteous Forests clad in green
Where watery Nymphs with soft embraces locks;
Such shadie Groves, as for true Love may seem
Fit Chapels (to the winged singers lays,
And burbling streams) to chaunt true Beauties praise.
Yet more he lodges in earths secret veins,
Ten thousand things of far more valued prise*
And the Sea for pleasure, and for use conteines
The choicest beauties, richest sinells* and dies.
Thus has our Maker for touch, taste and smell,
For Eye and Ear, puruey'd completely well.
But man himself alone must fe^d the mind,
And contemplation only cooks the dish.
What is it then? Has Heaven all these assigned
For our use, to that end we should be his?
Then must we give him one poor little part,
(The only thing he craue^) A thankful heart.
CHAP. XIX.
His Benificence.
IF from a friend some trifle we receive
Some bracelet, gloves, or some such common thing*
We think our selves ungrateful, if we leave
These vnrequi^ed; and can we less bring
To him, which gives us all that we possess,
Then the poor hearts true love, and thankfulness?
How can his r^iall bounties be expressed?
The things ordained for ornament and use;
The various fare prepared to feast his guests;
Where each one for his appetite may choose.
Oh who can count the various kinds of creatures,
Their wondrous shapes their colors and their features!
Ten thousand flocks that ore our heads still houers,
Which daily seem to bid us kill and eat:
Ten thousand fruits, which time to us discouers;
Ten thousand plants, and roots, and seeds for meat:
The sculles, Oh Lord, of all the Lakes, ^ Fountains,
The H^ards are thine upon ten thousand mountains.
Ten thousand creatures for delight assignd,
Ten thousand stones that precious virtues hold,
Ten thousand flowers to recreate the mind,
Ten thousand healthful Drugs more worth then Gold;
Ten thousand more then I can sum or count:
Thy blessings Lord, all tongues and wits surmount.
And every blessing is so double blessed,
That they not only food for us contain,
But bounreous Nature locks within the least
Of these, some help for our disease and pain.
One thing sometimes has such variety,
That many precious virtues hidden lie.
For all which, God requires but thankfulness;
Tho thanklesse we too often not agnize
The author of these benefits of his,
Bu^ either Chance, or Natures gifts them prize:
For those that with these blessings most about*
Ar^ commonly the most ungrateful found.
CHAP. XX.
His Magnificence not only affording things necessary, but heaping his
benefits upon us with so great variety, that the understanding of man cannot
utter it.
ME thinks it were enough if God did give
But bread and water to his enemies,
And some one kind of food* to make us live
Temperate, and secu^ed from Luxuries;
And not to frame so many thousand kinds
Of bread, of vyands, and of tempting wines?
Cuba her Iucca vaunts, Peru her Mayze:
Pegue and rich Cambaya theirs of Rice.
Congo her bread of (a) Luco's grain does praise,
And Palm Tree fruit. Guynce no less does prize
Her bread of roots, Inama termed by them:
But Heaven fair Europ crowns with the best grain.
Italy vaunts Falerne, and Setyne wine;
Germany Rhennish, Claret France, Spain Sack;
Candyse and Cyprus their's of Muskadine,
Greece has her Chyan, India Palm and Rack.
Dry (b) Ferrall her Heauens-dew-distilling tree:
Turkey her Cossa; Corn made Wines have we.
Me thinks our Maker had great bounty shown,
If he our nakedness such clothes had given
As our first Parents had (from Eden thrown:)
But he has made the little flies to spin,
And many a beast to yield their hair and wool,
And trees, and plants, from whence more soft we cull.
Me thinks for beggars too it had been fair,
One only kind to have of Wood and Stone,
To build defensiues for the Winter air:
But who can count the kinds of any one?
Oak, Cedar, Cypress, (c) Teyxo, Ebony,
A thousand sorts of Marble, Porphery.
Me thinks again one beast were well for ease:
But dry Arabia (that does water want)
Has the moist Cammell. Danzieks frozen Seas,
The sprightfull ^lland. The huge Elephant*
Our Maker unto fruitful ^nde assigns:
The little dock^^ed Ass to barren Climes.
(a) This Luco is a little small grain, round like musterd-seed, which makes
bread not inferior to our Wheat. His^. congo.

(b) Ferrall, one of the Canarie Islands, has no water in it, but that which
drops from the leaves of one only tree: for over the top of this tree there
houers continually a moist cloud, by Gods appointment, from whence the tree
receives this abundant moisture for the benefit of men and beasts. Linschott.

(c) This wood called Teyxo, is a stranger in these parts, growing only in the
Island Ter^cara, a tree of marvelous largeness, and the wood exceeding hard,
red within and waued, with an admirable beauty. This is not cut but for the
King of Spain himself.

CHAP. XXI.
No Place empty, and unfurnished of Creatures for Man's behoof, but all full
without scarcity, or scant, to this end, that man for this fullness and
bounty of external things, might return a proportionate fullness in his
affections toward God, which bestows all this upon him.
FOr Gods most complete bounty not content
With such a single liberality,
Therefore this great variety has lent;
As much abhorring pore vacuitie
And indigence, in all his works divine,
Which all with complete bounteous fulness shine,
The Rivers and the Seas be full of fish;
The earth is full of trees, of grass, of plant^,
And full of creatures framed to feed on this;
The air is full of her inhabitants,
All things on earth do of this fulness share;
No empty place: all filled with vi^all air.
But man may sooner loose himself in quest,
And survey of these blessings manifold,
Much sooner, then discover in the least,
The s^uerall gifts and virtues that they hold*
For in the least so many worths we find,
As much surmount man's weak sin darkened mind.
How many several gifts has the Maguayze?
How many has Maldiuars fruitful tree*
Which are as foyles to beauty, and praile
Our plenties infinite variety?
One tree does them with all abundance store,
And sweet content, and all ours can no more.
Yet here with us some one thing seem to stand
In stead of thousands: As the Sheep and Cow.
This brings the Ox, that tills and fats the land,
That warmely clothes us. This our fee^e does shoo,
And with their flesh and milk the most are fed,
But milk's the poor man's Physic, meat, drink, bread.
And why's this fulness? for this end alone,
That Man for fulness of things natural,
Should return fullness in affection;
Fullness of Love and Grace spiri^uall:
For if in these there be vac^itie,
True Motion, Essence, Light, Life none can be.
Vacuum omnino improbatur r^bus, naturalibus quia tollit motum, essentiam,
visionem, vitam vacuum and rationibus in parto motus (quarto phissi^orum)
euertitur ab Ari^^. Respuitur a S^al. ex. 5. quia essentiam tollit. Forman enim
non habet, nec materiam nec accidens, and quia se daretur vacuum, non ens,
esset pars entis. Lumen, and visionem per vaccuum sublatum esse doc^t. Arist.
de anima 2. quia lumen per corpora solum diaphana transfertur, non per vaccuum,
ita vt per inane nihil omnino videretur.

Denique vitam tollit quia in vacuo non erit pabulum animalibus. non restaurat
io spirituum vt in aere. Fernel. Sic etiam aliquod simile videtur in
spiritualibus si enim vlla sit vacuitas in affectibus, non est vera motus,
essentia, visio, vita.

CHAP. XXII.
But Man returns his Maker nothing but ingratitude.
NOw all tongues being dumb, and lame, to express
The smallest part of this his bounties stream;
What have we to return but thankfulness,
That in our selves, so naked are and mean?
We have no light, but what thou Lord do give;
The Air is thine by which we breath and live.
^ans thankfulness should next in sight appear,
A full stream to this bounty parralell,
But not the smallest torrent runs there here,
Therefore of his ingratitude I tell.
A stream that with the largest may compare,
That in our Natures troubled Fountains are.
Who would believe a beggar base, and poor,
Aduanst by much indulgence of a King,
Even from the dunghill, or the (a) lowest door,
To be a creature nobel flourishing,
Could for such benefits become ingrate,
And traitor where he owes his life and state?
^ut man in his affections is like wind,
And sooner varied to contrary parts;
^nkind, and most ungrateful; fickle friend,
Not constant enemy. Their wavering hearts
Possessed with foul desires, and fond respects,
Still making war against their intellects.
Oh thou who did in deepest darkness know us,
And did of nothing this our essence frame!
God, that from nothing gave a being to us,
A being fit the fairest to attain:
Not fixed like Plants, nor brutish led by sense,
But ruled by Reasons right intelligence.
^he perfect image of thy self who made us,
And with free power, and principality,
^uer this little world at first arrayd us,
So long as we by Reason ruled would be,
Why to rebellion should thy blessings move us,
And to be still ingrate to those that love us?
(a) Namely, that of Being, the most common trance into this workhouse of
Nature.

CHAP. XXIII.
Man's Ingratitude peruerts the very benefits themselves, to be instruments of
displeasing him that gave them, still presuming, that because he sees not
good, therefore God sees not him.
IN vain, in vain on our morality
To^a^ds men we stand; and falsely do we vaunt
Our constancy, and our integrity,
Thankfulness, honesty: for the maine want
Of these things toward God does plainly prou^
That men have not true friendship, nor true love.
Who friends us? Is not God our greatest friend?
Who loves us? Is not Gods love infinite,
That for our sakes his Son to death did send?
We dote on fading Beauty, and praise Light;
Glory rap^s us, Riches all affect:
Yet true Light, Beauty, Glory, Wealth neglect.
The lover strives to make the loved one
And same thing with it self, if it may be:
So perfect Love, our God that looks upon
Our wretched stare with gracious clemency.
F^rst clothes our fle^h with gifts of various kinds,
Hoping that we with Love should clothe our minds,
Perfect Light, gives light and being to us:
Perfect Beauty gives us comlie form:
Glory does with dignity endow us;
And wealth with plenty does our wants adorn.
Perfect Love gives love, and all to win
Our loves: yet hence (too o^t) our hates begin*
We hate the light that does our faults bewray.
For Beauty every day our souls we sell:
Glory does thousands to the grave betray;
But Riches sends her millions down to Hell:
And we for each cross that in these we have,
Hate that Love, which to win our love them ga^e*
Yet loves he more: and whereas we are poor
And naked in our souls, or much worse clad;
He daily follows us, t'impart his store,
Tho still we shun him (of our rags more glad,)
And like our Grandsyre Adam, think to be
Hidden from his eye, that does all things see*
CHAP. XXIIII.
Gods Omniscience, from whose all-piercing eye nothing is hidden.
^TH'vntainted Sun does Guanoes dung behold,
As well as Perues pleasant fertile land*
And low prized Marle, as well as splendant Gold,
Which fair Maragnon with her friendly hand,
Does borrow from the rich Guianaes shore,
To woe her Brittaaeine lovers over to her:
The Sun to every secret corner pries.
And sees as well the nastie nookes, and sincks,
And loathsome values, where murder often lies
Conceald, till it pollutes the air with stincks;
As well as Marble Temples, that are blessed
With all the pride of Art and Natures best.
Then shall not Gods soul piercing beams discover,
Much more the secret turpitude of things,
For which his vengeance ore our heads does houer?
Yes, yes: He sees what subjects do, and Kings;
He sees the scenes of lust, and philtrous spells,
And deeds of darkness seen by no eyes else.
He sees the tyrant Kings that do oppress
His truths defendors, and with lies betray
The lives of his two faithful Witnesses,
Exposing their dead (b) corpses as a pray
Unto their enemies, and does decree
When they by these arraind, and judged shall be.
He sees the treacherous Counselors of States,
That for base gain their Countries do betray.
He sees the false bribe-taking Judge, and hates
The Priests that (whilst their sheep statue) feast and play,
He sees the partial Jurors, and their leaders;
The lying evidence, and cousing pleaders.
He sees the greedy Dives dig his pits,
Wherein his needy neighbor t'ouerthro*
He sees the Broker weaue his parchment nets.
He sees the thief and murderer what they do.
He sees the Swine and Crockadile, the Whore
Watching for prey in th'euening at her door,
(a) There are certain Sea-fowle in Peru that cover the Mountains many
Spears deepenesse with their dung that they make, which dung the Inhabitants
call Guanoe, and use it as the most excellent Manor to fa^ten their Valleys.
Joseph. Acos^a. Hist. Ind. lib. 4. cap. 37.

(b) And their corpses shall lie in the streets of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt. Revel. cap. 11. 8. Which Napier
interprets of the old and and new Testaments Gods faithful Witnesses, which in
the time of Antichrist shall be thus ^ilepended, not only in Rome (the
spiritual Babylon,) but in the whole body of their Empire, or City politic.

CHAP. XXV.
Gods Patience, of which Man has ever a perverse consideration, abusing this
as he does all the rest, to his own destruction.
But because God with patience sees all this,
And suffers us run on in our own way,
Until some time that predetermind is,
The w^etched and unwise in heart, they say
There is no God; or else he sees not us*
Because our ^innes escape still unpunished thus:
But know fond man Heaven differs much from thee
In the consideration and esteem
Of the maine things. Of Place, of Quantity,
Of Time, of Motion, mortals often misdeeme,
And oftest err; because by sense we count,
Which still is ^ame in objects that surmount.
Sense tells us, that the Suns diameter
Is but a span: but Reason rectified,
Shows it transcends earths quantity so far,
That scarce proportion twixt them does recide.
Sense thinks an arrow swifter when the Sun,
Tho this a thousand mile each minute run.
And the like errors there in Time appears,
Because Gods judgments do not light upon
The sensual man perchance for some few years:
He laughs at judgment, and believes there is none;
He thinks an age so long: but sound men see
All times are nothing to eternity.
Audacious men! How dare we then provoke
Our Judge, that holds us in strong a Iayle?
By- Sampsons strength might Sampsons bonds be broke.
False ^ason with Medeah might prevail,
But here alas a tripple wall us curbs,
Of Flesh, of Fire, and th'Adamantine Orbs.
Then whether can we fly? a thousand eyes
Attend us. If to the world^ utmost bound;
There ore our heads, we find Gods watchful spies;
In Hell his executioners are found,
All flight is vain, save to himself alone:
For he that breaks Iayle, to the dungeons thrown.
CHAP. XXVI.
The infinite clemency of Almighty God, who stays and expects our repentance
so long, since the Scripture testifies of him, that he is a consuming fire.
But why (because Gods Patience does defer
Our punishment, expecting our amends)
Why should we hence grow bolder still to err,
But rather much more fearful of offense?
The wretch repriu'd prouokes not's Judge, but rath^^.
Strives to be reguler, to win more favor:
Yet we each day, each day and minute, we
Incessantly provoke the Judge Divine:
Because our blindfold nature does not see
The beams of Justice, that in him do shine;
And flames that flow from his incensed ire,
Who is indeed a swift consuming (a) Fire.
The Scraphins from fire receive this name,
Because enflamde with (b) love divine they are*
To Moses thus appeard he in the flame:
Mount Si^ay smok't when he in fire was there.
Now God being fire, and we being in him,
How good is he that burns not when we sin?
There is a (c) fire that does forbear to burn
Things that thereto by nature subject be:
And (d) fire that from the dry thin wood does turn,
Yet melts the steel containd in it instantly.
The like's in God, who spares the yielding things,
And unto ruin all resistants brings.
And as fire wastes the Stubble* Hay and Wood,
But purifies Gold, Silver, precious Stones;
So does the fire of Gods love in the good
Consume lusts, and unlawful passions,
Which are as stubble; but does purify
Bright shining Zeal, Devotion, Charity.
And th'Iron-hearted Sinners that do seem
(e) Black, cold, and stiff before they feel this fire;
The fire of Gods love makes them turn in time,
Light, hot, and pli^ble to his desire:
Or else his fires of Justice lightning like,
Consumes them in the time ordained to strike.
(a) Our Lord (says Saint Paul) is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.

(b) Elias enflamed also with this divine love, assended to heaven in a Chariot
of fire. 2. Kine. 2. 9.

(c) Miraculous fires. such as that of Sidrach, Misach and Abdenego, and others
of holy Martyrs that have not burnt for the time.

(d) Cetterum mira fulminis, si intueri velis, opera sunt, nec quicquam dubij
relinquentia, quin diuina insit illis and subtilis potentia. Loculis integris,
ac illaesis conflatur argentum. Manente vagina, gladius liquescit, and
inuiolato ligno, circa pila ferrum omne distillat. stat, fracto dolio, vinum,
etc. Seneca natural. quest. cap. 31.

(e) The properties of Iron.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Pagans for the benefits of Heat and light' worshipped the Sun and Fire.
THe manner of the Pagans was to adore
Chiefly those things did hurt or benefit.
The Memphians worship the author of their store,
Great Nilus, cause their fields were fatned by it,
Sidonians to the gainefull Sheep did bow,
As the Indians do to beasts and devil, now.
But the wise Persians they did worship fire,
For the great benefits of heat and light:
And all the Nations jointly did conspire
To worship Titan, vanquisher of night;
Who, when he does his splendant beams display,
Soon chases dreadful darksome night away.
Th'vnweldy Germans this, the nimble Daeians,
The prudent Chaldeans this, and rude Barbarians;
The noble Grecians this, and barbarous Thrasians^
The rich Egyptians, and the poor Tartarians;
All worship light: to this erected Phanes,
And (a) swift Steads brought to swifter Titans flames;
For heavenly light distinguishes each thing:
The sound from sick, the foolish from the sage:
But night knows not the servant from the King,
Not Gold from Lead, nor youth from crooked age;
The Sun, burnt Moore scorcht on the Libian sand,
From those most fair on Thames or (...) strand,
Night is the nurce of fear^, to fraud the furtherer,
A time for shado^ es* and for beasts of pray;
A baude to lust, a cloak unto the murderer:
No friend to Innocence, which loves the day,
And rises up to labor in the morn,
When beasts of prey back to their dens return.
Who maruels now that Pagans Idolize
The Fire and Sun, for gifts of heat and light?
But who^l not wonder, that our dimmer eyes
See not a Light ten thousand fold more bright?
A Light that to the Sun his light assigns;
And more, illumines our sinne-darkned minds?
(a) Ex dys Solemn veneranter cui equos immolant, hic autem est neos
sacrificandi, vt deorum pernicissimo e^ quadrupedibus omnibus pernicissimum
mactent. Herodot. Clyo.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Yet the darkness of mere natural men's minds is such, that they cannot see
the true Light. God which gives the Sun and Fire their Light. and is himself
the light of Wisdom, and the warmth of Charity.
THis bodies darkness is no little grief,
But darkness of the mind does far excel:
And that Light that brings this sad nights relief,
And shows the way from Sorrow, Death and Hell;
Why leads not blindfold Nature unto him,
That with one beam lets so much comfort in?
Alas we are blind, and cannot this Sun see:
For though the Sun do never so clearly shine,
If th'instruments of ^ight defective be,
In darkness deep we languish still, and pine:
So wanting the eye of Faith to see this Light,
We blame the Sun, and call the noonday, night.
And herein is that darkness more accursed
Of th'vnderstanding, then the senses sarre:
For (this defective) we are content to trust
A friend to guide us, lest our steps should err:
But that most wretched calls the darkness day,
And (thewd the light) in darkness strives to stay.
And why's this? cause we trust the sense alone,
And this light through the senses never past,
The Eyes no objects have, but bodies known:
To speak of light unseen, to th'sence is waste:
But unbelieving man that do agnize,
Only things obuious to thy sense and eyes.
When have thou seen the Air at any time,
The chief sustaining means by which we live?
Or thine own soul, whose beauties clearer shine
(More splendant beams) then fading earth can give?
For each thing is more noble in degree,
As'ts freer from Materialitie.
Water therefore's above th'condensed dust,
Air above that, then th'element of fire:
Then th'Orbes tralucent (a) incorporeall most
Of bodies, Lastly, The Angels that aspire
Nearest that incorporeall Sun above,
That gives the light of wisdom warmth of love,
(a) Most incorporeall of bodies; because of tralucent so many hundred thousand
miles, tho of Adamantine haranesse. Coeli enim qualitates sunt 4. 1.
Subtilitas, sieve puritas: 2. Indissipabilitas. seu soliditas: 3. Immutabilitas:
4. Rotunditas.

CHAP. XXIX.
Gods Wisdom.
YOu Nations then that stars and fire inuoke,
To this (a) light let your hallowed Incense smoke.
All Lights are darkness else; no other light
Can guide your steps from errors dismal night.
Come then: but when to see this light you come.
You must do like those that behold the Sun.
Look on some third thing that reflects the skies,
Because two vehement objects spoil the eyes.
The Bashawes in the Turkish presence bow
Their heads, and bend their eyes to the earth down lo,
Fearing to gaze too freely on their Prince.
Then shall we dare more then the Scraphins?
They to behold this Light in highest place,
Do interpose their wings before his face,
Not able so great glories to behold.
Then shall we wretched mortals (far more bold)
Gaze full upon those beams that make us blind?
No, let us for this weak eye of the mind,
Find some reflecting mirror (as we do
For th'sences) that to our intellect may show
(As in a glass) the shadow of this light;
For this it self is in it self too bright,
For creatures to behold of so low state,
We have a glass, a glass of things create,
Wherein this wisdom does so clearly shine,
That every eye may see this light di^^ne,
Therefore in this glass of the creat^res, we
The glory of our Maker best may see;
Who infinite, unbounded, vnconteynd,
Himself in limits, yet has all things framed
By number, weight and measure: for both Heaven,
Earth, Sea, Sun, Moon, the Stars, the Planets seven:
The Elements, Men, Beasts and Plants we find,
In these terms and dimensions all confind.
The Heavens in revolution iumpe with time,
No accident does ere their course decline
From their first order. Such proportion
Of magnitude assignd to every one,
And distance, that if ought herein were changed
From order, the whole frame were quite estranged
From goodness, and pernicious to men.
But this is not ordaind alone to them:
The little Bees and Ants therewith are blessed.
Such true proportion both in man and beast,
Of weight and measure, in each member placed,
And every part with such true number graced,
That if therein the least transgression be,
It brands the creature with deformity:
God gives to man one head* two hands, two feet;
If any where this orders changd, we meet
A Monster. If the Nose, or Mouth, or Ear
Be framed too large; they make the whole appear
Uncomely. What an uniformity
In Flowers and Fruits, in Seeds and Leaves we see?
Framed with such euennes (that oft-times our sight
Cannot distinguish) all with number, weight
And measure. And what can the wisdom show
Of our great Maker, more then this, to know
The number, weight and measure of each part?
Shall not he know the motions of the heart?
He knows the number of our steps and hairs;
Shall not he know our secretest affairs,
And close affections? He the drops of rain,
And of the Sands that on the shores remain,
The number knows. And tell me; shall not he
The number of our words and actions see?
Yes: For his Wisdom yet far more appears,
In that he at one instant sees, and hears
The actions, thoughts, and words of every man.
Man's lame imperfect knowledge hardly can
By many acts discoursing too and fro;
Scarcely attain (not fully come) unto
The knowledge of some one thing. But this King
By one act, sees himself, and every thing
That Heaven and Earth contains. But now we come
To th'weigh^ and measure of perfection.
This Earth (for which men strive so much) we deem
Compared with Gold and Iems of small esteem,
But these, compared with things that life can save,
Far sleighter, and much lower value have,
The beasts, that have the benefit of sense,
Offencelesse creatures have pre-eminence:
But men endued with reasons faculty,
Obtain a splendour far more clear and high:
Yet these, compared with those clear minds above,
Whom no soul appeti^es of senses move,
Are poor and low. How great diuer^^tie
Of weight and measure is in dig^itie?
In men's estates, and callings here on earth?
Some wise, some weak, some mean, and low by birth;
Others noble; some indigent and poor,
Others swelling with abundant store.
But in the most, man's weak opinion erres:
For tho the state of poverty appears
Irksome, and heavy unto earthly minds,
The holy soul therein advantage finds:
For wealth's a snare that does our souls betray;
But want's a tutor, whips us to the way,
That leads unto eternal happiness:
So that these present discommodities,
Return in time an ample recompense:
When the fair gilded sweets of oppulence,
Repay their weight in bitterness and gall.
Oh how inscrutable are his works all?
Who can declare the secret simpathies?
The hidden causes of antiphathies.
Who can express the wondrous properties
Of Plants and Beasts, their hidden qualities?
How many excellencies each were dwells,
Within the fabric of these earthen cells?
For of the fairer faculties of mind
(The mind's reflected knowledge dark and blind,
With such imperfectnes it self does view)
We justly doubt, if what we know, be true.
Tho most we find our imbecillitie,
In contemplation of that Majesty;
Which like a Fa^lkon through the high clouds towers,
Where we come tardy with these wings of ours.
(a) God is light, and there is no darkness in him. John 1. 1.

CHAP: XXX.
His Power.
HIs Power again as hard a task I find
(For infinite can never be confind
To place, or number) work too hard and high,
To show his power that rules both earth and sky;
To whom the Saints and Angels all obey;
To whom the Lamps that rule both night and day:
For he their Maker, and their Mouer is.
Nor do they run their proper course, but his.
Who sometime does subject their glorious light,
Unto the prayers of the faithful wight;
And makes the Sun stand still ore Gabaon,
And Moon against the Veil of Ayalon,
At his voice both the Winds and Seas do turn
From course and nature. Fire forbeares to burn,
The Tigers and the Lions that devour
All things, at th'becke of this transcendent power
Turn tame and gentle. The great King of Deepes
That every thing to's hungry Shambles sweepes;
When this Power list, must their his Prophet save.
The cruel Tyrant that delights to have
His bloody will, when God in power commands,
Puts up his sword, and lends his helping hands.
The wretched Powers infernal, whose cursed will
Swifter then lightning move to do man ill,
Are yet prevented by the swifter speed
Of this Power, who is ready still at need,
To help the faithful. But this Power most clear,
And infinitely powrefull does appear
In the production of his creatures all.
For what is of greater wonder, then the small
And slender seeds that mighty things produce?
No man (whose vnderstanding's most obtuse)
Can choose but wonder, how the bole and high
Tower topping branches of the Oak, should lie
Within the little Akornes seed contained,
Those engines wherewith Neptunes force is tamed.
Is It not as strange that watery substance, thin
And flewent, should be matter to begin
The timber-buildings of the mighty Whale,
The monstrous (^) Rhoyder, and the poisenous ^ahal?
Or that the offices of life in Bees
And Ants, is as accomplished as in these?
These have their stomach, liver, heart and gall,
Their instruments of sense and motion, all
The parts of generation as complete,
As have those massy buildings huge and great:
Whose mighty beams and transome few behold
Without amazement. If it should be told
To some that knew it not, would they not smile
To think, the bullet-scorning (c) Crokodile,
Whose iron sides do engines force repel,
Should bring those anuils from the tender shell
Of a small egg? This Power no less we see
In contemplating that variety
Of several forms in earth, in sea, and air,
Of which the cunningst Artists not declare
The smaller part of what unknown they leave.
How various are the several shapes they have?
How various is their food and preservation?
Their ways of breed and generation?
Quantities, qualities, their voices soundes,
Their benefits that unto man redounds?
This is a Sea which Reason clogd with sense
Cannot swim over: but this power immense
Is fairest written in the Heavens above.
With what incessant swiftnes do they move?
Yet measured and observing still that time,
Which first they did before they ere had seen
Man's guiltines; and (if God pleased) might be
Continued so to all eternity.
B^t in how short a moment is the clear
Suns light transfused throughout the Hemyspheare?
To this the lightning's flow; and the swift wind
And th'ayrie wings to phansies powers assi^^d.
Nothing's more strange conter^d in Na^u^^s store:
No^ that the Deity resembles more.
How highly in this Creature are we blessed,
The Sun, that life preserues in man and beast?
Who by attenuation does forth call
The blew Mists from their Mother Thetis Hall,
To th'ayres cold region, who (comprest by th'skie,
And their lapps filled with young fertility)
Return thence, and bring fruit forth on the ground,
Before they see their Mother, the profound:
But angry boiling Goddess of the deepes,
Whose rage not long at home her Daughters keeps
Ere Pilgrims new they turn, to cleanse their stains,
Within the concaues of Earths secret veins;
And, for this good, washing her dustie face,
Leave many a stowrie Meadow as they trace
The winding Valleys, to return again
Unto their Mothers lap, from whence they came:
But Heavens tralucent clearenesse, in so wide
Extended bodies, arguing beside
Their Adamantine hardness, since no loss
Of substance does their speedy motions cross,
Nor dissipation. This does well declare
His power, by whom they framed and gouernd are,
But what speaks more his power then this? he framed
Both Heaven and Earth, and all things there contained
Of nothing; all without precedent stuff
To build on: for his own word was enough*
The cunning Painter many years will stick
Upon some one rare piece, and errors prick,
Expunge and race, before the work be done,
A thousand times, to give perfection
Only to shadows. But th'Creator made
their substances of nothing, and arraide
Them all with true perfection with a word;
His only Word their essence did afford.
God did command the Heavens and Earth to be,
And they were made. With like facillitie
The Angels, ^unne and Moon that guides the night;
Plants, Beasts and Men, this Word prodeust to light.
And as one Word did all this All crea^e;
So must one Word, all this All dissipate.
Tho man, thus dissipated (in despite
Of Death, and Hell, and of corruptions might*
In spite of Time and Tyrants that disseuer
Our members) must united be together:
From thence before the mighty Judge to go,
That gives the doomes of endless joys, or woe.
(a) The Rhoyder is a Fish in the Island Seas one hunderd and thirty else long
(much larger then the largest kind of Whales) their flesh good to eat and
medicinable. The Nahall is forty else long, and deadly poison: yet he has a
horn in his forehead, which is sold sometime in stead of the sea. Unicorns.

(b) Crocodilus fluuiatilis oua 60. quam plurimum parit, viuit que diu,
maximumque animal minima hac origins euadit. ouum enim non maius quam anseris,
and foetus inde exclusus proportione est: attamen crescit ad quindecem cubita.
Arist, Hist. de a^^. lib. 5. cap. 33.

CHAP. XXXI.
Man by reason of his sinful condition, the wretchedst and the worst of all
creatures.
OH God how small a thing
Is man compared to thee?
The Heavens all covering,
To thine immensitie
Do but a center seem.
And earth where we remain,
A center we esteem,
Compard with heavens wide frame;
But man compard with this,
Does seem a thing more scant,
(Where magnitude none is,
There must dimensions want.
Thus man with earth compard,
As nothing does appear;
And Earth with Heaven declard,
As if it nothing were.
But the Heavens Oh God to thee,
Are least of all in sight:
For less then nothing be,
Finites to Infinite,
Nothing of nothing's now:
How b^ld are we that dare,
Such minds Gigantiue show,
With Heaven to bandy war?
The Lions are more stout,
The Elephants more strong;
The armed Rhynoceret
Much more secure from wrong.
The Crocodiles for war,
And Tortoyse fitter be:
The Congian (a) Zibraes are,
And (b) Dantes more swift then we*
The Whales are larger syzed,
The Apodes less desire,
The Vn^cornes more prized,
Pi^austa safe from fire.
The Oaks live longer far,
The Ca^dars be more tall;
The Lillies whiter are,
The Roses sweeter all.
Man is the weakest still,
The wretchedst, and the worst;
Has least means to do ill,
Yet then the rest more cursed:
For they to Natures Law
Are subject and confind*
But nothing keeps in awe,
His bad unstable mind.
The Tyger's not so keen,
So bloody no^ the Bore;
The Aspe so full of tee^,
So fell the Mantichore;
So lu^tfull not the Goat,
So slothful not the Bear.
So proud the Horse does not,
Nor Iu^oes foul appear.
The Dragon for revenge,
For envy he the Dog;
And Fox for craft transcends,
For beastlines the Hog.
A Tunny to devour,
A Hawke to seek his pray;
A (c) Whirlepoole in to power,
A (d) Cayman to betray.
How vile a thing is this,
That all things which are ill,
In Plants, in Beasts, or Fish,
We amply do excel;
But indigent in all,
That we in beasts commend;
We only, more then all,
Our Maker still offend?
(a) The Zibraes are by some Autho^s counted very swife.

(b) Da^t eiusmodi fert^resse ^^leritate vt cu^su fears emnes anteuertat Equos
suos empturi vel vendituri Lant farae ^ernicitate p^obant Arabes. S^al. exer.
206. pars. 5.

(c) This Whirlepoole (otherwise called a Phiseter) and by some taken to be the
Whale, draws inso much water, that when he spouts the same forth again, he
is therewith able to ouerset and drown ships, pli. l. 9. e. 4.

d) A Cayman is the same that a Crocodile.

CHAP. XXXII.
Fair without, foul within.
OH God how blessed were we,
If (as our limbs are white)
There might like candor be,
In mind complete and right)
But therein are we cross,
Black, ugly, crooked still,
Turning our gain to loss,
Through fond depraved will.
The pollisht Iuorie,
^rought from thee Tapro^ane,
Or Call^cut from thee,
Congoe, or Mauritane,
With Pearl of rich Perue,
Fair O^muz, Cameron,
May not compare their hew,
Nor whiteness with Sylon.
The pure white Syndon^punne,
By Britta^ne Virgins here,
O^ by the Belg^^k Nun,
To Lillies brown appear.
And ^ymster thy pure Fleece,
Dreft by thy rustic Swains,
(Tho rich as that of G^e^ce)
No luster it retains,
Compared with Atlas Snowes,
Or Douers Chal^^i^ Hill,
Which to repugnant shows,
To Amphyth^y^es will.
But Man that is as fair
In outside, as the best,
With what shall I compare
His darksome sable breast?
For tho he love the light,
And beauty do admire,
And most in things delight,
Which Nature does attire
In this celestial hew,
Whereof himself does vaunt,
(Despising both the Crow,
And cole-black Cormorant)
Yet he to whitenes still
Does offer most offense,
To whiteness that excels,
To snow-white Innocence.
And tho upright he go,
And groueling all the rest;
Yet he in mind does shoe,
More crooked then the beast,
The Cedar he commends,
So goodly, tall and straight:
And Pine that never bends,
But be ares his top upright;
But never observes how
Himself by Nature framed
Upright and straight to go
(As one to Heauenwards aimed,)
In mind does still decline,
To Earth still downwards bent,
More then the Dog, o^ Swine,
Whom Natures laws content;
Things proper them suffice
For appetite and need.
But man with Heaven this Flesh,
His Soul with earth would feed,
Improperties delight
Him best, in his desires;
For like is fed with like,
But he unlike requires.
CHAP. XXXIII.
We praise substances, but pursue shadows.
HOw wretched, and how vain
A^e Mortals, that refuse
True substances to gain,
And shadows only choose?
Pigmalion like we do
On pictured beauty dote.
Like Rhodian Youths we woe
The shadows, that are not,
And substances despise,
Tho fitter to be loved.
The things beneath the skies,
By Mortals most approved;
For which our souls we sell,
Are Beauty, Wealth, and Fame*
For these we visit Hell,
And Plutoes fiery reign.
For these we hourly part
With Ease, with Health and Friends;
For these we make a mart
Of Lives and Innocence.
And what is Beauty now
That thus the mind can fire*
That makes us languish so,
And pine with fond desire?
An accidental thing,
A type and shadow bare,
Of that Almighty King,
Whose beauties ^ubstance are
On Men not only placed:
For many thousand be,
Both Beasts and Plants high graced
Therewith in their degree.
And what is Wealth for which
We ^oyle, and hazard still?
It makes us not more rich
Nor happy. Heavens high will
Has not these things confind
To Measure, nor to weight*
But placed them in the mind.
Content makes all things streigh^,
Even In the greatest want.
But base Desire, oppressed
With heaps of wealth, feels scant,
Is poor, and cannot rest.
Much poorer thing is Fame,
Peru^ian Air less ligh^;
It Is but a heavenly name,
In earthly rags bedight;
And base P^e^eyan breath,
Which often on wings does raise
The lumps of worth'elle earth,
But spots fair virtues praise
With black and ugly fee^e.
Now which of these is best?
Imperfect all in sight
And sh^dowes all expressed?
Glory, Wealth, Beauty, lent
To men, bare shadows be,
In Earth but accidents,
In Heaven essentially*
Earths glory does appear
Of Heaven, a type most bate;
And Wealth that we have here,
With that must not compare.
Beauty terrestrial,
In beasts or men combined,
In Earths rich Mineral,
Or what is to earth assigned.
The beauteous Planets seven,
The glorious Sun and Moon;
The Azure studded Heaven,
Nights still companion:
All these one picture frame
Of beauty, that is immense:
Beauty which man may name,
But not conceive by sense;
Though our depraved mind,
Still fading things pursue,
Which we but shadows find,
Yet loose the substance true.
CHAP. XXXIIII.
We follow gain, not goodness.
WHo can enough complain
On humane diligence?
This Zeal of ours for gain,
It breeds my great offense.
Too short's the longest day,
Too long the shortest night*
Desires brook not delay,
But croft, no peace admit*
The Rain, the Frost, and Snow,
And Tempests of the Air;
These never make us bow,
If gain be our affai^e.
For profit we do sail
Amongst the fleeting Ice;
T'encounter with the Whales
And Bear* we are not nice*
And in these places strange,
We seek the morsses shole;
Both Lands and Seas we range,
Near to the frozen Pole;
Then to the burning Line,
And Affricks Deserts dry,
Where many thousands pine,
And perish wilfully;
Where by the Sun and Wind,
They Mummey do become.
Yet we, with this in mind,
To th'same misfortunes ^un.
How small a thing does man
In magnitude appear,
Compared with Seas and Land*
As if he nothing were?
But all this earthly ball,
Both Earth and Seas vast frame,
To man's desires more small
Do seem, then he to them.
If profit may redound,
No dangers does he doubt.
How often he circles round,
This massy frame about?
The Currents, Sands and Rocks,
The Typhons and Ternades,
The falling Spouts he mocks,
And Monsters that inuades:
The flying Fires that seem
By th'Winds attrition bred:
The Waves which some would deem,
The Graves where hope lies dead:
The Tempests, and the Storms,
Death and Diseases, all
Triumphantly he scorns,
If profit may befall.
For this he travels both
By day, and darksome night,
No labor does he loathe,
Or Office think unmeet,
For this he Marts frequents,
And place where pleadings be,
(Which wise men are content
To have: but seldom see.)
Amongst the fools he gapes,
And hunts about for pelse:
But knows not that he takes
Pains to condemn himself.
If to Gods house he go
But once or twice a week,
And spend an hour or two,
How often he falls asleep?
How long he thinks the time?
His soul is at his Farm,
His Ship, his Shop, the Wine,
Or on his neighbors harm*
How great alacrity,
And cheerfulness of mind
In worldly things show we?
In these how dull and blind?
One hour to holy works.
And meditation lent,
More troubles and more irkes,
Then years in ill misspent.
Therefore this travel great,
For things terrene and base;
This labor, and this sweat
Must one day come in place;
Where Justice in her scale,
These times and works shall lay,
To see which will prevail,
The darkness, or the day.
Oh let us then be wise,
And coue^ riches true:
These only fill your eyes,
But nothing profit you.
CHAP. XXXV.
We dote on earthly pleasures, and in them vainly pursue Happiness, which
indeed are not so much as shadows of the true Joys and Happiness above.
P^^asure, how great a VVitch
Art thou to humane minds*
The potent and the rich,
In servile c^^aines tho^ binds*
Not Epicurus Bowers,
North'charmed cups of C^rce^,
Al^y^ous Founts and Flowers,
Nor Antiochia^ Daphnay;
Not Tawris flowrie Groves,
Nor ancient Bayas plenty,
Amara whom Heaven loves,
Nor blessed Arcadian Tempe,
Which whilom were believed
Thy Parents (Pleasure) where
Thy strength thou first atchiued,
And where thou fosterdst were.
These do not now confine
Thy Service, nor thy Psalter;
Augmented much with time,
The whole world is thine Altar;
Where fond ungrateful men,
Give up their hearts and minds
To transitory things,
Which Heaven to us assigns:
But not intending we
Should these for Gods adore,
VVorking idolatry
With creatures base and poor.
But with intent, that these
Characters of his love,
Our minds to thankfulness
And Love, should frame and move*
For this the Plants and Roots,
And Seeds to earth assigned;
The Fish, the Foul, the Fruits,
And Beasts of various kind,
Are sent in place, and time,
That best his needs may fit;
And every sort of Wine
To warm, and ^heare the wi^:
The Simples for health sent,
The Silk, the Wool and Skin,
The Iemms for ornament.
Are all t'allure, and wi^ne,
Man's heart to love and fear
That Lord, which these conferr^.
But he then saluage Bear,
Or Tiger saluager;
Once of the gift possessed,
The Giver quite forgets.
His soul in these seeks rest,
His heart on them he sets,
Seeking true happiness,
And good in earth alone;
Believing not true bliss,
To be in things unknown.
Thus our desires impure,
Pervert the blessings kind,
Wherewith Heaven seeks t'allure
Our heart and thankful mind,
To sorrows and to grieves,
To curses and to snares.
But why do men believe
This gulf and Sea of cares,
To be a place of bless?
And therein so delight,
As if Heaven did possess
Nothing so fair and sweet?
If traveling we spy,
Some silly earthen Cell;
We argue instantly,
That beggars therein dwell.
But seeing buildings fair,
Some Castle, or rich thing;
We straight conjecture there,
Remains some Lord or King.
Why do we not the same,
When we poor Earth behold;
And Heavens bright Azure frame,
With lights so manifold?
Do beggars Cells abound
With so great wealth and store?
And shall the Kings be found
More indigent and poor?
No doubt the Heavens contain
More worthy things and high,
Then does on earth remain,
Tho hid from mortal eye.
Tho by affirmatiues,
We can but scarcely show,
What we by negatiues,
And opposites best know;
In nature and in sight
Is Earth to Heaven opposed;
In Earth dwells endless Night,
And Ignorance enclosed;
Excessive Heat and cold,
Labor and VVearines,
And Torments manifold:
But Heaven has none of these*
In Earth Strife and debate,
Eternal Sorrows dwell;
Fraud, Rapine, Lust and Hate,
Diseases, Death and Hell.
But Heauen's the place of Joy,
Where God himself vnuailes;
Where Sin, where Sad annoy.
Where Death no more preuailes,
Therefore you holy Souls,
Seek happiness above:
None seek it here but fools,
Whose joys do sorrows prove.
CHAP. XXXVI.
And all this Worlds Torments and Miseries, no more but shadows of those that
remain for the damned Souls in Hell.
WHere blessings infinite,
And mercies cannot move,
There pain, an object fit,
And torments we do prove,
To rouse the souls closde eyes
From sad and dismal slumber
Of false securities,
That most our souls encumber;
But as this worldly bless,
And glory to earth given,
Is but a type, and less
Of that which is in Heauen^
So all the torments dire
That Tyrants here devise,
To feed the flaming fire,
Of their sad cruelties,
No more then shadows be
Of that tormenting pain,
That for impiety
The Infernal Lakes contain.
Name all the inventions old,
Deuisde by haples wits;
Those torments manifold,
Where death and horror sits
Enthroned in burning flames,
With Chains, with Cords and Steel,
With bloody servile trains,
With Gibbets, Rack and Wheel.
The cursed ^cythian hate,
That sowed up living men
In Beasts exentorate,
And there did nourish them,
Till putrefaction might
Engender creatures new,
And death produce to light,
Her self devouring crew,
The living men to kill,
(Tho killing they bestowed
A Tomb on him they killed,
More then the Tyrants would.)
The fearful brazen Bulls
Of Phalleri expose.
The poor unhappy Sculls,
Made Goblets by their foe^:
Observe the Pirameds,
(Not those by Niles fat side)
But piles of slaughtred heads,
Framed so by Turquish pride.
See all the dreadful things,
Brasilia and her feasts.
The Bowkans fraught with limbs
Of men, to feed men beasts.
Yet all these torments here,
Which tongue cannot reveal,
As shadows do appear,
To that the damned feel.
Below there is a pit,
Within the Center closde,
Wherein to torments fit,
The damned are exposde*
Where Horror like a Queen,
Sits throned in burning steel;
And Torture with whips keen,
Close tending at her heel:
Ten thousand ugly Hags,
Ten thousand fiery Drakes,
Are there with burning Drags;
Ten thousand hissing Snakes.
Ten thousand Damps and Smells*
Eternal darksome Night.
Ten thousand thundering Yells
Of Furies that do fight:
Ten thousand Blasphemies
Against Heaven do there rebound.
Ten thousand Curses, Cries,
And Oaths make all resound.
Ten thousand pale Fires run
Through black Cocytus waves:
In burning Phlegiton
As many Furies raues:
Ten thousand greedy Wolves,
Ten thousand grisely Bears;
Ten thousand gaping Gulphes
Breed here ten thousand Fears.
Ten thousand Harpies then,
And Vultures there do stay,
To tire on wretched men,
That erst on men did pray.
Excess, here lean and poor,
Upon her own flesh feeds;
And Wrath has wounds great store,
Ten thousand thousand bleeds.
There Pride is neatly put
In new and strange attire,
In Red and Crimson cut,
Lac't through with gards of fire:
But for the greedy Syres,
That means nor measure hold
In their unjust desires,
Are cups of moulten Gold.
For itching Lust remains,
Not least respect and grace;
The Friends with burning flames
Them every hour embrace,
Ambition has no doubt
A fitting plague assigned;
A rack to lengthen out
The body to the mind.
For Envy is a dressed
The wreathes of hissing Snakes,
From whence into her breast
New poisons still she takes.
Then in the Soul recides
Fury, Despair, and Rage
At God, which them diuides
From him, an endless age.
Thus both alive and dead,
Scorcht both with Frosts and Flames;
One while in burning bed,
And straight in Iere streams;
Stench never kills them here,
Night never shuts their eyes;
Noyce never deafes there ^are,
By wants or wounds none dies^
The senses all remain,
And every faculty,
To work their greater pain,
Their self tormenters be.
Therefore fear God, and dread
Not men, that can impose
Nothing upon thee dead.
Shun Hells eternal woes.
CHAP. XXXVII.
The comparison of the great and little Worlds.
Et creauit Deus hominem, ad imaginem, and similitudinem suam, ad imaginem Dei
creauit illum. Genes. 1.
HOw much unlike this great World seems to be
Unto this little World in quantity?
And yet in quality how near they come?
Within the compass of (a) comparison.
The Heavens and Earth this greater World we name;
Of Heaven and Earth's composde, this less Worlds frame*
The Sun illuminates the Heavens all,
And gives earth life. So in these bodies small,
The soul performs as much. The Sun transmits
His influence, his light and benefits,
Through the tralucent bodies interposed,
And triple Air, in Regions three disposed.
Even so the sentient Soul likewise susteines
Both moves and gouerns, as with certain reins,
On th'ayrie wings of (b) threefold Spirits sent,
Each faculty of this her instrument.
And as the Sun from two half Hemispheares,
Illumines Earth (which otherwise appears
But a sad mansion:) So the soul affords
The like, through her half seen, half hidden Orbs.
The Sun by rarifaction does euoke
Th'attenuated Waters, vaprous Smoke
To th'ayres cold Region, and, condensed there,
Melts them, to feed the Earth, and cool the air.
The like again does Natures lesser Sun;
(The Soul I mean) when through concoction,
Motion, or other cause the vapors fly
Upwards; if through the head transpired they be,
They have their uses in Dame Natures Hall:
But if dissolved, like showers in Harvest fall,
And many a time the worst disease beget.
Thus squares the sentient faculty with it.
But the supreme irradiance of the mind,
Far liker to the Worlds high Soul we find,
Both incorporeall essences, and high,
Unbounded by (c) Time, Place, or Quantity.
And as the Worlds high Soul, containing all,
Is not contained. (d) The like thing does befal^
To this of ours. As that has supreme power
In all: so by Creations right has ours
Ore this her petty Kingdom. And as that
Does this great World two ways illuminate,
By (e) corporal and incorporeall means:
So seems the soul to power forth twofold beame^*
Beams that do this dead earth viuificate,
Beams that do this dark sense illuminate,
Beams that forth from that (f) light and essence flow.
That in it self both light and essence holds.
And as God is by his infinite
Of essence every thing: (g) So men's souls be
After a sort, by apprehending all
Material things, and immateriall.
And as that has perfect knowledge and will*
So had this, tho now spoild by Satan's ill.
But much they differ in existencie.
God of himself subsists. But by him, we,
By whom our souls were first of nothing made:
The perfect patterns of th'^de ^s laid
Up in the secret closets of his mind.
Now for the (h) Earth, although therein we find
Betwixt things ouall, and things angular,
But little semblance, Yet some things there are,
Which (in a measure) paralels may seem.
We have both frozen Poles, and burning Line.
The head and feet, that furthest off remain
The frozen Poles, I may imagine them.
The parts precordiall, Line and Center be;
Where native hear consumes humiditie.
Within the earth is many a burning fire;
And in our selves Diseases, and Desire
No small flames breed When Water, Fire, or Air,
Would from Earthes womb unto their homes repair,
But are deteynd, what Feauors they engender?
And in our selves the same effects they render,
As diverse know. (*) An oily humor feeds
Our Native heat: Trees have the like, and Seeds.
Our flesh is but a humor, that is concreat,
Earths superficies is no more: the sweat
And fatnes of the clouds. Nature alone
Imparts not (i) fat and marrow to our bone.
Earth has her fat, which (k) sulphur we do call;
Which feeds her Bones, her Mines and Mineral.
Nature to us alone, hair has not lent.
The Woods and Groves are Earths like ornament.
Dame Nature not alone our wants supplies
With fruitful Veins, and panting Arteries.
The crystal streams, and Rivers ^alt tide was^t,
In stead of these, ar^ reasonantly placed.
The two great Seas, the (l) Terrene* and the Ocean,
That moving still, this seeming void of motion,
Natures Magazines of humiditie,
Be as in us the heart, and Liner be.
H^w like are these? yet how unlike again?
All fair, did not man's sin their beauties stain.
(a) Nonne capitis situs in quo intellectus rationis and sapientiaeofficina,
supremam illam inuisibilis mundi partem, quae summi illius numinis and
intelligentiarum seeds creditur, reffert? nonne men's, Des ^lla portio, corporis
domina, tribus potentijs, s^u facultatibus (eandem tamen cum anima rational^
essentiam perticipantibus) Dei ousian am^riston in personis interim trinam,
adumbrat and tacit quasi ingerit? Nonne interiorum sensuum triga, tres illas
hierar^hias, in quas religiosa antiquitas intelligentiarum numerum innumerum
est partita: exteriores autem sensus eas intelligentias, quaerationem Angelorum
induunt, vt sunt (Apostolo citante) virtutes, principatus, thro^, Archangeli
and Angeli, tanquam stipatores, De^ omnipotentis thronum circumstantes, iussa
illius capessentes, salutemque humani generis quouis modo promouentes,
representant, and innuunt? Galen. 1. de temp, ad finem, and Galen. 1. de vsu
partium, cap. 2. 3. Ex Knoblochio. Institu. Anato.

(b) Animal, Vital, Natural.

(c) Demonstratum est extra coelum necesse c^rpus, nec etiam, esse posse* patet
ergo neque locum extra coelum esse neque vacuum neque tempus. Arist. de coelo.
lib. 1. cap. 9.

(d) Quid igitur continet animam si sua natura est partibilis? Profecto non
corpus, nam potius econtrario videtur animam continere corpus* vnde ea egressa
euanessit and putrescit. Arist. de an. l. 1. cap. 9.

(e) Per solemn nempe instrumentum materiale luminis, and per spiritum
inuisibiliter irrhadiant em omnes piorum and fidelium mentes.

(f) Quid enim aliud ipse Deus quam lux est sed tamen illa neque visa nec
affatu facilis, Scaliger. Excert. 297. 3. and excer. 365. 6.

(g) Vt ergo Deo quam similimus homo reddatur necesse est cum quoque omnia
fieri. Cumque omnia fieri non possit per infinitudinem essentiae, vt Deus est
omnia, ideo opportebat fieri per imaginem rerum omnium in mente hominis
impressam and diiudicatam. Keckerman s^st. Phys. l. 4. cap. 4. and hominem
intelligendo omnia, omnia fieri. Arist. de an. 3.

(h) Vniuersus mundus ex sua tota materia constat: materia namque ipsius
natural est at que sensibile corpus. Arist. l. 1. c. de Coelo.

* Preter quatuor primaros hum^res in sanguine, and venis contentos tres alios
humores ostendunt medici inter quos oleoginosum hunc ponunt humorem, sedem
natiui caloris et vehiculum vitae. Fernelius de spiritu and innato calido. cap.
6. namsulphur quicunque metallorum naturas perserutantur, terrae adipem vel
oleum appellant. Ibid. cap. 3.

(i) This is true of the inner Mediterrane Sea, which neither ebbs nor flows,
but not so of the upper Terrane, called the Gulf of Venice, which does ebb and
flow. Acosta. Hist. Indies lib. 3. cap. 14.

(k) Stellarum errantium forsan ducatu in microcosmo desideras? En Lunam
Cerebrum, Mercurium Lingua, and facies. Venerem genitalia, Solemn cor, Iouem
epar, Martem vesica fellis, Saturnum Lien tibi perpulchre referunt. Quin imo,
si modo fas vela pandere, nauimque altius in simplicia, and mixta corpora, in
quae mundum Parapatetici partiuntur, immittere, and ea quoque in microcosmo
adumbrata ^uadantenus esse, haud facile quis negatum iuerit: cum spiritus
humani corporis coelum, quintam illam essentiam quatuor vero humores, bilis
ignem: sanguis aerem: pituita aquam: and terram atrabilis exprimant. Knobloche,
institut* Anatom.

XXXVIII.
An Elegy upon the Death of the most Illustrious Prince HENRY.
I Do not grieve when some unwholesome air
Mildewes rich fields* nor when the clusters fair
Of Claret, ^ot through too abundant shovers:
I grieve not when some gay vasauory Flowers
Are nipt and withered by ta'vntimely Frost.
Only herein my patience suffers most,
When the sweet Harvest and expected gain
Of Virtues Vintage, ere full ripe is slain.
When Time the Wheat with cruel sithe cuts down,
But leaves such vulgar weeds as we vnmowne,
Darnell and Vetches: When these ^^ortall lights
Extinguished be, should guide our dimmer sights.
Then, then I weep, and wish the warry clouds
Would furnish me with reares, to weep whole floods.
Then wish I BOREAS (whose killing breath
is never perfumed with sweets of Indian Earth)
To lend me sighs. I wish the Culuers groans,
The Pellicans shrill shrikes to express my moanes.
I wish my self those (...) wings,
To search the glorious Courts of th'Fasterne Kings;
And a strong Partent sea^'d from powerful JOVE,
Freely to take all that my thoughts approve.
First, would I then in Indian Forests ^lit
The weeping Plant (with Iuorie Knife) to get
Such precious liquor uncorrupted clear,
As might enbalme her^^^ck ^enrie here.
Then would I next to Tauris Gardens pierce
For rarest flowers, to strew upon his Hearse!
The Indies should yield us Diamonds, China Gold;
Pe^^e the Silver that her lap does hold;
Sylon and Ormus, all their Pearl should send,
The Congian Slaves from secret Caves should rend
The Chyan Marble, white Cassidonie,
Green Lacedemon, and red Porpherie,
The pure white Marble got in Palestine,
And rare Numidian spotted Serpentine.
Tuskane should yield me then some Architect,
Whose artfull wit should first these Stones dissect
With Sand and toothlesse Saw* and then engraue
What stories there you memoriz'd would have.
Which work let mine imagination frame
So large, that the whole Earth might seem to th'same
A fitting Basis, whence a lofue Spire,
Through the triple ai^e Regions, and much higher,
Should penetrate: so should the whole Earth be
His tomb, and the faire^ (...) his Canopie.
This Piramed, a Pharos, fer^ing right
For to direct the storme-lost wandering VVight
To saferie: for since Fate did's life design,
A pattern unto this Cimmerian time
To imitate; tho ATROPOS accursed,
His Clew but new begun, in sunder burst;
Yet that small piece in tables SMARAGDINE,
I would preserve for light therein to shine
From these our Labyrinthian ways uneven,
To guide us just that way he went to Heaven.
XXXIX.
Mortals lament; for Nature now and Fate
Seem at great odds, and both with mutual hate
To cross each other: Else why is it still,
If ought be fair, or good by Natures will,
Fate cuts it off? Your Peach with much ado
Escapes the Frost; yet lives the bitter Sloe
In spite of Winter. Wheat and other Grain,
These often are blasted, Weeds are seldom slain.
A thousand mischiefs and diseases tend
The towering Falkon, soon to work her end;
When Puttocks last, and Crows live many a year.
The Arabian Cour^er, prized so high and dear,
He Is melted in one day, perhaps, and dies;
But the wretched Ass suruiues all miseries,
Strokes, endless toil and fa^^ine. And we s^e
The like in men: If Nat^^^ ^ounteous be
Once in an Age, and striu^^ to make one blessed
With her rich favors, him before the rest
Fate soonest aims at. Let me instance take,
That Royal hope, whom Nature strove to make
The very model of Perfection:
How soon Fate cut him off? And now is gone
(O word scarce to be named with fewer tears)
CANDISHE, the Noble, Virtuous; tho in years
Younger then ADON, yet like NESTOR wise;
Though green in blooming youth, ripe in advice;
Whom Nature as a Cabinet did frame.
Therein to stow all things that Mortals name
Rich, fair, or good, which Death by Fates decree
^^th broken up, and now quite robbed we be
Of treasure had enricht this barren time,
And reduced plenty. Fate these works of thi^^
Are much too deep, for dim eyes to discern:
For though some ignorant perchance would term
This Civil war; yet far be such offense
From us, to think the divine providence
Which leads these second causes, ever may
Be self divided. But this right we say,
That as these mortal Gods on earth do use,
All things or rich or fair, themselves to choose;
Thinking the inferior sort unworthy such;
So seem the Heavens herein to do as much:
If Mines of Marle, or Coal, or such like stuff
Be found, the Sovereigns think it good enough
For the mean people: But if Gold, or Plate,
That Is for themselves. Wherein they imitate
The Heavens; so that indeed there seems to be
In their designs a kind of simpathie:
Both choose unto themselves what good they deem;
Tho men mistaken, oft-times most esteem
That which most harms them. But the Heavens, which know
The natures all of things they frame below
With cunning hand, in this fair Garden gather
Each beauteous flower, leaving the weeds to wither
By time, and courses fit for them ordained,
Since these likewise for hidden ends were framed.
John Hagthorppe.

XL.
Tears for Sir THO. O.
YOu Culuers of the VVood lend me your groans:
You Mandrakes shrike^, and mournful Pellicanes*
You midnight Birds, lend me your dismal tones;
And all that wrongful villainy complains.
Oh lend me, lend me all the dying strains
You Snow-white Swans, which on Meander swim,
Do at your deaths in funeral Dirgessing.
You Elephants caught in the Peguan Toil;
You Nubian Lions, that the naked Moore,
Or wild Arabian (for your ancient spoil)
Compells in vain his mercy to implore.
Thou raging Tygre, and fierce Mantichore,
Lend me your powers combind, that I with cries
May rend the Marble Mountains, and the Skies.
Lend, you me sighs, you Typhons of Ter^ear;
Let ^eares like (a) Atlas ^rozen Hail distill:
Oh lend me words you seuen-fold echoes clear,
Your plaints tormented Ghosts in Heclaes Hill;
That so my sighs, tears, plaints, may blast and kill
All smiling flowers, and trees adorned with green,
And (like my self) make Earth a mourner seem.
Oh let me, let me sprinkle the free Air
With these my boundless woes! But I am dumb.
Imprisoned souls herein seem happier;
My Reason has to me denied a tongue.
For as too vehement objects overcome
The senses; so the Vnderstanding's lame,
To utter things that do transcend the same.
Hence therefore let me fly with Swallows wings
To (b) Tessets barren Deserts, where no Wight,
No saluage beast frequents, or creeping things;
Or to Condorian Caves, where six months night
May make me hate the unwelcome entering light,
And fly back to my Cave again, to find
A constant darkness, suting mine own mind.
There will I build mine everlasting Cell,
Oblivion and my self will live together.
If in an Age some ask, who there does dwell?
My self will through the wall or door deliver
Some feined Names, and send them thence else-whither*
That cruel men which for their dearest friends
Thus dig the graves, may not my peace offend.
Here Silence and my self will hug each other:
And if we walk, on soft Moss will we tread.
Here Contemplation shall be my sworn Brother,
And Sorrow, where we friends this theme will read;
That tho tears do not profit those are dead;
Yet if for true friends, tears be ere well spent,
It Is when false friends betray friends innocent.
(a) Such was that of Cizicum, and that of the Gallerie at Olympia, which from
thence had^^ appellation. Heptaphonon. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 15.

(b) Tesset is a little Town in Africa in (...) Desert, distant from the
nearest habitation thre^ hundred miles. Leo.

A short elegiack Verse, written vp^on the unfortunate Deaths of the thrice
worthy Gentlemen, the Sheffeilds, drowned in Humber.
OH where am I! I thought I erst had died,
I was so frozen up, and stupefied
With Artick darkness, and Condorian cold,
Which these late months, life's faculties did hold
Imprisond, in the center of my heart.
Sure slain I was, I felt so little smart,
At the chill news of Humbers fatal deed,
My tongue to move, mine eyes forgot to bleed.
(For water cannot expiate what water did)
When Virtues Children lie unburied*
Shall I be then less sensible, less kind,
Then Mecchaes Pilgrims, which themselves do blind*
And rather do for custom sacrifice.
At marble shrines, then pious love, their eyes?
No, I will weep, and weep, and weep again,
Till in my conduits, humors none remain,
To give my Fountains liquid supplement.
And when those pipes and hollow caves are spent,
Mine Air in them condenst likewise shall be,
And transmigrate to moisture presently,
From whence I may derive a fresh supply,
Even whilst I live to weep, and weeping die
For them, whose worthes and fatal chance excel
The power of Time, in both to parallel.
A Funeral Canzonet upon the untimely death of an Honorable Lady under the
name of Stella.
Stream tears, and in your waterie language lee
My passion speak the sorrows of my mind,
Since words want weight, and tongues in vain are see
To utter woes, that have not bounds assigned;
Since Stella's dead, so noble, fair and kind,
That no tongue truly can her loss express,
Then mine be mute, speak eyes my heaviness.
But Stella's dead, and I in vain do strive
To limit water, or confine the air.
My words will perish that I would repriue,
And grief has dried the springs, whence tears repair.
So hard to form, I find our passions are,
That what my Reason most incites me to,
I blindfold seek, but quite contrary go.
For Winters Frosts, or Summers Heat have dried
My tears, and put this tempest in my tongue,
When reason rather of the two had tried,
Tears to have tenderd, then this Dirge to have sung*
For Stella's death, so Noble, Fair and Young,
On my souls anuile, such cross passions break,
That my tongue weeps, whilst these mine eye^ should speak.
TIme, I ever must complain
Of thy craft and cruel cunning*
Seeming fixed here to remain,
When thy feet are ever running;
And thy plumes
Still resumes
Courses new, repose most shunning*
Like calm winds thou passest by us;
Lined with feathers are thy feet:
Thy dowry wings with silence fly us,
Like the shadows of the night:
Or the stream;
That no beam
Of sharpest eye discernes to fleet.
Therefore Mortals all deluded
By thy grave and wrinckled face,
In their judgments have concluded,
That thy slow and snaile-like pace,
Still does bend
To no end,
But to an eternal race.
Budding Youths vain blooming wit,
Thinks the Spring shall ever last,
And the gaudie flowers that sit
On Flora's brow, shall never tast^
Winters scorn,
Nor forlorn.
Bend their heads with chilling blast,
Riper age expects to have
Haruests of his proper toil:
Times to give, and to receive
Seeds and Fruits from fertile soil*
But at length,
Does his strength
Youth and Beauty all recoyle.
Cold December hope rete^nes,
That the Spring each thing reviving,
Shall through-out his aged Veins
Power fresh Youth, past joys repriuing:
But thy Sith
Ends his strise,
And to Lethe sends him driving.
To Earth.
EArth, thou art a barren Field
Of delight and true contenting;
All the pleasures thou do yield,
Give but cause of sad lamenting:
Where Desires
Are the fires,
Still our souls tormenting.
Riches, Honor, Dignity,
Are the high way to misfortune:
Greatness is a lethargy,
That to death can soon transport one.
To be fair,
Causes care,
Gifts cha^te thoughts importun^.
To be witty, quick of tongue,
Sorrow to themselves returns.
To be Healthful, Young and Strong,
Feeds the flames, where passion burns:
Yet do Men
Covet them,
More then what adorneth.
To have Friends, and Lovers kind,
That us round enuiron:
Wife and Children, tho we find
These be robes that best attire one,
Yet their loss,
Is a cross,
Melting hearts of Iron.
To be perfect here, and wise,
Is to know our indiscretions;
And our goodness chiefly lies,
In observing our transgressions:
For we dwell,
As in Hell,
Thrall to bad impressions.
Then alas why long we so,
With loved Sorrow still to languish;
I^ there ought on earth but woe,
Aye renewing cares and anguish;
Where new fears,
Still appears,
Darts at us to brandish?
To Death.
THen Death why should thou dreaded be
And shund, as some great misery?
That cur'st ou^ woes and strife;
Only because we are ill resolved,
And in dark errors clouds enuolued,
Think Death the end of life:
Which most untrue,
Each place we view,
Gives testimonies rife.
The Flowers that we behold each year,
In checquered Meades their heads to rear,
New rising from their Tomb.
The Eglantines and Honie-Daisies,
And all those pretty smiling faces,
That still in age grow young:
Even these do cry,
That tho men die,
Yet life from death may come.
The towering Cedars, tall and strong,
On Taurus and mount Libanon,
In time they all decay.
Yet from their old and wasted roo^es,
At length again grow up young Shootes,
That are as fresh and gay.
Then why should we
Thus fear to die,
Whose death brings life for aye?
The seed that in the Earth we throw,
Does putrify before it grow,
Corrupting in his Vrne:
But at the Spring it flourishes,
Whom Ph^ebus ^nly cherishes
With life at his return.
Does Times Sun this?
Then sure it is,
Times Lord can more perf^rme.
To Time.
STay wrinckled Time, and slack thy winged haste,
Which from our Zenith does so fast decline
In Western waves, Lethe thy self to ^aste.
Stay, and at length regard this plaint of mine:
Thy one days course is many thousand years,
And I in vain pursue thee all my time.
Whilst thy declining haste more swift appeare^,
And thine own weight precipitates thee to;
My feeble legs their burden hardly bears,
Whilst I pursue to catch thy harrie brow:
But thou like fr^ward Age still writhest away,
And to my good endeauours wilt not bow.
Yet know, I come not now to beg delay
For any debt of mine, or borrowed sum;
Nor to repriue my life for some short day:
Old Time, it is for none of these I come,
But even to vent my griefs, that thou (to me
To pinching) art so prodigal to some.
The Usurer a hundred years can see,
To cram his chests with theft and poor men's spoil.
The Baude stored with all sorts of villainy,
And sins, that Hell and blackness self would soil;
Lives till her body be an Hospital
Of strange Diseases, mischiefs perfect foil.
The P. and the P. that are most,
Fed by the peoples sins, and also feed:
Those mischiefs whereby many a man is lost,
Which be, old Time, thy worst disease indeed.
These do not want: to do amiss wants none;
But Time to him that would do well's denide.
Thou give the greedy Worldling time to run,
In quest of profit, to the frozen Climes;
Then to the burning Line, and thirsting Sun;
To Ganges, the Mollucaes, Phillippines:
Tho (more then men) he Nature cozen will,
That heat and cold for bounds to him assigns.
Thou lend'st the Drunkard time his Cups to spill:
Thou Art to the Sluggard too indulgent kind;
Thou give the Murderer time to kill;
The Thief and Lustful man their prey to find;
But those that to employ thee well are bent,
Too little, or just none have they assigned.
Ten years the guilty Laws have from me pulled;
My Wants and Cares as much; Sickness the rest;
My best hours, but from Wants and Cares are culd.
Oh Time! must he have least that spends thee best?
Oh Time! give me a Time my self t'applie
To Virtue and to Knowledge, or to die,
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 30. line 13. read, ( d) Hyena's. l. 14. r. ( e) Screech Owls: l. 15. r.
( f) Torpedoes. l. 17. r. ( g) The Other. l. 20 r. ( h) Hels l. 21. ( i) Scyros.
p. 40. l. 20. r. Candie: p. 43. l. 20. ^. Vac^um sex rationibus in part mo^us.
l. 24. r. (...) daretur. p. 46. l. 4. r. sees no^ God. p. 87. l. 6. r. ( i) Nam
sulphur. l. 9. r. ( k) This is. l. 13. put out ( k).


