A Touchestone for this time present, expressly declaring such ruins,
enormities, and abuses as trouble the Church of God and our Christian common
wealth at this day. Whereunto is annexed a perfect rule to be observed of all
Parents and Scholemaisters, in the trayning up of their Scholars and Children
in learning.

Newly set forth by E. H.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
green Dragon in the Royal Exchange. 1574.

To his known friend master Edward Godfrey Merchaunt.
IT WERE TO BE wished (my dear friend) that even the whole course of this
our frail and mortal life, were bestovved upon the service and continual
worship of God: and that we could commit our whole will and dealings unto
the will and pleasure of God, both for that our own thoughts do little
prevail about them, and also for that the general felicity of man does depend
only upon the obedience unto Gods will and providence.

It were also to be wished that we were not careful for the chances to
come, but that we could submit our selves without stay to Gods divine
will and ordinance.

But (alas) such and so grievous was the fall of our first father in
Paradise, that besides the fragilitie of our state, and the uncertainty of our
life, which of all things is most uncertain, (Nam homo quasi bulla) there is
also by the same his fall infused into our fleshly hearts, a frivolous care,
and as it were acurious meditation of temporal and corruptible things: Which
care as it is unto the godly a very decrease of zeal, and hinderance to
perfection, I mean to perfection wrought by Gods spirit: so undoubtedly the
same unto the reprobate, is an utter extinguishment of piety and virtue: For
no man of what estate soever he be, of himself has any ability at all,
either to contemplate the goodness of God or to stand in awe of the terror
of justice. No we are not able I say to taste the benefyts of christ his death
and passion, except we have by the (instinct of grace) mortifyed within us
the corrupt motions and natural cares of the flesh: which altogether
vvitholde us from the true contemplation of divine and spiritual things,
according as it is written: Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt Dei: The
fleshlye manne has no feeling of those things which belong unto God.

And although there be a certain care commended unto us in the holy
Scripturs, as the care which Jzaacke had for the barrenness of his wife: the
care which Jacob had for the loss of Joseph his son: the care which the
poor vviddovve of Sarepta had, first for her own poverty, and then for
the death of her only son: the care also which the Gospel declares to be
in Martha: unto whom our savior Christ said, Martha, Martha, thou carest
and art troubled about many things: Although (I say) such kind of care is set
forth unto us in the book of our salvation: Yet dear friend we must not
think but that there is another, and that a principal kind of care, which
only and alone by the word of God, to all such as are regenerate, is
commanded and commended: even a zealous and a fervent care to the building of
Gods house: besides the which care, al other cares (in what respect so ever
they be) are but corrupt and vain: Yea, they are nothing else but dregs of
the first fylth and corruption that fell unto man by the sin of Adam, and of
which our savior Christ in the Gospel forbids us, even so many of us as
by him desire to be righteous, saying: Take no thought for your life, what you
shall eat, neither for your body what you shall put on: The life is more
than meat, and the body is more than the raiment. Consider that the Ravens
neither sovve nor reap. And again: which of you by taking thought, can add
one cubit to his stature? And again in the same Chapter Therefore, ask not
what you shall eat, nor what you shall drink, neither let your minds
wander about these speculations: For after all such things, the heathen people
of the world seek: and your father knovveth that you have need of these
things. The Apostle also wills us to be careful for nothing but in all
prayer and supplication to make our petitions manifest unto God with giving of
thanks: To conclude, even of this care our savior Christ in saint John's
Gospel says: Are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walcke in the
day, he stumbleth not, but if he walk in the night, he stumbleth because
there is no light in him. Truly, this care I say is nothing else but dregs
of infydelitie, and the very frailtye of old rebellious Adam, which except
it be mortified within us, will undoubtedly drive us from the true feel of
salvation.

Contrariwise of the true christian care, which as it is said is the perfytte
badge of regeneration: the kinglye Prophet David speaks in the Psame when he
says: The zeal of Gods house has devoured me: and again: I had rather be a
door keeper in the house of God This care was wonderfully to be seen in
Moses the princelike Propht of Gods people, when he desired rather to be
razed out of the book of life, than that God should forsake his people the
Israelites: Yea, this care does Christ himself commend unto his servant in
this manner: Sell that you have, and give alms, and make you bags that wax
not old, and treasure that can never fail: and again in the same chapter,
Let your loins be gyrt about you, and your lights burning: and again:
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. To be short even this and none other is that same care of the which
the Lord said to Martha: Thou carest for many things: but one thing is
needful.

Wherefore (beloved in the Lord) seeing that this is the very true care that
we ought to have: and contrariwise, the other care but a fleshly care, a
vain care, yea a care proceeding of infydelitie, and altogether a let and
stop unto such as desire truly to be illumined: Alas what and how much have
we to lament, that in this our vvretched time, so small remain of that same
christian care, so streightlye prescribed and left unto us in the sacred
Scriptures appears amongst us: even amongst us that vsurpinglye take upon us
the name of true christians? that neither care of Pastors toward their
flock: of maiestrates toward the people, nor of parents toward their
children is almost any where to be found? And that (contrariwise) all men are
careful for themselves, all thirsting after their own private commodities,
and no man almost caring for gods glory, no man seeking after the
righteousness thereof.

To conclude, how much and how greatly this christian care is at this day
in all men generally, and in these three estates especially contemned, how
much it is set at naught and neglected, whereas notvvithstanding, it is the
very erecting and repayring of Gods house and the propagation of his glory: I
have in this little book briefly declared: being desirous in the only respect
of love and good will to confer the dedication thereof unto you: in whom I
do know (as by perfyt experience) to be dwelling a most godly care unto
piety and truth: and contrariwise an utter hatred to falsehoode, and else
whatsoever is shadowing of truth. Accept it J pray you, and be no less
pleased with my hearty affection, than J my self am displeased with the
baseness of the gift, which notwithstanding, may suffice to express the
abundance of my love.

Your friend most trustily assured Edward Hake.

A Touchestone, for this time present.
WHO so vvil bend him self but slightlye to behold the dealinges of the
world at this day, he shall perceive (even to the great horror of his mind)
the small habilitye of well doing that remains scant superfitiallye rooted
in the consciences of men: he shall see our wills altogether bent to wicked
actions, and our wits to ungodly inventions: our consciences loose, wide, and
hipocritical, and our hearts full of dissimulation and fraud: that alas, even
the very principles, as well practiue, as speculatiue, are quite and clean
forgotten, and gone, and the infallible doom of our conscience (which of the
learned is called Synteresis) holds no place of terror amongst us: reasons
as well superior as inferior, as well Divine as Civil, have no power to
reclaim us: Signs of Gods wrath and examples of vengeance may nothing
appalle us: and (to conclude) eue^ humane mortalitye will not, can not, nor (I
fear) shall not withdraw us: so great is our liberty, so secure our lives,
and so presumptuous our hearts thoughts and attempts. Look what is good, the
same we deride, contempne and refuse, and contrariwise, whatsoever is evil, if
it bring either pleasure or profit, the same do we wish for, pursue and
embrace: Avarice, we account good and honest desire: Usury (the son of
Avarice) we account lawful trade: Excess we call bounty: whoredom, pleasure:
swearing, Iolity: pride, Bravery: deceit, policy: robbing, shifting: and (what
should I more say) vice we account virtue, and virtue precise foolishness. We
seek for new fashions, we desire new laws, new rules and new orders, and yet
no man (all this while) has mind of a new life: no man seeks to renew the
same, nor yet to amend the old. Surely, surely, the consu^mation of the world,
the dissolution of the heavens, and the dreadful doom of our souls and bodies
aprocheth and is hard at the door: I lament therefore the state of the world
at this day. But since we are by the infallible word certified, that the
nigher the world does draw unto his end, the more raging shall be the Serpent,
the more faithless and stonye hearted the people: Let us lift up our hearts
unto the mercy seat, and cry unto the Lord for his elect sake, to shorten
the day. I fear, I fear me that when the Lord of the vineyarde shall come
(as undoubtedly he will come, and that very shortly) that he shall find both
Spiritual murderers and Traitors amongst us: yea, even amongst those that call
upon the name of Iehoue. His ministers and our fellow servants, we have
rejected, we have buffeted them, yea, we do daily co^tempne and scorn them,
and there little wants that his dear son Jesus christ is not torn in
pieces, blasphemed and mocked in his most holy word. O Lord, what shall become
of us? what account shall we make before the terrible seat of vengeance, that
thus do neglect the government of Gods house, the well bestowing of his goods,
and the unity of his servants? For being by the death of his Christ, redeemed
and made free from the perpetual bondage and slavery of the devil, death and
hell, we have despised his Passion, we have frustrated his coming, and
contemned his law. The high Priests are elated, and we are al fallen, even
from the highest unto the lowest, a small number only exempt, which at home
are contempned and derided: abroad, are daily murdered, tormented and torn
in pieces, consumed through fire, famine and sword, for the profession of his
holy name, and true worship of his eternal Godhead. The wicked devour them
like Lambs, and consume them like stubble, them selves flourishing as the
Cedars of Libanon, and increasing in wealth as Lords of the people.

But woo, woo be to them, by whom offenses do come. Be thou favorable (O
Lord) unto Sion, build up the broken wales of Jerusalem, forsake not thy
Sanctuary, but save thine elect from the pernicious customs of the wicked
world: the world so full of poison, so full of murder, so full of
vvhordome, so full of avarice, so full of contempt, and so full of securitye,
that (alas) even with horror, it svvelleth to the top of the uppermost
heavens, and it annoyeth the seat of the most highest.

Alas, what may we think, or what else may we look for, but even the very
heavens too dissolve, and the extreme flames reserved for our sins, to make
an end of our lives? Sin is ripe, faith is dead: and save deuilishnes and
deceit, there is nothing within our hearts remaining. The wicked are strong,
the Godly are weak, that what through securitye of the wicked, and the
torments executed on the godly, almost no faith can be found. The wicked as
living in delicacie, neglect the Lords work: and the Godly (as afflicted
continuallye) are afraid to do well: that except it be to talk and to be
mindeful of God and his word, there is nothing thought vain, nothing thought
sin, nothing detested.

And so the Temple of God, the Lords house, Christ his Congregation, the very
true spouse of our savior, lies ruinous, al to rent and deformed. Alas, no
faith, is left to fasten the work to the corner stone, no moisture remains
to knit up the frame with the foundation, Christ Jesus, our only rock, our
only foundation, our only head and chief corner stone. Love is cold, faith is
dead: truth is naught set by. And that same small number which would fainc be
doing in the dangerous work, are either daunted by their enemies, or
discoraged by their fellows: The zeal of Josiah is gone, and Demas triumphs:
Amasiah and Diotrephes do bear up their villainous breasts against the Lord
and his people: Demetrius is busy, and Simon Magus does florishe: that hard it
is to think whether the number is greater of fearful soldiers, faint
workmen, and feeble Christians, or the boldness of the adversary more universal,
or in tira^ny more abou^ding. How rages, how roareth, how thundreth, how
threateth, how whispereth, how braggeth ye Babilonical strumpet, ye Romish
Dragon, that bloodthirsty Ciclops, Minotaure, and horrible mo^ster? how bustle
her couetus cha^pions? how swel her vilanous rabble of rakehel Termagants? how
rage beyond ye seas her bloody Bishops? how crake the crew of her coaleque^chy
Cardinals? whose destruction and horrible fall, although I know to aproche, and
to be as it were begoon: Yet I do lament (and so may al true English hearts)
that our sins are so grievous, as by the occasion thereof, the lord does deny
in the time of so chaste, so wise, so godly, zealous, and so learned a Prince (as
is our most drad sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, whose life with joined
hearts and hands let us cry, cry unto ye Lord to lengthen) within this Realm of
England to bring to perfection that which be has begone: to abolish from her
people al remnants of popery, and to supplant the hipocritical and unlearned
ministerye. But it is to be thought and assuredly to be believed, that our
sins, even our sins so great, so grievous and so manifold, (as that ye
measure of them is immesurable, and the burden of them is intolerable) are
the only cause that our adversaries do flourish and bear the^ selves so bold
against ye furtherers of this work as they do, and that our iniquity is the
very cause yt so many cold brethren do increase and remain at this day. O
where is Besaleel? where is Aholiah? where is Hira^? where are al those true
workme^ become, yt in the work of ye material temple, were so stout, so
zealous, so artifitial, and so wise? Is there nothing of their zeal remaining?
nothing of their valeance abiding? nothing left of their skill? no alas
nothing: almost nothing at al. And (o grievous case) as this work is most
divine, most true, yea, and as it is the self same Temple that was then
prefigured: so is it in labor, in building, and in erecting, most of al
neglected and despised: nay, it is almost altogether set aside.

But if I should say that all men do neglect the building of this holy house
(as the more is the case to be lamented, very few as they ought, do further
the same:) then should it not appear that the greatest workmen do more pluck
down by their ill example in life, than erect by their labor in building.

Nevertheless, whether they work for love, for gain, or for fear, so they
do the works of hired workmen, it is not much to be waied (I mean for so
much as they do:) For (as the Apostle says:) Whether they preach Christ
for love, or for spite, so they preach, it is to be ioyed: although their
true labors, as well in life, as in doctrine, would be more to the
advancement of the work, and to the winning of a great many others.

But I would to God that the greatest part of them were not (as they are) more
careful in building of Pluralities, Trialities, Totquots, and Non residens,
than in furthering of this sacred, spiritual and divine Temple of the Lord: I
would to God they were not more given to greedye gaping after promotions, than
to the gathering together of the infected, weak, wounded, and feeble sheep:
Yea, I would to God I say, they did not more watch, and prye for worldly
preferment, than watch and pray for the Lords people, the very true house,
church, and Spouse of Christ.

Assuredlye, even now has the Fig tree cast his Leaves, now is the Sun
darkened, now has the Moon lost her Light, and now are the Stars fallen
from Heaven. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. But tell me (I pray
you) ye ministers of this holy work, ye Stewardes of this household, ye
guides of the people: Is the kingdom of heaven a worldly kingdom? Is the
crown of glory a heap of Riches? Is Christ his church a material Temple,
or is the same sustained either with Silver or Gold? Is it not said: Luke. 13.
My Kingdom is not of this world, If my Kingdom were of this world, then
would my servants surely fight for me that I should not be delivered to
the Jews: Luke. 13.
but now is my Kingdom not from hence? Is it not also written: The Kingdom
of heaven is like to a Leaven which a woman took and hid in three bushelles
of flower till al was leuened? Do not all the prophets, all the Apostles, and all the faithful that ever were, does not the whole volume of sacred scriptures,
does not christ him self, the very true son of the father God almighty,
affirm the kingdom of heaven to be a spiritual kingdom? not visible, but
invisible, not transitory, but everlasting? yea, do not we our selves at this
day: even we (in whom so small fruict of godliness apeareth) affirm, hold, and
maintain the same kingdom to be a kingdom intransitory, divine, and
incomprehensible, and the glory thereof to be immortal and never vading? Do not
we (further) hold that the Church of God is ye congregation of ye faithful,
and the very frame building, and foundation thereof to be the Apostles and
Prophets: one body, and the body of Christ: the same Christ being the head
corner stone: according as it is written: You are no more strangers and
foriners, but Citizens and Saints, Ephe. 2.
and of the household of God, and builded upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Christ Jesus him self being the head corner stone: In whom
all the building coupled together, grows to be an holy Temple in the Lord:
In whom you are builded together to be the habitacion of God by the spirit?
Is it not thus said? is it not thus written? is it not so believed? what should
I say? if it be so written, if christ him self has so taught you, and you your
selves ca^ not deny it: if you be assured I say, yt the kingdom of God is
immortal, immutable and holy: why, why then (alas) do you so greedily seek
after worldly primacies, transitory promotions, and corruptible substance? If
yt crown of glory be likewise immortal, and permansible: why desire you
earthly crounes? why hunt you after vain titles, and deceaueable honors? Has
God any fellowship with Belial? Or may the world and the spirit make friendly
atonement togeathers? what agreement is there (I pray you) betwixt God and
Ma^mon? or how accords light and darkness? It may not be, it may not be I
say that the Minister of gods word should any other way of him self seek to
further the gospel of Christ, then by sincerity of life and godly conversation:
from the which mean, whosoever he be that swarueth, the same undoubtedly is no
builder but a destroyer: no sheepherd, but a wolf: no Minister of truth, but
a sclanderer of the same: Peter. 5.
I beseech the Elders that are among you (says Peter) which am also an
elder, and a witness of the suffering of Christ, and also a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed: that ye feed the flock of God which depends
upon you: caring for the same, not by constraint, but willingly: not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as though you were Lords over Gods
heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock.

O you Pastors, you Preachers, you Guides of the people, and you pillars of
the church, O you masters of this work, and Surueyours as it were, of this
building, does then the kingdom of heaven stand in eating and drinking? Can
the Temple of God be sustained with Pluralities, and Tot quots, with Deanries
and Prebendes, with office and honor? has not Christ ordained you as Lanterns
of light, as salt of the earth, and ministers of salvation? Is it not said,
you are Gods laborers, Gods worckemen, and the builders of Gods Temple? How
happes it (then) that you be builders of your own stoare, and not builders of
Gods church? maintayners of your own wealth, and not susteiners of gods
temple? feeders of your selves, and not of your flock? How haps it (I say)
that a great number of you (for to such extremity is it come) will
counterfaitelye seem to be careful in feeding of souls, (which
notwithstanding you do not as you ought to do) and forget altogether the
releeuing of bodies, to the discredit of your selves, and to the detriment
as well of your own souls, as of the souls of your flock? and again other
some to be so epicuryous in the pamperyng of their own bodies, And so
vaineglorious in a little releeuing of the bodies of the needy, that they think
the same their counterfeit hospitality to be a sufficient discharge of them
selves, and defense of their flock? Yea, I would to God, that the number were
not great of such Godless Hipocrites, such unlearned loyterers, and very
pieuishe pelting Parasites, which for living sake have intruded and thrust them
selves into the Church: who, if they were not clothed with the counterfaite
title of bountiful housekeepers, should have nothing at al wherewith to cover
their blockishnesse, nor to hide their blindness, nor to cloak their
lewdenesse and trecherye: whereby they should incur the just reward of their
naughtines, even ignominy and reproach: of whom the Apostle gives us warning
in these words: Timo. 3.
This know ye that in the latter days shall come perilous times: For men
shall be lovers of them selves, covetous, bosters, proud speakers, disobedient to
father and mother, unthankful, ungodly, unkind, trucebreakers, false
accusers, riotous, fearce, despisers of them which are good, traitorous,
heady, high minded, greedy upon voluptuousness, more then lovers of God:
having a similitude of godliness, but having denied the power thereof. Would
God (I say) that the holy house were not pestered at this day with such
hipocrites and damnable sort of luskish loytering Lubbers, who (notwithstanding
their great blockishnes their palpable ignorance and extreme want of learning)
do keep within their cla^mes the liuelyhood of true pastors, and painful
laborers: which sustain Ruffia^s, to beggar ministers: which maintain routes
of rakehel Roisters, to decrease the number of honest poor christians: which
not only the^ selves are contented to stop the rooms of learned preachers, but
also deuilishly do bring in most horrible crewes of cursed Chaplins, and
notorious numbers of monstrous unlearned Sicophants, which take the fleece, and
starve the flock: and which do impair the Church more in one day, then the
greatest workmen are able to repair in.xx. years, to the great ruin of the
building, and directly against the word of the Apostle, which wills that none
should be admitted into ye ministry, Timo. 3.
but such as are honest: not double tongued, not given to much wine, neither
greedy of filthy lucre. Furthermore, I would to god, that besides ye number of
such disguised monsters, this holy work were not likewise hindered with
faint and faithless brethren, which are fallen from the spirit to the flesh:
from God to the world: But I fear, I fear me that eue^ of the chief workmen,
of the head laborers, and Prepositours as it were of this building, not a few
at this day are cooled in zeal, are fallen from sincerity, and ouercom with ye
world: so yt of some of the^, a man may say: Albi an atri sint, nescio. But such
alas is our state, such is our time. From the prophet to ye priest from the
hiest to ye lowest, from the head to ye foot, we are al gone from truth. we are
fallen to unrighteousness. Howbeit blessed be ye lords name for ever,
notwithstanding these abuses in ye Ministry, there is none can say that (eue^
maugre the head of ye enemy) the sound of the gospel has not passed throughout
every coast, has not been preached and taught in every place, and been rung
into the ears of every man, woman and child. Al have heard, al have seen,
yea, and al have felt as well salvation proffered, as plague for sin threatened:
Ignorance may not be pleaded, neither is there at al any excuse to be
received. But alas, of so much seed, what is the fruit? of so much
travail, what is the gain? Even this forthwith to be reaped: Stubble for the
fire, and horrible sins for the scorching flames of hell. And for this cause,
came light into the world, that men seeing, should not believe: and not
believing, should be damned. From our very Cradels are we nourished in
sin, we are practiced in our infancye, and made perfect in our Childhood. In
man's age, are we very sin itself, in middle age monsters, and in old age
Devils. O terror: O horror, O rustye beaten age? O age wherein iniquitye so
much and so mightily prevails, and wherein Beelzebub so greatly bears rule:
what should I say of us, but even this? sin, receive thy guerdon: man receive
thy doom: thy doom (I say) to be burned in the glowing gulphe of perpetual
damnation. Non vult Panthera domari, neque Phrix nisi plagis, emendabit.

As for the grievous deserts in temporal government, and the great abusions in
civil Magistrates, their cold erecting of the Lords house, their violent
depression of the great and holy work, their small zeal to the Lords people,
and their Godless supportacion of false worckemen, cursed hyrelinges, and
professed enemies to the truth? Assuredly I can not without great shame and
sorrow declare in words the very least part of that, that by some of them is
committed in deeds: to the miserable decay of the building, to the grievous
ruin of the Lords house, and to the manifest offense of Gods people.

With silence therefore will I leave them in their sin, and with hearty prayer
commit their amendment to the will of our God: who, for Christ his sake, and
for his holy names sake, frame their hearts to more love of his truth, that
his gospel be by them no more hindered, nor the professors thereof hated, nor the
sound of his word stopped.

And as for the state of Ecclesiastical government, who sees it and sorroweth
not? who beholds it, and lamenteth not? But what should I say? I would to
God that sin were not more abetted through the feeblenes of discipline, than
zelously reproved by the voice of Good Preachers. Nay, rather I would to God
that feeblenes of Discipline were not a vizare unto fearful Magistrates, and a
preposterous shift unto partial Judges. But of this matter sufficientlye,
though not to my self, yet to others of impatient hearing. Only, I wish that
silence were the virtue to bring vice into subjection, that lenitye and
mildness were the coraziue of sin: that pitye had the power to put
wickedness to flight, and Pusillanimitye and tymorousnesse were the preseruers
of pietye. Then should sin be subdued, then should vice be extirped: then
rotten soars should be searched: and then the militant Church of Christ
should abound in all kind of honor and quietness. For, silence, O who
imbraceth it not? who will not be mild? where is he that will punish? In
whom does not partial pitye abound? Or at the least wise, who is not afraid
and loath to displease? yea, and (that worse is) who dares to speak and is
not punished? who sins and is not pardoned? Alas, so mightily preuayleth
sin at this day, that as we will not say, that to sin, it is not
dangerous: so, must we needs say and affirm, that to be an accusar of
sin and wickedness, is the most dangerous thing in the world. To bear with
sin, it accuses us: To speak against sin, it troubles us: To complain
of sin, it undoes us. To keep sin secreate, is oftentimes periurye: to
lay sin open, is imminent danger: to sue against sin, is present
destruction. And what should we more say? so large a scope has sin at this
day, and so small a succor has virtue each where, that sin each where is
pampered, and virtue each where subdued to importable bondage. And now, if al
these things be true, and upon experience found to be true: alas, where
shall virtue be shrouded? where, oh where alas shall sin be restrained? Shall
she fly unto zeal? Oh, zeal can not help her: for why, so cold is zeal now
every where become, that none otherwise than as a dead corse is he carried
about us. Zeal I say is dead: virtue is become awiddowe: And as for sin, so
puissaunte is he waxen, that power can not vanquish him, whole Parishes can
not put him to flight: and where men think to have most advantage against him,
there is he most mightily supported. If they bring him before the Commissary,
the Co^missary cannot, or will not hurt him. If they follow him according to the
order of ye law: alas, the Law does enfranchise him: and what there wants in
the law, that, aucthority supplyeth.

The proof of which matter, as it is so fresh amongst some, that it cannot be
forgotten: So, is it so grievous, as that silence can not shrowde it. I have
heard of sundry godly Parishioners that have found all this to be true: Who,
by keeping sin secreet, have felt the worm of their Conscience, besides the
danger of the law still threatened unto them: and by laying sin open (namely,
so far forth as manifest suspicions were able to lead them) have thereby (as
it were by a direct mean) brought sin to full scope, and them selves to great
danger and continual vexations: some of them, followed with threats: some,
endaungered through sudden stripes that have been given them: and other some,
molested with suits brought upon them, wanting all color of equitye. But, as
uncertain where to infer this fault, whether, in the weakness of the Law,
or in ye partialitye of the Judge for overmuch mitigating the seueritye of so
scle^der a law, in admitting (peradventure) some feeble purgatio^ by unseemly
compurgators, I will cease for this time: wishing nevertheless, that
whensoever any party accused, shall happen by such sclender purgation, to be
acquitted of such crime, as in the eyes and by the oathe of godly men shall
seem not only detestable, but also apparent: Some means may also be found
by the Godly and careful provision of the Magistrate, that the accusars may be
shielded from the mischeuous attempts of their adversaries, that they may be
quit from their continual quarelles, that they may walk in safetye from
their malice, and may travail in their callinges without dread or hazard of
displeasure.

But to return: Lo, hear the negligent building of the ministry and the
cold erecting of the Magistrate: Now behold we in the midst of this Chaos,
what help there is in Parents, or what hope in succession.

Parents do err, and they do not only continue their errors, but therein
also do they nourish their children.

Children by nature are evil, and being evil, they are by example of Parents
made worse. No love toward God, no honor of children to their Parents, nor
fear of Parents in their Children is sought for, had, or regarded at all^ If
I should speak of the educatio^ of daughters, (whereof in this third place I
should writ) the very Pagans, Infidels, and Turckes, would stand up against
us. I can not tell whether through sorrow, I should cry out and bewail
them, or for shame commit them to scilence: so immoderate in apparel, so
lascivious in talk, so bold in behavior, and so unseemly in iesture is the
universal state, almost as well of wives as of damsels. And that which most
of all should be regarded: I mean the provident care of parents over their
daughters in their young and tender years: that is altogether neglected and set
a side. No sooner is the daughter of age of understanding, but she straight
way and therewithal learneth the high path to whoredom, and the principles
of vanity and lewdenesse. Either she is altogether kept from exercises of good
learning, and knowledge of good letters, or else she is so nouseled in amorous
books, vain stories and fond trifeling fancies, that she smells of
naughtiness even all her life after, as a vessel which being once seasoned,
does never forgo the sent of the first licour.

In the time of infidelity, women by learning did attain the very top and
prick of virtue and honesty, of which number I will recite a few according as
they have been gathered, not by my self, but by learned writers, which for
their direct handeling of this matter I am persuaded sometimes to use, and
oftentimes to ymitate. Hortensia a Romain maid, was so profoundlye learned
amongst the Romans, that her worthynesse was spread throughout the whole
Monarck, and she was not more famous for her learning then loved for her
virtue, and honored for her chastity. Of such wonderful learning, was the
wife of the Poet Lucane whose name as I remember, was Argentaria, that after
the death of her husband, she corrected his books, and made perfect all his
works. Diodorus the Physician had five daughters, excellent in learning and
renoumed in chastity. Corynna The^a a virtuous woman overcame ye Poet Pindar
five times in verses. What should I speak of Cassa^dra and Sulpitia? what
should I speak of Paula the wife of Senec, which being once informed with the
doctrine of her husband, followed the same also in virtuous life and
conditions? All these were Paganish, Heathenishe and misbeleeuing people: And
yet for all that, such was their excellency in learning, and their worthynesse
in virtue, that the worst of them all (for prude^cy) was able to govern a
whole country, and to keep in order a whole kingdom. If we look back to the
first time of Christianity, there also we shall find many godly zealous, and
learned women and virgins. Tecla was the disciple of Paul the Apostle, and
very perfect in the sacred scryptures. In the time of saint Hierome, Paula,
Marcella, Eustachium, and others were greatly studied in the word of God. And
in the time of Saint Augustine, were Valeria, and Prob a, besides an infinite
number in all ages, which excelled as well in learning, as in good life and
living.

But even as I do see very few, and almost none at all in this our extreme,
and to too impious time, any thing desirous to attain either unto virtue or
learning: so, that same small number which have any knowledge at all, do so
greatly abuse it, that much better were it they should unlearn that again
which they have already learned, then miserably to abuse it as they do, or at
the least wise (as we see them) to make equalle Pampheticall trifles with
wholesome Doctrine and trial of life. That bread can never be wholesome and
good bread which has once been spread over with ratten bane or other poison,
be the venim never so much scraped or pared away. That cloth can never
attain the old hew and whiteness, which has once been touched with tar:
and (no more) may those writings be good which are enterlaced with toys and
villainous fancies. I would to God that maids at the least wise might be
brought up, if not in learning, yet in honest trades and occupations as amongst
the very infidels has been used, accustomed, and most carefully observed.

Nay, I would to God they did not spend their times like the women of Perse
land: who after some slight and frivolous exercises, do fall into more vain
and impious pleasures, as it were a malo, ad pe^us: after reading of
pernicious, unchaste and godless books, or after labors of like importance
(for avoiding of tediousness) to accompany inpleasures and banquets, young
amorous Roisters, and mischievous varlettes, making the end of one pleasure to
be the beginning of an other. Of a truth, I may say of them now, as a learned
and zealous Preacher said of the people in his time: it shameth me to think
that they are not ashamed to speak: it shameth me to speak that they are not
ashamed to do: it shameth me to do that they are not ashamed to rejoice at.

On the other side, it is to be lamented (as a case too too grievous) such
parents as do bring up their daughters in learning, do it to none other end,
but to make them companions of carpet knights, and giglots, for amorous
lovers. If their intent were otherwise, how would they dare so over curiously,
and carefully to maintain and keep them, at the least wise to wincke at them
(as they almost every where do) in that vain and ungodly practice of
daunsing? vain and ungodly I say, only in respect of the present abuse of the
same, which the very Pagans at all times and in all ages abhorred, especially
being once grown into an occupation and trade as a practice most pernicious,
wherein the senses are altogether captiuated and made subject to unlawful
fantasies, to unreasonable thoughts, and wicked devises. O good GOD, says a
certain writer, what shaking, what bragging, what wringing of hands, what
whisperings, what treading upon the toes, what uncleanly handlings, gropings,
kissings, and a very kindling of lecherye, does their assotiate that trade and
occupation of daunsing? And surely, as the same in the abuses thereof at this
day, is cause of much and exceeding great impiety: so is it not (almost)
possible for any one to attempt it, after the excess of our common banquets,
being sober or in right mind, and perfect memory: For it cannot be but that
to dance in such order, or rather in such disorder as is now used, proceeds
either from excess of drink, or else of mere madness.

But what marvel is it, if there be so many disordered places of daunsings and
ministrelsey, since that there are also houses of bawdry? And yt this our
intemperat kind of daunsing is a mean unto much lewdness and contempt of
godly life, it is plainly to be understood: there was never seen any one of
our notable dau^sers zealous in good life: there was never heard of any that
could hop, skip, and turn on the toe (as they term it) that would scarcely
come to ye church without carrying. O good God, what kind of learning is this?
what education of children is this to be called?

And yet this is the virtue that now a days is used: yea, this is the skyl
that Parents do now a days desire to be in their Daughters. And whether for
the learning heareof, they bestow their goods upon them or not, all is one:
For they never restrain them: no, they never forbid them* so often as they see
them of them selves to be thereunto given: And it is a world to see, with what
demurenes, some that be Parents do sit in beholding the strange Iestures,
footing and countenance of their curious fantastical Daughters: yea,
oftentimes, when the self same skill is the cause of defiling their bodies,
and utter loss of their honestye and good name.

A certain Emperor ordained that no Daughters should goo out of their mothers
doors, but in the company of their mothers, and that they should not daunse
with Young men in assemblies. We contrariwise, do procure our Daughters to
Bridales, to Maskes, and to other like companyes where Daunsing is used: yea,
and so careful are Parents to have their daughters noted of excellencye in
daunsing: that in all that they may, they adorn them with Jewels, and set them
forth in costly apparel: such, as the fond, foolish and enterchangeable
fashions do require.

And this is the learning that Parents now a days do wish for in their
daughters, this is the virtue, these are the qualityes of them so greatly
desired: that if time were ever a compound, I think it is even now at this
day and in this Age: Besides this, when the Daughter is in this wise noseled
and brought up, when she is in this kind of learning more than sufficiently
instructed, or rather distructed, then is she straight way taken forth a
new lesson, she turns over another leaf, and goes on with evil speed.

And as before the learning thereof, she was meet enough to receive any kind
of Godly instructions: so, after she has once attained unto the knowledge of
Daunsing, she never afterward returns back to better things, she quite
and clean forsakes virtue, and for the most part, bids honesty adewe. Then
she must have scope, then she must have her apparel after the fashion, then
she must have paintings, Lickinges, Combings, Playtinges, Pitchinges, and all
kind of new fashioned Trimminges: yea, then she must have walkinges,
Feastinges, and watchinges, and al kind of pleasure that makes perfect the
trade of a Strumpet.

But as herein, I have greatly (and above the rest) occasion to accuse such
Maidens, as have been, and are immoderately given to daunsing: so, (the
general confusion is such) that as well the unskillful daunser, as the cunning,
as well the one, as the other, are now altogether given over to liberty, and
there withal to pride, fond love, and worse.

Of a truth, I can not see that for the education of Children, especially of
Daughters, we may almost in any point be compared with diverse, and that a
great many Infidelles and Pagans which never knew God nor Christ. Amongst the
Egiptians there is a custom (and I suppose at this day inviolable) that women
shall wear no shoes, for intent only that they should abide at home, and not
(so much as once) be seen out of the doors of their Parents or Husbands.
The Massagetes, a people amongst the Barbariens, like as they do use none
other houses save great Tubbes and Tons, so do they provide, that their
Wives and Daughters be together abiding in one Tun, and them selves and
their Sons (when they are of age) in another Tun: not accompanying their
Wives after the time of their conception nor resorting unto them a good time
after their deliverance. I read also that the Bragmans a people in the
uttermost bounds of this vper world, do never assotiate the^ selves, I mean
the man the woman, nor the woman the man, after such time, as their wives have
conceived, nor till they have a certain time gone after their deliverance:
their issue being always brought up, the male with the father, and the female
with the mother. And at such time as they see their children of sufficient
years, and mariageble (as they call it) then if it be a man child, the father
treats with a certain Officer amongst the men (which is as it were the head
of the people) a man approved wise and full of piety, for the marying of his
said son, and they together immediately do repair to the place, where the
women have their abiding together. And after that the magistrate has chosen at
his discretion from among the rest of the virgins, four damsels, agreeable to
the young man as well in age as otherwise: Forthwith are called before them,
the mothers of the iiij. maidens, and the mother of the son: and after that
they all (being demanded) do seem to assent unto the choice of the young
man, upon whom so ever it shall happen the same to be made, then they
altogether with one voice (falling groueling on the ground) do beseech the
Gods to prosper him in the choice: and after certain prayers made according to
the use of the country, the son as is aforesaid, at his own liking, does
choose one of the four virgins, and (taking her forth by the hand from the
other three) they all with the magistrate accompanied with the other three
wives, who in the mean time do leave the governance of their daughters to
some ancient matrone amongst the rest of the women, do conduct the young
couple to the father of the maid: who after that he has given his consent,
which they never at any time do deny, with his wife and the other three
women, (the magistrate going before) does lead them to the people, which for
the same purpose are called together: whereupon the people with one voice make a
joyful showte and outcry to their Gods to bless them, and to increase the
fruits of their bodies. And when they are thus coupled with assent of the
parents, the mutual liking of the persons themselves, and the good will of the
people: The young married folk are brought home again by the magistrate, the
parents and the other iij. women aforesaid, being also accompanied with so
many of the men, as either then be married, or have at any time before had
wives: leaving always behind them governors for their children, as in that
behalf, it is also provided.

And this is the order of that country in bringing up and marying their
children. And they use also this self same order in marying their daughters,
not differing in any point from the marriage of their sons: saving that the
mother of the daughter always accompanies the husband, as well when he
treats with the magistrate, as also in all other dealings. Which order in
marying and bringing up of children, I do here write to none other end, but
because I do see (even to the great grief of my heart) that neither in the
education of daughters, nor yet in the honest bestowing of them in marriage,
parents now a days (at the leastwise very few) do in any point come nighe
them.

If this be Christianitye, if this be pietye, nay if this be humanitye,
that we shall be corrected by the Heathen, reproved by Infidelles, and
condemned by Pagans: Then to what end has our merciful Savior denied his
most holy word, his Divine truth and perfect door of Salvation unto his
peculiar people, the Jews, whom always he preserved, whom always he
defended, yea, and whom always from the beginning, he loved and Fostered: and
given the same unto us which were outcastes and bondslaues of the Devil,
Children of wrath, and heirs of damnation? Nay, Tire and Sidon shall stand
against us at the day of Judgment: Sodom and Gomorra shall accuse us, and
Nimue shall utterly condemn us. What I could hear say of the outrage of
Women in their Apparaile, in Licking, Painting and Trimming them selves, I am
ashamed, and do tremble to utter. Of a truth, the substance which is
consumed in two Years space upon the apparaill of one mean Gentleman's
Daughter, or upon the Daughter or Wife of one Citizen, would be sufficient
to find a poor Student in the Uniuersitye, by the space of four or five
Years at the least. Mine eyes have seen the experience, and with sorrow have
I found out the truth thereof.

O state confused, O people deformed and full of outrage? O time too too full
of Iniquity and sin.

O England, what have thou imagined, or how have thou wrought, that even the
very Turks and Sarazens, the very Pagans and Miscreantes, do thus reprove
thee of iniquitye, and condemn thee of sin? O Parents, what has your
posteritye offended, that thus you conduct them to the Devil, and make them
fit members for the Infernal gulye of damnation? Why restrain you not the
horrible pride of your daughters? why reprove you not their detestable
Paintinges, Lyckinges and Pranckinges of them selves? why (I say) do you not
teach them to keep home, and instruct them in virtue? And O ye Daughters,
what mean (I pray you) those strange kind of disguisinges, Starchinges and
Trimmings? To what end are these fashions, and for what intent are they used?
If you do them to please your self, it is vain: If it be to please Christ,
it is a follye: If it be to delight men, it is whorishe and ungracious: If it
be to get you Husbands, it is as much, as if you would win them with
Uizars. Democritus says that the adornement of a Woman stands in scarcetye
of Speech and appareyle. The Wise man says that the right apparel of Men
and Women, is no manner of deceyptfull painting and Trimming, nor yet the
Pompeous apparel and Iewelles, but it is their good conditions and manners.
Saint Ambrose also says that the Woman that painteth her face with material
colors, does raze and put out the true Picture of Christ. She is not well
appareilled (says Plautus) that is not well manered: neither loves she
virtue that desires her apparel to be Brave and fine. I say, O you
Daughters, why then do you thus without al measure, and beyond al Godforbod,
endeavor to trick up your selves and to alter your natural hewes? why seek
you for strange attire? and why wish you to be seen? I would to God that
worthy Law, which now bears the name of Opius: I would to God I say that
Opius Law were established amongst us, which does prescribe a mean in Women's
attire, what they may, and what they may not wear. Nevertheless, I do
believe that albeit there were ordained a measure altogether immeasurable, and
an order altogether inordinate, yet women in this time would not observe it
nor keep them selves within the compass of it: such is their extreme rage
and wilfulnes.

And herein appears as well the negligence of Fathers, as also the pernicious
example of Mothers, and the general excess of al women, as well in apparel, as
otherwise: whom as we have with great sorrow to lament, so must I leave them
in silence, for that their lives are so generally noisome, as to hear the
same, it would abhor any true and honest Christian.

But even as the lives of Parents and elders are, so is the bringing up of
Children and Yonglings: not only of Daughters, which I have before touched,
but also of Sons, of whose education in Learning I have somewhat written,
though briefly in a few quaires hereunto annexed. As into whose education in
life and manners, I am much loath to discende, the field being so large, and
the hope of amendment so small. Omitting therefore the first ill, handeling of
them in their Infancye, the over great neishnes and dilicacye that by Parents
is infused into their little sons, even in those years when as they should
chieflye be framed unto such constitucion of body as the importance of
Study does look for and require, and as through want whereof, they become
unfit in after Age both for learning and all other good exercises tending to
the succor of a common Wealth, as falling through their said ill Education
into feminine delights and vain Curiosityes: I come only to that looseness
of manners whereunto they are haled and set at liberty, at such time as
their frail youth ought chieflye and carefully to be held in and
restrained, namelye, and universally the contempt of Superiors and government:
whereunto they are directly procured or rather enforced by two spurs of wicked
provocation ministered unto them by the meare vanitye of Parents* I mean
through excess in their appareyl and liberty in their speech: whereof the
first so outrageth now a days in the heads of fantastical Parents, that
were the dispositions of their Sons never so temperatelye set, That one
vanitye were of it self able violentlye to withdraw them from virtuous
Delites and forewardnes to learning, unto a very Sea of fantasies and wicked
behauiours.

And as for that too too malapart boldness and liberty that they so greatly
delight to have maintained in their sons, who seeith not what number of
enormityes have ensued, and do daily fall out through the same? who seeith not
how it increases with their Age, and how many wickednesses it draws on
with their years. Parents them selves thereby disobeyed, all government
contempned, al correction resisted, al liberty sought for, and all virtue
forsaken. Whereupon follows and instauntlye ensues with increase of their
age, such monstrous increase of horrible abuses, such continual disturbaunce
of common tranquillitye, and such yrkesome annoyaunce of the Churches
felicitye, that who soever is (in deed) touched with the least consideration
of any of the same, he can not fail but find matter enough of unspeakable
sorrow.

And I would to God the Magistrates could ones bend their minds, although not
to the Original preventing of these said manifold abuses (which truly as
natural Parents they are holden to do) yet at the least to shred of some part
of the Branches that so aboundantlye are increased through this ill kind of
education, and that so mightelye ouershadowe the banckes of all honesty, good
order and government.

Amongst the which, as one most noisome to the Church of God, and most
hurtful to the common Wealth, that bloody Brauerye in quarelling and fighting,
that sauadge practice in cutting and slashing, ought sharpelye and earnestlye
to be dealt withal: Which certainelye (if Magistrates do not foresee and
speedelye reform) I am fullye persuaded will bring more danger to the state,
then all the Laws of the land will bring sauetye to the truth of men's causes.
But this viperous bloody brood, this unkind and fierce Generation, what
bloodye colors can it cast to cloak with face of manhood this more then
boutcherlike kind of behauior? Forsothe (say they) and that with fearful
Oaths, we are Gentlemen (I speak not now of common Hacksters, who are ready
at al times and upon every slight motion to bid battle to al honestye and
truth) and can not bear to be abused of any man living: Who in deed, if they
were right Gentlemen, would rather be induced quietlye to put up the force
of ten Iniuryes, than witleslye and cruellye with rashness to pursue the
reuengement of one, to the disturbance of the good peace of the Realm, to the
sheadding of blood, and to the overthrow of all good orders and pollicye.

But to discende into the particular displaying of the manifold Branches that
are daily sprung up and increased from and by the means of this ill kind
of education of Sons, and not least of all from this one vain of Saucines
boldness and liberty, whereunto they are let loose without all respect of time
and al regard of Age: As I should take upon me a work infinite in it
self, so, should I conclude nothing else in the same, but matter of sharp
and bitter reproof unto Parents and Magistrates, who, of so many and great
abuses so infinitelye arysing and so outragiouslye increasing with
continuance, no one do prevent, no one do suppress, no one at all do
restrain, or appease.

Wherefore, that I may finishe, behold thou Realm of England, thou old
Brutish Nation, whom sometimes Foreign Peoples have honored for thy pietye,
behold I say what is thy state, bethincke thy self of thine impietye, see
how thou razest the walls of Christ his true Church, consider thy horrible
sins and offenses, perpende thy contempt of Gods divine truth, that heavenly
Manna, and glad tidinges of the Gospel: see, see how thou heapest up wrath
against thy self in ye day of thy visitacio^. If ever thou soughtest the mean
to repentance, now call for it, now seek it, and with penitent prayer, crave
it at the hands of thy dear Father: Now, now I say look about thee, now is
it high time: even now (O England) is it most needful, when God as thou
seeist, does plague for sin even all thy neighbors about thee, and stays
his anger toward thee, deferreth his scorge, and withholdeth his indignation.

If the exceeding and superabundant mercyes of thy God will not reclame thee,
if his wonderful benefits will not move thee: If his great love, and more
then fatherly kindness will not persuade thee, nor the extreme judgment
withdraw thee: yet (as one of thy sinful members). I beseech thee, and as
thou regardest thy good and quiet state, as thou desire to avoid thine own
desolation, thy utter fall and ruin, I exhort thee that thou consider how
grievously thy brethren about thee, even borderers on thy country and
neyghbors to thy Nation, are devoured of monsters, are murdered by Tirants,
are persecuted, burnte, bayted, boiled, scourged, racked, paunched, pined,
torn in pieces, and violently drawn unto strange, horrible and fearful
kinds of death by their false brethren, Iudaical Traitors, execrable
Papists, cursed shauelinges and damnable sect of deuillishe Dunses. O, behold
the tragical and most grievous state of thy afflicted brethren in France, thy
friends in Flaunders, and thy neyghbors in Scotland. See see (O England) how
their sins have heaped up so mightelye the indignation of God against them,
that the greatest relief which they find, is speedy death, and quick
dispatche of their irckesom and miserable lives. See I say, and behold how for
contempt of Gods most holy Gospel, they are miserably afflicted and plagued:
how for their negligence in building, they are tormented and punished.

And (O thou Realm of England) what have thou to plead for thy self in this
case? what lawful excuse can thou make for thy self? Have thou not Jesus
Christ the chief corner stone? Have thou not his blessed word, fro whence
necessary matter may be ministered for the quickening of thy barren, dry and
inconstant faith? Have thou not the same Faith moystened by his long and
exceeding great benefits? What would thou more? His very elect, his
Apostles and most familiar friends have not enjoyed so great oportunitye by
the thousand part, as thou have at this day. They had no rest in their blessed
bodies, nor quietness in their Sacred minds. They wanted both place of
assemblye, where they might hear and teach, and also place of relief where
they might be shrouded from their manifold and exceeding great number of
enemies: which even continually lay in wait to spil their most innocent
blood, and only for the profession of Christ and his sacred Gospel. Thou
(contrary wise) have not only the Gospel revealed, but also have liberty to
Preach and to hear the same. Thou art not only defended from the enemy,
but also have the same unto thy self in subjection. To conclude, thy wealth,
thy goods, and else what so ever thou have, is not only protected from
ruin and spoil, but also thy Riches, thy substance and prosperitye is
mightelye blessed, and most amplye enlarged: All which being so, alas what
remains for thee to plead in defense?

O think therefore of thy God, or at the least wise, tremble at thy state.
Fear, fear I say, and repent: Pleasure will not preserve thee: Riches will
not save thee: Honor will not shield thee: Aucthoritye may not help thee:
Renown can not acquit thee. Away therefore with thy pleasure: abandon thy
Riches: contempne thine estate: Seek not to bear rule: come down to the
lowest. It is good for thee to humble thy self: and most needful it is to
lay hold on the time. Though time be infected, yet let it not pass thee.
The time shall come, and is even now come, wherein neither time nor trade at al
shall be. And even in this extremity of time, thou shall desire the mountains
to cover thee, and the Hills to fall upon thee, and shall not escape. Bind not
therefore one sin too another, for one of them shall not be unpunished: Every
man in his vocation shake of this Lethargye, and awake out of sleep: You
Pastors, you Preachers, and spiritual builders of this heavenly Tabernacle,
set to your hands: away with ambicion, away with security, and above al
things, let not covetousness be raygning amongst you. As you have regard to
the saving of souls (which is cheifest) so forget not, therewith al to
minister relief to the bodies oppressed and in need: be glad to distribute:
do good unto al men, and especially to such as are of the household of Faith:
and in any wise preach not for temporal preferme^t or gain. Call to mind how
Gehasi, Helias servant was stricken with Leprosy for receiving of money in
reward of his Masters duty: 2. Regu^. 5.
Whereby you may see how detestable a thing it is in the sight of god to have
ministers of covetous minds. On the other side, you Magistrates, and temporal
Rulers, down with all falsehood, let Law have his force, let Justice take
place, let virtue be aided, let vice be suppressed. Have always before your
eyes the Touch stone of truth, which is the book of Gods word, and let not
Bribes overcome you, nor favor entise you, nor fear dismay you, nor affection
withdraw you. And above all things, defend with all force the Gospel of
Christ, and the power of the Scriptures: regarding therewithal the defense of
his Preachers, the safegarde of his Ministers, and the maintenance of their
estate. Pluck not from them, catch not from them: defraude them not. If they
shake but the dust of their heels against you, you shall never be able to
answer it. Tire and Sydon shall be in better case then such of you shall be at
the dreadful and extreme judgment of souls and bodies. Consider how Joseph
being put in aucthoritye, did make it for a law over the land of Egypt, that
Pharao should have the first part, except the land of the Priests, which was
not Pharaos. To conclude, even al you that call upon the name of Jehovah, that
worship Christ in the deity, that have spiritual feeling, and that take upon
you the name of Christians: Away with negligence, away with prating, away with
hipocrisye, and put from you contempt of the Scriptures, by the which and
according to the knowledge whereof, you shall be Judged, and that very shortly.

Avoid wicked company, eschew fained Brethren, and fly far from the
sinful. If any that is called a brother, be a fornicator, Corinth. 5.
or covetous, or an Idolator, or rayler, or a drunckard, or an extorcioner,
with such keep not company: nor until he repent, have any fellowship at al with
him. Fear not to do well: but be afraid to do evil. Maugre the head of the
Devil, do well: do well, and cease not, do well I say, because it is gods will
that you should do well: ye men seeing your well doing, may glorify your father
which is in heaven. Of sin comes death: Of well doing comes life, the
firm reward (although not for good deeds, yet) of well doing. Be not carried
away with pleasure, nor discoraged in sorrow. Forget not in prosperity: ne
faint ye in aduersitye. The one comes of too much confidence, ye other of
despair: If thou have wealth, use ye same to the profit of thy brethren, to
the relief of the needye, and in due distribution. If thou have scarsitye, or
other affliction what soever, repine not there at, neither by sinistre means
seek to amend thine estate: grudgingly refuse it not, nor frowardlye wish
thou of thy self, to avoid it. Remember how the Children of Israel seeking
without pains to come to the Land of promise, Exodus 3.
received not only a more tedious wait of travail and pains: but also (even
all of them except Joshua and Caleb) were quite and clean excluded from that
place so desired.

Finally, you that be Parents, have a special regard to the bringing up of your
children: Let their education be godly, and their young years not careless:
remembering evermore that childers Children are ye crown of the elders, and the
glory of their Fathers. Let your Sons have correction, Prou. 13.
and your Daughters be bridled: Teach them the commandementes of God, and have
regard to their ways: that your so^ns may florishe, and your Daughters be
fruitful: by the one to have Justice, and by the other, increase of housholdes
and people: Let them learn obedience, and walk in humilitye: Let their
virtues advance them, and truth still defend them: Let them marry for virtue and
not for promotion: That that which has been, and is at this day cried out
upon in all places, may now at the last be reformed: that no more it be
said, you sell your Daughters for money, as men sell their horses and sheep:
That Matrimony no more be accounted to Halte, nor Whoredom a pleasure: That
earth may be peopled, and heaven still enlarged: That we may stay (even
now at the last) the riottous race of our damnable living: And that to us it
be not spoken, as it was sometimes said to the children of Israel. The people
turns not unto them that smite them, neither do they seek the Lord of
hoastes: Therefore will the Lord cut from them in one day, even head and
Tail, Branch and Tvvig, the ancient and the honorable? Man is the head,
the Prophet that Preaches lies, is the tail: for the leaders of the people
do cause them to err, and they that are led by them, are devoured. Therefore
will the Lord have no pleasure in their young men, nor. pity their Fatherless
and widow. For every one is an hipocrite and wicked, and every mouth
speaks lies.

A Compendious form of education, to be diligently observed of all Parents
and Scholemaisters in the trayning up of their Children and Scholars in
learning.

Gathered into English meeter, by Edward Hake.

To master John Harlowe his approved friend.
AFter that the right honorable the Lord chief Justice of the common plees
had permitted unto me the oath of an Attorney, thereby admitting me into the
number of Attourneys in the common place, it was persuaded unto me by certain
good friends of mine, for that the name of an Attorney in the common place is
now a days grown into contempt, whether in respect of the multitude of
the^, which is great besides an huge rabble of Pettipractizers, or rather
Petifoggers, dispersed into every corner of this Realm, or whether in
respect of their loose and lewd dealinges, which are manifold, Or whether
in both those respects I know not: I say, it was for this cause persuaded
unto me, to dedicate a little time wholly and altogether to my professed studies
of the common Laws, that I might thereby the better enable my self to do good
in that calling. Whereupon, resolving my self determinately to follow that
purpose, I thought it convenient to seclude from me all those foreign
exercises which might any vvayes seem to repugne, or to be (as it were) a
proposito aliena.

But (as in those my studies prefixed) being tied unto solytarinesse in the
Country, which for my lot, has happened unto me by marriage, after a while I
perceived that, vvanting (as I there did) the benefit of mine accustomed
conference, it was impossible for me, without some exercise of the mind, to
continue, or with profit to go forwards in the same. In which respect, I
contented my self (betwixt vvhiles and for recreation sake) to resort unto
mine accustomed exercise, but so, as (if it might be) some profit might
redound thereof unto others.

And happening by good luck upon a certain Latin book entitled, De pueris
statim ac liberaliter instituendis, I gathered compendiously out of the same
(as not being able to allow my self time enough from my said studies, to
accomplish the part of a Translatour) such certain summary documents as might
seem sufficient to frame an orderly and good form of education: which also I
have turned into English meter and that for these two causes especially:
First, for that prose requires a more exact labor then meeter does, and could
not have been enterprised without going through the whole book, whereunto my
small allovvaunce of time (as is aforesaid) could not be aunsvverable.
Secondly, because meeter unto the unlearned (whom I heartily vvish to be
followers of this book) does seem a great deal more pleasant then prose,
and does mitigate (as it were) the harshnes of the matter.

Which little book I do offer unto you (my approved friend) as a token of my
good will, in whom, as in my self, I do perceive a special love not only
unto this, but also unto every other good form of education: as being trained
up (together with me your poor scholefellow) with the instructions of that
learned and exquisite teacher, Master John Hopkins, that worthy
Schoolemaister, nay rather, that most worthy parent unto all children
committed to his charge of education: Of whose memory if J should in such an
opportunity as this is, be forgetful, J might justly be accounted the most
unthankful person in the world, considering that I have franckly tasted of
his goodness in this behalf: that (if it be not unseemly so to vvishe) would
to God J had lived at his feet even days and years longer then J did. But to
return, in respect only of good will and love, I send unto you these fevv
quaiers, praying you to accept the same in equal part, resorting indifferentlye
unto the consideration of those common affections of love, which are wont
rather patiently to bear reproach, that any vvayes to lie hyd and unknown
unto the party so beloved. Wherein I rest.

Your own assuredlye Edward Hake.

To the Reader.
WHat age in Infantes is requirde,
or ere they should be taught,
What sort of Teachers best agrees,
what Schools be good, what naught,
Dew means also t'instruct them well,
all these good Readers here
Within this book (though small to vewe)
in largest wise appear.
With other matters incident,
which to my simple skill,
For thy delight, I have discourste
and written with good will.
My meaning do accept for good:
but pardon things amiss.
So shall my pen for thy behoof
write greater things then this.
The Speakers. Philopas. Chrisippus. CHrisippus, in these careless days
wherein the blind are bold
To force with words the truth of things:
wherein each man does hold
His own devise for reasons rule,
his will for perfect law,
Wherein each one accountes his words
for depthe of learned saw:
What think thou in this case of mine,
should Infantes tender years
Be trained up and taught in book
ear wanton Childhood wears,
Or stay til time of greater strength,
that they then better may
Be able to sustain the toil
that learning lookth for aye?
And whereby their so tender sense
more capable may grow,
To bring forth fruit of better things
which careful skill shall sow?
Of truth, it seemthe, twere best that I
my little son at home
Should keep a while in childishe race
and suffer him to rome,
To play the wanton yet a while
until such time as he
Through help of years may labor bear
and more capations be.

Chrisippus Philopas, I perceive in you
as in each father now:
You wish for fruit of tender soil
and yet forbear the plowe.
At first, at first Philopas, when
the mind is void of cares,
When heap of vice for want of place
the wit of wanton spares,
While tender age is tractable
while mind is apt to take
Each good precept, and it retain,
then then your entrance make.
For old men naught remember but
such things they learnde in youth:
If good therefore be graft in time,
good fruit thereof ensuthe.
Esteem for naught the words of such,
as hold that infantes age
Has neither strength to wade with pain
ne wit for learning sage.
For first of all, Memory chiefly regarded to the obta^ning of learning.
thentraunce unto
learning does consist
In memory above the rest:
and all men well it wiste
That Children have the aptest wits
both to retain and hold.
To supple wax the seal does stick,
not so to wax that is old.
And for so much as nature has
to learning us begotte,
Why should we think ye learnde to sone
that nature thinks not?
Why should we deem the study rash
of that same thing to be
Whereof by Nature seeds are sown
in each young Babe we see?
Dame Nature in our minds has sown
the knowledge of each thing:
Why should we then make nice those bloomes
to better state to bring?
Besides all this some things there be
though needeful to be known
Of elder sort, yet those in Babes
more easilye are sown
And sooner settled than in such
as are of riper time
As Christ cross row the skill of tongues
fine tales and Catoes rhyme.
For brief, why is that age esteemde
for learning so unfit
Which all men see so apt and prone
good nourture for to get?
Nay, what will children sooner do
which once have power to chatte
When as they see no remedy,
than still to think on that?
How much more profitable is it
that that same age should be
Stirde up with learning than with toys,
so mean have his degree?
For if the Child have sense to learn
lewd things and trisles vain,
Then thinck the same has sense likewise
to learning so again
For as upon new white lymde walls
Men painte what likes them best
(Beet good or ill:) so sure it stands
with Infantes tender breast.
At first (I say) ear cares come on,
ear vice begin to grow,
Let children learn. Such seeds increase
as men in time shall sow.
Unto the sheep new shorn fleese
whereon no dye has fall.
You may such perfect color cast
as likes you best withal.

Philopas Alas Chrisippus, small it is
(God wotes) that Children can
By help of tender sense obtain:
and (pray) what boots it than
Therefore the same into their heads
which they can not retain?
Now in good soothe, it seemth to me
but travail spent in vain.

Chrisippus Sweet licour may preserved be
as well in brittle glass
As in the pot framde out of stone
or vessel made of Brass.
And why should sclender gain be lost?
to little give you more:
And so shall little gain in time
increase abundant store.
At least this profit shall ensue
to them through studies toil,
Their minds shall have no place for vice
which tender skill does foil.
For nothing better occupies
the busye mind of man
Then earnest study wrought with toil
though happing now and than.
And sure, this gain ought not to be
contempnde in any wise:
For what though weak the body be?
the wit to strength shall rise.
And then the loss is counteruailde,
who would not rather crave.
Some loss of strength than loss of wit,
if wishing he might have?
Nayth'lesse it is not meant to make
tough Champions of the same:
But only for the common weal,
good governors to frame.
Whereto their childish strength will serve
and well suff^saunt be:
Far weaker state then Milos strength,
will thereunto agree.
And yet if danger ought appear,
through pressing of the mind:
Why should not such as have the charge,
some present easement find?
Let nothing stop the care of skill,
and learning to be had:
It forces not for lack of game,
let little child be sad.
But parents fondely fray their sons, Abuse of fond Parents.

from toil that study craves:
Though vilely they neglect such things,
as bring them to their graves.
As filthy surfets in their meat,
wherethrough to them do grow
Not only in the body hurt,
but in the mind also.
They bring their infantes unto feasts
of strange and diverse food:
In banquets that till midnight last,
their presence does them good.
With salt and fresh they fill their gorge
with hot and cold aleeke,
Until the stomach ouerchargde,
through vomit ease does seek.
They pinche and crook their bodies in,
the little corpse they strain
With garments far unmeet such age,
and to be thought as vain.
They cock them up with coats of pride
they use them for their squires,
They make them Cockneies in their kind
and Apes in their attires.
Not any ways more tenderly
they do mistrust their strength,
Then when they should be set to school,
and brought to book at length.
Moreover parents there be some
which when (in tender age)
They hear their children likde for ought,
they straight their state presage.
This child says one will prove well learnd:
then says the father, sure,
I will for him some Prebende or
some Prouostship procure.
Or else I trust to see him rise
to tipe of high degree:
To be some Judge, some man of law,
or man of dignity.
This child says one will make a man,
see how his limbs be pight?
The father straight way says: this child
shall be a courtly knight.
Thus thus, to wish in swathing bands
before the child can speak,
They think it not to soon at all:
yet if a man man should break
With them to have that child brought up,
and traind in learning so,
As he with skill might use such things
as unto him might gro,
They answer that he is to young,
though words be utter plain:
Of truth of truth ( Philopas) I
adiudge these men but vain.
As for the words that mothers use,
my child has how to live,
He shall (I trust) a living get
although he never give
Himself unto such needelesse toil
and travel at his book:
I force them not, they are but fond,
good ground they never took.
But let me see? to answer here,
(for so I think it best)
These foolish words whereon their fond
opinion is increast.
She says her child has how to live:
what, how to live right well?
Nay, there a straw. I toulde you I
the mother cannot tell.
What needs law or logicque ought,
(says she) er else such like?
My son has lands whereon to live:
he needth no learning seek.
And has he so in deed good wife?
what, shall he have such stay?
So much the more he learning needth,
to shield him from decay.
The larger that the ship is framde,
and frayghted up with wares:
So much the more undoubtedly
should be the shipmans cares.
Yea, and so much the more it needth,
a Steers man having skill:
Through want of whom ye frayghted ship,
falth into danger still.
Far, far, therefore more bountiful
is he that learning gives,
Then he that yeldeth heaps of coin
whereon the body lives.
Which Alexander great declares,
if I were not (quoth he)
King Alexander, then I wish,
Diogenes to be.
Wherefore, to fine this long discourse,
let infancy be taught:
And even such for whom great wealth
has great preferment wrought.

Philopas. Of truth Chrisippus, worthyly
you have dilated this.
Now tell me whether private school
or public better is.

Chrisippus Philopas to discourse this point*
what scooles were best to be:
Few words shall need the case is clear:
all men may plainly see
That many sooner are reformed
by the fear of one,
Then one instructed perfitly,
by only one alone.
Wherefore I think there either ought
to be no school at all.
Or else that that same scoole should be
a scoole ingenerall.
Save first to tell you by the way,
that common scooles require:
Such only as have gaind their grounds,
and greater things desire.
For why, where sundry sorts of wits,
are linckt in scooles degree,
There general teaching must be used,
wherewith all though we see
Some special wits to profit well
and gather skill thereby,
Yet common sort cannot therewith
the sundry points epsy.
But as the master holds on,
as needs he must his course,
So does the scholar still stick fast
and grow from ill to worse.

Philopas. Declare this one thing more I pray.
if greater profit grow
Through many teachers to a child,
or greater else through few.

Chrisippus As parents ought most carefully
herein to make their choice:
And as they ought most earnestly
to hear the common voice,
And know report of him whom they
do choose t'instruct their child:
Even so (no less) their heed should be,
(least hope be soon beguilde)
That many teachers they refuse:
Multitudo Imperatoru^ ^ariam ^^^didit.
for (as the proverb is)
The country Caria was destroyed
in such a case as this.
So many men, so many wits,
Quot homines tot ^^^^entiae.
young infantes are dismayde
When that the thing they learn to day
to morrow are vnsayde.
To seek for reasons in this case,
no reason urges so:
Suffiseth me to have that proof
that practizde parents know.
Yet one thing needely must I open: Tradendi ratio.

the only mean to teach,
How neither rough nor weery way
should tender minds appeache,
For why, at first this infants age
with flattery should be traynd,
Because it has not skill to know
what proffite may be gaynd.
What honor, fruit, what dignity,
what pleasure in the end
May hap to such as have delyght
to learnings lore to bend.
Which both the masters gentleness,
and eake the scholars wit,
For both their parts, may bring to pass,
and drive the pain from it.
For nothing is more profitlesse,
naught loses labor more,
Than when the masters cruel trade
does fear the child before.
And make him hate or ere he know
wherefore it should be looude.
So love to book which should be first,
through fear is first remooude.
The first degree to lerning is,
the scoole master to love:
Whereby it comes to pass in time,
as skillful teachers prove,
That little child which loved first
his book for masters sake:
In time through love to learning does,
like love to master take.
For as those gifts are loved most,
which come from those we love:
So babes that know not why to love.
for masters cause do love.
Isocrates has rightly said,
that he does learn most,
That has the most desire to learn,
and thinks no labor lost.
And as to learn, we learn best
of those we best do love:
So love to master is the cause,
that love to book does move.
For parents even themselves cannot
prevail if they shall use
To break them all by fear and force
and gentle means refuse.
Much less the master may through fear
through foul and froward mean.
Once work a will unto the book,
but soon undo it clean.
The chief regard is to be looud,
then feately does succeed,
No fear, but frindely reverence,
which (to define indeed)
Has greater charge then cause of fear,
has care to shield fro shame:
Has doubt to drag and draw behind,
not fear to suffer blame.
How ill therefore do they foresee,
the safety of their child*
The bewtifying of his brains
with skill and manners mild
That turn him in his tender age,
to ghastly mazing scoole:
Where thronizd sits a master strange
blunt, rude, and half a fool.
Oftetimes infected with disease,
inueterate and old:
Which makes the waywarde testie fool
with little lambs to skolde.
And surely, we do see there can
be none so abject fools
So base and void of sense, but now,
men use them for their schools.
And think them meet to bring up youth*
to train them at their books:
Where expert men at first do judge
them Asses by their looks.
And they supposing to have got
a kingdom in their kind,
Advance themselves with fearful looks
and set aloft their mind:
Because they bear a rule, but not
in beasts (as Terence says)
But in that age which soon (god knowth)
a little terror frayth.
A man would say it were no school
but slaughter house in deed,
Whence saving stripes and roaring out,
no learning does proceed.
What else is this than soon to fraye,
the silly babes from book,
who wanting pleasant flattering words
none other pleasure took?
And some a man shall sooner kill
then mende with cruel blows,
Where he by fair and quiet means
might bring to learning those.
But this lewd kind of men (for truth)
ought not to bear the name
Of masters, but of manquellors,
so brutish are the same.
And none more fell and froward are,
than those which nothing have
Wherewith tinstruct and teach a child:
whose doggishe deeds deprave
The due success of forward wits:
whose roughness does deface
The golden sparks of natures gifts
which in the child has place.
A gentle Horse is sooner ruled
with stick or little wande
Then with a whippe or digging spur
within the side to stand.
The Ox likewise being to much pricked,
does soon cast of his yoke,
And bringes to danger him that drives,
through hap of heavy stroke.
So men must handle forward wits
as Lions do their whelps:
The huige and heavy Elephant
the skillful person helps.
What should I say? no beast there is,
no savage beast in fine,
Whom violence will not provoke,
and skill to will incline.
But some perhaps will here allege
these scriptures for their turn:
Who spares the rod, does hate the child,
and who in love does burn, Eccless. 30.

Does use the same unto the vvhippe:
again bow down in youth
His neck, and knock him on the side
ear greater age accruthe.
And this correction might perhaps,
agree unto the Jews:
But christians to translate these words,
far otherwise do use.
That, if some one would bind us now
unto the letter bare:
What more absurdly can be said?
what words worse sounding are,
Than thus to bow a down the neck
of little children, and
To knock and thumpe them on the sides
with stick or with the hand?
What, think thou yt we break an Ox
to frame him to the plowe?
Think thou we teach an ass to bear?
or else that we seek how
The tender sense of silly babes
to bend to virtuous lore?
Whose slender hands with fearful suit
Our favor does deplore.
Nay, let our rods that we shall use,
be admonitions mylde:
And if we chide, as chyde we must,
see bitterness exilde.
This whippe, this whippe accustom we
our children still unto:
That they being well brought up and taught,
may learn what best to do.
May find at home an honest form
of life, and never need
To hang upon our neighbors sleeue
for counsel and for reed.
Lycon, that old Philosopher,
does teach and well declare
How that to cheer up childrens wits,
two spurs most sharp there are.
The first is praise, the second shame,
with which two spurs must we
Toule on our children if we look,
that learned they should be.
And now, if that you seek to know
what thumps we ought to use:
How we should knock our childrens sides
take these, the rest refuse.
Lets watchful be ti'nstruct them well,
no labor let us spare,
To teach and train them up to good,
Let that be all our care.
Some times to read, and of things read
again for to require
A just account: lo these be thumpes
that tender wits desire.
First let them learn to love, and have
in admiration great,
Good letters and an honest life.
Again, with ardent heat
Foul ignorance and filthy life
to hate with single eye:
The one to love and still to seek,
the other to defy.
And let their ears be tyckled up
to hear some one for good
Tenioy great praise, and other some
of whom is understood
Some lewd offense, to have reproach
and still enduring shame:
So teach them still dame virtues praise
and vices foul defame.
This man (say thou) through learning skill
is come to high degree:
This man to wealth by learning, this
to power and dignity.
But this again, through ill desert
through want of learnings lore,
Reproach, contempt, and poverty
has gaind himself therefore.
These truly be the very battes,
these be the thumpes in deed,
That scollers of sweet Jesus Christ,
will take to them at need.

Philopas. Chrisippus I do well allow,
each word that you have said:
And sure I think that gentle wits
through terror are dismayde.
And yet to say that ragged coltes,
that rude unruly boys
Will be reclaimd through shame or praise
No no, they count them toys.
That savor not of smarting whippes,
which yet perhaps in some,
So never worckes, that they thereby
to goodness sooner come.
Much less through fawning flattering (praise)
for some much less do way
The loss of praise, nay loss of skill,
than any loss of play.

Chrisippus To such Philopas, unto such,
whom neither mild request
Nor rough rebuke, nor praise nor shame
to learning will inuest.
The smarting rod (if need so be)
must now and then be had
But so, as we do coldely fight,
and not as we were mad.
Yea, bashefully we should lay bare
their bodies when we fight:
For nakedness to gentle boys
if many are in sight,
A kind of great reproach does seem*
and Fabius does deny
That body of a gentle boy
in nakedness should lie.
But some perhaps will say to me,
what shall be done with those
Whom we to study cannot frame,
except it be with blows?
To such I answer in this wise:
what would you seem to do
To asses or to Oxen, if
they come the school into?
What? would you not soon drive them (forth)
into the country soil,
The one to the milne, the other with
the plowe and cart to toil?
And certainly, no less are men
unto the plowstaffe borne,
Than is the Ox: no less to the milne,
than th'Asse with labor worn.

Philopas. But so the masters flock decays,
and therewithal his gain.

Chrisippus Aha, there goes the Hare away:
by this appears plain,
That unto such, far dearer is
the fare of filthy meede,
Then is the care how they should make
their scholars good in deed.
But such no doubt, the common sort
of Scholemaysters are now:
And yet as wise Philosophers,
do flatly teach us how
A wiseman we should well discern,
as Rhetoriciens eke,
An Orator does well discribe,
when as they say: go seek
And scarcely find whom thou may call
a rightwise man in deed,
Whom thou may call an Orator,
(thereto belongth such heed:)
So much, and far more hard it is
that we should well atone
What he the master ought to be,
as who should say such one
As scarcely may be found the like:
such one as hardely will
The due prescribed form accord
or can the same fulfill.
But such should be the public charge
of civil magistrates
And of the Ecclesiastical:
yea, of the high estates,
That as the Soldier trained is,
and fitted for the field,
As singing men are taught to tune
the counteruerse they yield:
So, much more should they see that man
be taught, much more be trained
That to the worthy teaching trade
has any way attaynde.
Vespatian from his coffers gave
a certain yearly fee
To learned men: that learning so
might well maintained be.
And Plinius Nepos did the like.
But if the public care
Should hap to cease, then every man
at home must needs prepare
To have a private teacher. But
thou say, how then should they
That are not able so to do,
their children any way
Bring up to learning? whereunto
I nothing have to say
But this that Terence does record:
when as we cannot do
Even as we would, then as we may.
we show the trade unto
Right teaching, as not able we
good fortune for to give,
Except we wish the welthies aid
to such as poorly live.
Now to return, I do mislyke
that mildness should expel
That fear and reverence which a child
becomes very well,
But these who nothing else do know
save fiercely how to fight,
How would they do if they should teach
Kings children whom they might
Not iercke nor strike withouten blame?
But happily twill be said
That children borne of noble race
More nearly must be wayde.
And is thy son or mine in faith
less man then any they?
Is not each fathers child think thou
as dear to him, and gaye,
As if the same a Kings son were?
If fortune be but base,
Then learning and good bringing up
must help relieve his case.
Contrariwise if welthy port
do happen to his lotte,
Then wisdom helpth to guide his wealth,
and shield his name from blotte.
And though we have not wealth by birth
though so not honors glee
Nor office, nor renown, yet sure
thereto brought up we be.
And here I leave to brawle and chyde,
with cruel masters: here
I wholly end that point: so as
this one thing may appear:
Namely, that laws and magistrates
condemned are to be
Which ever seek with pain to pinche,
and never do agree
T'allure with pleasures and reward:
which ponish still but so,
As they ne warn the fault whereby
the ponishment does grow.
Right so I think of that same sort,
that common sort I say,
Of schoolemaysters which only seek
their silly boys to pay,
To beat and bounse them for their faults
and not t'instruct their mind
So as they may both see and know
from what offense to wind.
Wherein I end remembering this,
that in each exercise
Our minds delight is chiefest cause
that we to skill arise.
Lo, here Philopas, you have heard,
what qualities are meet
For him that shall instruct a child
again, what things vnfeete,
Are wisely to be lookde unto,
and in the same foreseen:
Whereby you may avoid such faults,
as heretofore have been
Neglected in that kind of men.
the scoolemayster you see,
To win the child, should seem a child
and child again should be.
And yet I wholly do mislyke
that that same crooked age
Wherein the second childhood dwelth*
should take the room of sage
Instructors: for such men in truth
are children every deal:
They feign not childehoode but in truth
they childehoode do reveal.
They do not seem to stamber, but
they stamber plain in deed.
I wish such men to be displast
and youngmen to succeed.
And how this young man now should (deal)
what form the same should use,
What means to teach he should retain
and what again refuse,
This rests here to be discust:
and as the proof does find,
None otherwise the same should deal
in forming of the mind,
Then skillful Nourse or parents deal
when they the body frame:
Which that he may so imitate,
Lo here insueth the same.
To teach the Babe to speak, they first
do tattle forth their words:
And lispingly they frame their tongue
to that the babe afordes.
Dad dad for father first they give,
and beade they teach for bread:
And when they teach him drink to ask,
then din to him in said.
And pretily they lispe their words
Whereto it prates again:
And thus at length as proof does teach
the Baby speaks plain.
To teach it how to eat, they put
the pappe within their lips
And from the spoone eftsoons they seem
to draw forth pretty sippes.
Which done therewith they feed the babe.
And when they teach to go,
They bend their corpse, and frame their (pase)
before their infants so*
As what therewith, and with such means
as they with pulpits use,
In time the child has perfect pase,
he can none other choose.
And this thing worthy noting is,
their child they never feed
With all that comes to hand, but they
observe with careful heed
Both what to give and how to give:
what quantity to use:
And eke to feed it laysurely:
for if they should infuse
And pour it in with retchlesse hands,
they know they either should
Their baby choke, or at the least,
his clothes would be fould.
Now therefore, as of lightest meats
and meats agreeing best,
They often and little give them, so
the infants tender breast
In teaching should be framed like*
your self ( Philopas) may
Thexample best apply, for I
have something else to say.
You look (I know) that I should teach
what things do best pertayne
To childrens wits: what first to learn
which only does remain
At this time to be handeled here.
this briefly therefore know,
That love unto the lattine tongue
in childehood first should grow,
With use thereof, which easily
without great studies care
To children comes: but hardely when
the same more aged are.
Whereto (as has been said before)
the fables do inuit
With moral sawes in covert tales:
whereto agreeeth rite
Fine Comedies with pleasure sawst,
which (as it were by play)
Do teach unto Philosophy
a perfect ready way.
Then sentences and proverbs choice
and Apothemes of men,
Wherein great wisdom restes, wherein
great learning aye has been.
Which fables and which comedies
they better far shall learn,
If once they know the arguments,
and sum thereof discern.
The names of Trees, of plants also
and names of monsters strange,
With natures of them finely taught,
does cause their minds to raunge,
To seek abroad for farther sight
with longing minds to know
Where this beast lines, where that bird breeds
where this strange tree does grow.
In sine, it helps very much
the lattin tongue t'attaine,
T'associate such with whom good skill
in lattine does remain.
Avoiding still as rocks and clyffes*
foul barbarous words to name
No latin rather let them speak
than so to speak the same.
And here concluding, this I note,
that in the first degree
Of teaching, this above the rest
must well aduerted be.
That, whatsoever pleasant is,
what thing so ever eake
Is easy to be understood,
that children best do like.
For surely as it is absurd
to look for grapes in spring,
In harvest else to look for Rose
or such like blooming thing:
So schoolemaysters must well adapt
such things as they shall teach,
Unto their childs capacity:
so as the same may reach
And it conceive, with firm delight:
for pleasure profits much,
And nothing else but pleasure may
allure to learning such:
So as na'thlesse we careful be
to avoid all bawdie rimes
And wanton iestes of Poets vain
that teach them filthye crimes.
Good stories from the Bible chargde
and from some civil style.
As Quintus Curtius, and such like
to read them otherwhile.
Where through by just degree of skill
from reading shall succeed
As eke of congrue use of speech
a seemly form indeed
Of writing well: which naythelesse
is difficile: but so,
As by the masters skill the same
may far more easy grow.
Rewards he must prescribe for such
as shall perform their charge:
But such as neither mylde request,
nor praise nor promise large
Can bring to better form of ski^
with those, this practice he
Must put in ure: that is to weete
though they unlearned be,
To make them think and yet believe
themselves to be of might
T'encounter with the better sort,
and put the same to flight.
And evermore we must avoid
t'enioyne them things to hard,
Or things not needful to be taught
or things that may be sparde.
For (Lord) how are their minds perplexed
how troubled will they be
When things they cannot understand,
through much obscurity?
But though that something of it self
some hardenesse does contain,
Yet may the masters policy
make easy that again.
For like as good physicians that
do bitter potions make,
With something sweet do smeere the pot
that infauntes so may take
The Potion that they would have drunk
whereby they are alurde
The same to drink, which else to do,
they could not be procurde:
Even so the skillful master ought
to deal in each respect:
Things difficult with ease to teach
and leisure to direct.
And yet we may not too too much
mistrust our childrens strength:
For what they cannot learn at first,
that learn they at length.
Though strength they have not as an Ox
yet as an Ant they have:
And often unto the Elephant
the little Fly does scath.
Conceypt does chiefly hurt a child,
where if you make but play
Of things that you shall teach him, then
Conceit does never fraye.
That one and only scruple now
remains to be discust,
Which many one full fondely do
against all reason thrust.
They say the profit is so small,
that children do obtain
Before the same be five years old,
that labor is in vain,
And cost ill spent that is bestowde
to bring them up to book.
But these men which will this object.
these rather seem to look
More straightly to the parents purse,
and more to spare the pain
Of masters, then to well respect
their little childrens gain.
But grant the profit be but small
admit it small in deed:
Take rather small than nothing yet,
for that's the wisemans reed,
And slender howsoeare it be
that that same age shall gain,
Yet this advantage be you sure
shall thereunto remain:
That greater things they shall atchiue
that year, wherein if they
The smaller things had erst not learnd
they on the same should stay.
I need not here repeat again
that certain things we see
In infantes age far better learnde
than when they greater be.
And grant we that they trifling are
and things of slender skill.
Yet they such tryfles first atcheeue
that greater things fulfill.
The painful Crafts man makes account
even of the smallest coin,
For why in time, to that same small,
he greater store does join.
The Goldesmithes rise ere break of day,
before they well can see,
To win some time before hand still,
(though nere so small it be)
The Plowman sometimes does not stick
on days that holy seem
To bind his sheaues, to shocke and often
to set a work his Teeme.
And shall we way for nothing then
the loss of five years time?
Shall we so hang on harder age,
that we neglect the prime?
When as there is nothing half so rich
as time, nor half so good
As learning is: oh nothing may
so high be understood.
Here here Philopas, here should men
most nearly pinch and spare:
Even here (I say) for loss of time,
should be their chiefest care.
The husbandeman has good regard
that no part of his ground
Do lie vntilde: for look what piece
unfit for grain is found,
That he with Osiers sets and plants,
Or else to pasture lays:
And one way or another still
he fruit thereof does raise
Shall we permit the best part then
of all our time to flytte
Without all learnings profit had?
without increase of wit?
New fallowd ground must needs be (sown)
with some one kind of seed,
Or else (even of it own accord)
it brings forth noisome weed.
Like so the tender Infants mind,
except the same be taught
With good precepts, it will bring forth
the thing that is merely naught.
The mind does either good things yield,
if good therein be sown,
Or if thou nothing sow therein,
with vice it is ouergrowne.
And surely he not smally gaynes,
that vice can well eschew:
And he that shuts forth vice does not
to virtue least accrewe.
What? will thou know how much it helps
tinstruct a child betime?
Why, then behold thou Ovid well:
marcke Lucan in his prime.
Vrsinus but eleven years old,
so wonderful was found,
That strange it is to make report,
how far he did abound
Great Alexander in his youth,
even all the parts attainde
Of wisdom and Philosophy:
and with the same had gaynde
Such perfect form of eloquence,
that had not kingdoms pride
Withdrawn his mind from studies care
no man could have denyde
But that amongst Philosophers
(the chiefest of them then)
Not second but the very chief
accounted he had been.
But here to fine this long discourse,
your self Philopas I
Will have to witness all such things
as erst have passed by.

Epilogus. Consider well what portion and
what dear possession eeke
A son is: and how flittingly
man's mind does knowledge seek.
How wayghtie education is,
what hablenesse is found
In tender childs capacity:
what quickness does abound.
How easily the same does learn,
how Nature gives consent:
And how they profit most when they
to learned men are sent,
And unto such as gentle are,
which teach them all by play:
Things easy first, and harder things
when harder things they may.
To these things add how dear and of
what weight our time should be:
How much it helps to teach betimes,
what fruit thereof we see.
Hesiodus does flytting call
the wandering age of man:
Whose youth is busy, and whose age
is quite from learning gone.
These things if thou shall well observe,
six years, shall not be seen
Nor yet three years before thy son
which heretofore has been
Neglected (as to this intent)
shall either learning gain.
Or else be well preparde at least,
good learning to obtain.

FINIS.

