THE TRVE PICTVRE AND RELATION OF PRINCE HENRY His Noble and Virtuous
disposition, CONTAINING Certain Observations and Proofs of his towardly and
notable Inclination to Virtue, of the Pregnancie of his Wit, far above his
Age, comprehended in sundry of his witty and pleasant Speeches.

By W. H.

With the true Relation of the Sickness and Death of the same most illustrious
Prince, with the opening of his Body.

Written by a famous Doctor of Physic in French, and newly translated into
English.



AT LEYDEN, Printed by William Christian. 1634.

Consecrated and Dedicated TO THE MOST HIGH AND PEERELES PRINCESS ELIZABETH,
PRINCESS OF GREAT BRITAIN, QVEENE OF BOHEMIA, PRINCESS PALATINE, DVCHESSE OF
BAVARIA, etc.

BY HER MAJESTY'S MOST AFFECTIONED AND BOUND IN ALL HVMBLE DVTY VV. H.

THE TRVE PICTVRE AND RELATION OF PRINCE HENRY His Noble and Virtuous
disposition, Containing Certain Observations and Proofs of his towardly and
notable inclination to Virtue, of the pregnancy of his Wit far above his Age,
comprehended in sundry of his vvitty and pleasant speeches.
AMong so many thousand wicked and corrupt people that live dispersed abroad
through the world, there is one sort, if not worser then others, yet at least
is such as ought to be ranked among those that are manifestly wicked before the
world; namely, such as are ingrate, and among them a great number of those that
live in the courts of great Princes and Lords, and by all possible means do
labor to attain to riches, honor, and preferment, through the help and
favor of these great ones, whom (whilst they are yet alive) they do
reverence, honor, and extol with high and extrauagant praises, placing them
(as it were) among the celestial powers. But those great persons being once
dead, and consequently their hope to gain or profit any more by them having
now failed them, they forget within a short time their benefactors, without
speaking almost of them any more, or at least not making any honorable mention
of them, to the end that they might perpetuate their memory and fame to their
posterity, according as they had justly deserved at their hands whilst they
lived. As for my self, having once had the honor to be one of the most
illustrious Prince HENRY his servants, and acknowledging my self to be
perpetually bound and addebted to his Highness, so long as my soul and body
shall be united together, and therefore being unwilling to be accounted among
those ingrate, and as it were disloyal persons, I have gathered and set down
(though somewhat rudely and confusedly) these observations following, which
do contain diverse of his merry and notable speeches, when he was yet of
very tender years, being infallible and certain tokens of his great and
unspeakable virtues, and of his nature good in all perfection (if any such was
ever found in any Prince) which in the mean while shall serve for an
abridgment of his life, until such time as some other shall write and set
down the same more amply, and in more high and delicate terms.

First, concerning his behavior toward God and Religion, there has always
been observed in him rare tokens of a religious and virtuous disposition; as
namely, in his deuote and reverent manner of praying, and hearing of public
Service and Sermons; in his perpetual refraining from oaths, and all
irreligious and lascivious speeches, in his reproving and dislyking of such as
have been about him, for any undecent or vicious behauior. And chiefly, when
they did swear or take the name of God in vain. In so much that being yet but
very young, he took such order, that none of his young Gentlemen and Pages
were taken with this offense. And if any had offended (which did fall out but
seldom) he was fined in some little piece of money, to be given to the poor.
And for his own part (which is more rare, and almost impossible to great
Princes) he did never swear all his lifetime.

In his behavior toward his Parents, he was always dutiful and respective
far above his age, and the manner of other children: for since he was but two
years old, he both knew and respected the King his father above all others,
and never was weary to be in his company: albeit his Majesty with the tokens
of his love to him would sometimes interlace sharp speeches, and other
demonstrations of fatherly severitie; yea his affection to his Majesty did
grow with his age, for being present on a time at a fall, which his Majesty
had from his horse, he bevvailed this mischance (which nevertheless was less
then it was feared to be) with tears and speeches full of compassion and love.
And likewise the respect which he carried to them increased daily, as by this
example I shall breefly declare. His High. one day having come forth of S.
James his house a little before supper, to walck in the Parck, having a great
number of his Gentlemen with him, and seeing the Kings Majesty a far of
returning from his walk, and coming toward him, with a very small company,
he was ashamed, and looking about him commanded his followers to depart and go
no further with him. Which immediately they did, leaving him almost alone, and
thus did he meet the King, not having past three or four to attend and wait
on him.

The same respect likewise did he carry to the Queen his Mother, as among
many other things he declared herein: for going often to visit her, and to
show his humble and loving duty toward her Majesty, and sometimes she being
busied, or otherwise let by her affairs, and for this cause not admitting
him to her presence (though inwardly with himself he might be displeased
therewith) yet in show did he never seem to be any ways discontended
therewith, but returned alvvayes to his lodging with great patience, after
that he had vvaited a long time in vain.

His brotherly love was likewise very great, which did evidently appear
one day, the King being at Otlands, and a false rumor being spread abroad, that
the Kings Majesty was slain, his H. and the Duke of York his brother,
remaining then both at S. James his house, he covered for that present time
his excessive sorrow and grief, which he had conceived inwardly, and called
for the Duke his brother in great haste, that he might once see him in safety
with himself; and thus went to Whitehall together to the Queen, who had sent
for the Prince long before more then once: but he put off his going till he had
his brother to go along with him.

And as for the Lady ELIZABETH his Sister, he loved her alvvayes so dearly,
that he desired to see her always by him. And (at least) they did visit each
other once in two days, if time and occasion had served, and that they had
been any thing near together. Otherways he did send often to inquire of her
health, with diverse unfallible signs and tokens of his great love and
affection toward them both.

In his carriage tovwards other persons, he did behave himself with such due
respect and discretion, as it is rare to be found in one of his rank and age.

He was brought op even from his cradle, by an ancient, virtuous and severe
Lady; to wit, the old Countess of Mar, who kept all such as were about
him in awe: yet did he not only reverence her, but also love her most dearly.

Toward the right honorable the Earl of Mar, son to the said Lady, who
had the principal charge and custody of him, he always showed himself most
loving and duetifull, in so much as before his coming to Engeland, the Earl
delivering him in presence of the Council to the charge of other Lords
appointed to vviate on him in his journey, he suddenly embracing the said
Earl brust forth into tears: albeit he was known to weep as little as any
child whatsoever.

Next his Parents, he was always most loving to his Schoolemaister Sr. Adam
Newton: notwithstanding that the said Sr. Adam Newton did always prefer his
own duty, and his Highness well doing before the pleasing of his fancies.

I need not record with what courtesy and discretion he behaved himself to
all others, seeing all that knew him do witness the same.

The seeds and buddes of Princely Virtues have appeared in him, even from his
most tender years. His natural inclination to Justice did show it self
continually; in that amongst his Pages and other young Gentelmen placed about
him, he did most grace and favor such, as even by men of greatest judgment
were thought to be of best behavior and desert, wherein also may be perceived
more judgment then is incident to the age of a child.

His courage was always seen in that he did weep as little as any child. When
he was very young having hurt both his hands with a fall, in such sort that
they bledde: albeit the smart which he felt wrong from him some tears: yet did
he rise up in the mean time smyling, and as it were dissembling his hurt.

At another time he was so hurt in the shin, as it was scarcely cured in a
month after: yet being then asked whether any thing ailed him, he answered
(nothing) and ran up and down playing him as before.

An other token of his courage was, that being very young he took great
delight in the sound of Drums and Trumpets, yea and of his Pieces both small
and great, being shot near to him.

When he was scarcely seven years of age, a boy of good courage almost a
year older then his Highness falling by accident to buffets with him, and doing
the worst he could, his Highness both had the upperhand of him when they were
parted a sunder, and loved the same boy ever after the better for his courage.

It was a great token of temperance in him, that in his diet he was naturally
moderate, and less dainty then children use to be, yea he was easily persuaded
by such, as either for their place about him, or for his opinion of their
virtue and judgment had credit with him, to forbear either meat or other
thing, wherein he took greatest delight.

In patience he exceeded all others, as this history following does amply
declare; Being at a certain time at his house of Woodstock, intending one day
to ride abroad a hunting betimes in the morning, and the time being come, and
he ready for his Boots, his Shoemaker by mischance had made one of them too
strait, for which cause diverse that stood by in the mean while checked him
very sharply, laboring with all to stir up his Highness against him: yet he
would by no means so do, but very coldly and mildly commanded him to go
speedily, and make it a little vvyder. So he went forth leaving his Master
only with one boot, who sat thus in his chair for the space of an hour and
more, waiting for his Shoemakers backcomming, and talking all the time merrily
with those that were about him, which in the mean while did show themselves
very impatient, and would gladly have had the Prince to be the like. At last,
the Shoemaker having brought back the Boot for his Highness, not only did he
not chide him, but contrariwise looked on him with a cherefull countenance,
which made them all amassed, together with the Shoemaker himself; who expected
nothing less then such a favorable aspect, and came all sweating and trembling
for fear (as he had very good cause to do.) Did he not herein vanquish and
surmount himself?

He promised nothing rashly or unaduisedly to any one: but if once he had been
induced to ingadge himself any ways, he would be sure to perform what once
he had promised, which by this example is manifest. One of his household
servants, to whom he had promised a better place then that which he then
possessed, and with time had forgotten the same promise, and this servant
laboring hard with his Highness by the means of his friends to attain to the
place that was promised to him, the time being then very fit and convenient for
the performing thereof. At first he denied that ever he had promised any such
thing, having with time quite forgotten the matter: but in end his handwrit
being produced, and the promise signed with his own hand, he confessed his
fault freely, and immediately without any delay caused him to be sworn in the
place, which he had promised to him.

Howbeit this illustrious Prince in diverse particular actions did testify
both his great charity and liberality, as toward the poor and indigent,
toward his domestical servants and others, and by contributing largely
toward the building and reparation of Churches, and many other works: yet
I will only produce these three testimonies of his liberality.

The first is, concerning that which he gave to a certain stranger a
Frenchman by nation, who styled himself the Kings Professor of the French
tongue, and had indeed some little pension of his Majesty for this same
purpose. This Professor, having crept into some favor with the Prince his
Chamberleyne, prevailed with him so far, that at last he persuaded him to
speak to his Highness for him, that he might have some little pension granted
to him, as he had of his Majesty which at first his Hs: would not grant,
saying, that he had nothing to do with him. Notvvitstanding Mr: Chamberleyne
follovving closse his suit, and beseeching him to take some pity on him, since
he was a stranger, and had but small means to live on, his Hs: at length
ansvvered, saying; Howbeit I am no vvayes bound to give him any thing: yet to
do you pleasure, and because he is a stranger and a Frenchman, I shall give him
what you shall think fit; and within a short time after he gave him such a
pension, as pleased him very well.

The second testimony is this; A good Poet, and right honest man, presenting
him a small poem, he received it very graciously, and willed a Gentleman
that had his purse, to bestovv on him some token of his gracious acceptance;
the Gentleman asking him whether a couple of Iacobus would not serve. Fie for
shame (said his Highness) give him at least ten pieces.

The third was, that some fevv weeks before his sickness, considering
vviselie, that some of his cheef Gentlemen, which were in eminent places, and
near to his person, had but small means to maintain the rank and place they
were in, to cherish them in this their want, and make them go on the more
cheerfully in their service, and moreover that they might not pretend that they
were driven through any necessity, to be importune in begging of such suits at
his Highness, as could not conveniently be granted; he provided them with
honest and reasonable pensions during their lives, and if he had lived a little
longer, intended to proceed further in this kind of bounteous and provident
liberality: but being prevented by untimely death, none of these worthy
projects could take any effect. This is a notable example both of his
liberality, and of his wary and Princely providence.

He was exceeding magnifick and stately in all his doings, and principally in
feasting of great persons, such as was the young Duke of Brounswick, the young
Landgrave of Hasse, the Duke of Wirtemberg and others, which he feasted most
royally, giving them all manner of contentment, that they could have desired of
him.

And about some four months before his death; at his house of Wootstock he
made such a sumptuous and great feast to the Kings Majesty his Father, that
after his Majesty had considered and vewed well the tables and meats set
thereon, his Gentlemen and Servants richly apparelled and in good order, and
all things in his house well ordered and governed, without any disorder or
confusion, was so much amassed at the sight thereof, that he was forced to say,
that he had never seen the like before all his lifetime, and that he could
never do so much in his own house.

Concerning his apparel, he loved to go handsome and well clothed: yet
without any manner of superfluity or excess. But as for his servants and
Gentlemen that were near to his person, he was some what more curious, taking
pleasure to see them go richly apparelled. Which he declared sufficiently by
this example* A certain Gentleman, who had served him a long time before, and
with others was placed about him in his minority by the Kings Majesty, being
with the rest of his household Servants to be sworn to him over again at the
taking up of his house (at which time he had free liberty to choose such
Servants as pleased him best) he gave way to the receiving of all the rest,
save only this Gentleman, whom he forbade to swear, until such time as his
Father had promised to apparel him better in time coming; and as it was
fitting for his place. Which his Father having once promised to do, at length
after that all the rest were sworn, he gave order likewise to admit him to his
place.

He desired also, to have good attendance of his Servants, and to be well
served, as it may appear by this following. One of his Sewers coming one day
a little too late to wait, when his Highness had already almost half dined, he
was asked by him, whence he came so late? He answered, that it was not yet
eleven of the clock (saying so because his master dined commonly at that
hour, and no sooner.) The Prince answered him again, that he would not be
served at an appointed hour only, but at all times.

His modest disposition, and natural hating of vain ostentation, began to
show it self, when he was very young. For being taught to handle the Pike,
and his Teacher instructing him both by word and example to use an affected
kind of stateliness in marching and holding of his hand, he learned all other
points of him so well (as all men know:) but in no ways would he frame
himself to that affected manner. And if sometimes upon earnest entreaty he did
offer to use it, he would lanch at himself, and presently return to his own
more modest and comely manner.

And whereas he had learned to dance so well as none of his age being of a
Princely rank or degree could do it better: yet never took he much delight
therein, nor offered himself to dance, but was for the most part entreated
thereto by others.

The like modesty was seen in whatsoever he did or spoke: yet was this his
modesty no hinderance to his heroical and generous disposition, which made
him to perform all his exercises best, before most company, and greatest
personages; as namely he never tossed his Pyke better then in presence of his
Majesty and great Ambassadors, of whom was the Constable of Castile.

From his generous mind it proceeded, that he delighted in handling of his
arms, and in such other manly and martial exercises: hence also did arise his
affection to learning: wherein he so well profited, as I have not heard of
many Princes of his age that could do better. In quick apprehension and
memory few of his age went beyond him: but none in judgment and understanding
of that which was taught him.

When he began to have some knowledge of the Latin tongue, being admonished
to choose himself a Posie out of sundry sentences gathered by his
scholemaister for this use, he read many that were good, but passed over them
without choosing till he came to this sentence of Silius Italicus: Fax mentis
honestae gloria, Renown is a furtherer of an-honest mind: whereof himself
made choice. And to say the truth, none among them all did better fit him.

The Kings Majesty asking him, which were best verses that he had learned in
the first book of Aeneides, he answered; These, Rex erat Aenaeas nobis, quo
justior alter
Nec pietate fuit, nec bello major and armis.
In English; We had a King Aeneas called, a juster was there none,
In virtue, or in faites of war, or arms could match him one.


Which indeed is a most excellent commendation, concerning the three principal
Virtues of a worthy Prince to Wit, Piety, Justice, and Valor.

Reading this verse; Tros Rutilusve fuat nullo discrimine habebo,

Be it Trojan or Italian he, no difference will I make. He said himself would
make use of the same, changing it thus; Anglus Scotusve fuat nullo discrimine
habebo. Be it English or Scot he, no differens will I make. In which change he
respected the commendable qualities of unpartiall judgment and affection, and
not the qualities of the verse, which he knew to be erroneous.

I come now to the rehearsal of sundry of his pleasant and witty speeches,
during his young and tender years, wherein the pregnancie of his wit, and
virtuous disposition do appear.

When he was but a little past seven years of age, a son of the Earl of
Mar, something younger then himself falling out with one of his Pages, to
whom (as his Highness was informed) he had done some little wrong, he reproved
him therefore, saying; I love you, because you are my Lords Son and my
Kousin: but if you be not better conditioned, I will love such a one better,
naming the child that complained of him.

The first time that he went out of the town of Stirling to meet the King,
seeing a little without the gate of the town a stake of corn in proportion to
a topp, wherewith he had wont to play, he said to some that were with him; Lo
there a goodly topp, whereupon one of them saying, why do you not then play
with it? He answered; set you it to me, and I will play with it.

Being asked very young what Instruments of Music he liked best, he
answered, a Trumpet.

On a time that he saw some hunting on a Dear, being asked, whether he loved
that hunting well? He answered; yes, but I love another kind of hunting
better. One asking him, what manner of hunting that was? he answered; hunting
of thieves and rebels with brave men and horses. And turning him to one of
his Pages descended of Highland Parents, who were bruted to be thieves, he
added; and such thieves as I take shall be hanged, the great ones higher then
the rest, and you Sir (if you be a thief) highest of all.

Once in his childhood, in a merry humor taking up Strawberies with two
spoones, when one might suffice, he said; the one I use as a Rappier, and the
other as a Dagger.

Being asked of a Nobleman, whether after his Father he had rather be King of
England or Schotland? he demanded, whether of them was best? and answer being
made, that it was England, then (said he) would I have both.

A controversy for sport being stirred up by the King his Majesty betwixt two,
the one of whom, serving him in good place by a nickname was called a Tailler,
and loved very well his liquor, the other was known to be a tall Trencherman,
they were both near falling together by the ears, when as the Prince was
willed by the King to make an agreement between them, which agreement, some
that were by said, must be written and sealed by them: Whereunto the Prince
answered; then must W. M. (this was he which has the nickename of a taillor)
seal it with chalk, for he can not write his name, and then I will agree them,
upon condition that M. G. (this was the tall Trencherman) go into the celler,
and drink with W. M. and that W. M. make a cloakbag for M. G. to carry his
victuals in.

Eating in the Kings presence a dish of Milk, his Majesty asked him, why he
eated so much childs meat? Sir, quot he, it is man's meat also. And immediately
after fed well of a Partrich, the King said to him, that meat will make you a
coward. Whereunto he answered, though it be a cowardly bird, yet it shall not
make me a coward.

The King asking him whether he loved Englishmen or Frenchmen better? he
answered, Englishmen. The King demanded the cause thereof; because, said he, I
am a kin to more noble persons of England, then of France, Then the King asked
him, whether he loved the English or the Germans better, he answered; the
English. Whereunto the King replying, that his Mother was a German, he
answered; Sir, you are the cause thereof.

At the same time, his Majesty asked him upon some mention made of Queen
Elisabeth, whether she had any children; he answered, he understoode of none.
And has she none (said the King) that may be called her son? he said yes
Sir, your self: and who nixt after me, said his Majesty? Sir (said he) your
Son. Another standing by, saying, that was Duke Charles: no (Sir) said his
Highness, it must be the eldest, wherein his discretion and modesty in not
once naming himself, is worth the noting.

On a certain time his Highness wearing white shoes, one that resorted
sometimes to him, said, that he longed to kiss his feet: whereunto his
Highness answered; Sir, I am not the Pope. The other replying, that he would not
kiss the Popes foot, unles it were to byte off his great too, his H^:
answered; if you were in Rome; you would be glad to kiss his feet, without
biting of his great too.

Some one reporting to him, how the French King had said, that as well his
Bastard as the Bastard of Normandy might conquer England: I will be at ears
with him (said his Highness) if he go about any such matter.

Some of his Servants running to break their fast, and returning after a
quick dispatch, being asked what they had been doing, said they: We were at
our disiune. One, who stood by, said, that word is French, and that the right
English was breakfast, it may so be called indeed (said his Highness) for you
breakefast to it.

It being told him by some of his servants in a house where once he lay, how
some of them had gone to bed without their supper, through the fault of some
pinching Officers of the house, he seemed at that instant to take no great
notice: but the Lady of the house the nixt day coming to visit him, whiles he
was turning a book that had many pictures, whereof one was of some that were
painted sitting at a feast, he said to her; Madame, I inuit you to a feast.
She smiling asked him, Wat feast it was? he answered; to this feast. What (said
she) to a painted feast? No better is that, said he, which is made in this
house to some about me. One, who was present, and had heard his Servants
complain before: yet not guessing what he meaned asked him if he understoode
not that of some persons figured in the Tapistrie of the Chamber, no (said he)
you know well enough who I mean.

In Sir Thomas Sommerset and Sir Henry Goodyeares presence a little before his
journey to England, the Earl of Mar said unto him; Sir, you hear how goodly
and how rich a country England is: yet (Sir) considering that you have been
borne and brought up in Scotland, if I may be so bold, let me ask you, which
of both countries you love best? Whereunto he answered; My Lord, after I have
been there a while I will tell you.

One, who was fatt and corpulent, being by a Nobleman recommended to his
Majesty for a good huntsman: yet (said his Highness standing by) it seems
thereby that he loves Venison very well.

Whill he was telling a certain Nobleman something that he could have done,
but that his Schoolemaister was the cause why he did it not: one who had some
credit about him, mistaking what he said, as if he would have laid some fault
committed by himself upon his Tutor, said to the Nobleman; It is the Prince
his manner to lay his own fault upon others. Hereat the Prince smyling taxed
his impertinency, saying, Sir, indeed I might have learned that lesson of you.

A certain courtly and merrily conceipted Lady, who had a husband, whom she
could not well enjoy in presence of as pleasant a conceipted Gentleman, who was
then a widower, jesting with his Highness, requested him, that he would send her
beyond Seas in embassage, to court a certain Prince his daughter for him.
Marry, (said his Highness) I am contented so to do, upon condition, that, when
your husband shall die you marry this Gentleman, who being well traveled and
languaged, will serve you for a good guide.

His Schoolemaister to cherish his generous spirit, and surenes in uttering his
conceips, did give him liberty of jesting pleasantly with himself, offering
him sometimes occasion thereof; as once when the Prince was plaing at the
Shoufleboord, and in his play changed sundry pieces, his Tutor being desirous
that even in trifles he should not be newfangled, said to him, that he did ill
to change so often, and therevvith taking a piece in his hand, and saying that he
would play well enough therevvith without changing, threvv the piece on the
board: yet not so well, but that the Prince smyling, said; well thrown
Master. Whereupon Sir Adam Newton telling him, that he would not strive with a
Prince at shufleboord. He answered; you Gownemen should be best at such
exercises: being not meet for those that are more stirring. Yes, answered Sir
Adam Newton, I am fit for whipping of boys. The Prince answered, you need not
vaunt of that which a Ploughman or Carman can do better then you. Yet can I do
more (said Sir Adam Newton) I can govern foolish children. The Prince,
respecting him even in jesting, came from the further end of the table, and
smyling, said, whilst he passed by him; he had need to be a wise man himself
that would do that.

At another time, playing at Gauffe (a play not unlike to Palemaille, whilst
his Schoolmaister stood by talking with another, and not marking his Highness,
warning him to stand further off, the Prince thinking he had gone aside, lifted
up his club to strike the ball; In the mean time one standing by, said to him;
Be ware (Sir) you bit not Sir Adam Newton. Wherewith he drawing back his
hand, said; had I done so, I had but paid my debts.

His Schoolemaister, having laid a wager with him, that he could not refrain
from standing with his back to the fire, and seeing him forget himself once
or twice in standing after that manner, said to him, Sir, the wager is won;
for you have failed twice. Master, answered his Highness, St. Pieters Cock did
crow thrice.

Playing at Chitlecock with one far taler then himself, and hitting him by
chanche with the Chitlecock on the forehead; this is (said his Highness) the
encounter of David with Golias.

A young man, not very staid or discreet himself, taxed another, and saying,
there was no man living more fantastical, Except your self (said his Highness.)

Learning to play at the Violl of a very skillful Musician, another not so
skillful, in his teachers presence took on him to teach him sundry points. His
teacher saying, that already he had taught him. What (says his Highness,
jeasting with him) will you not learn of your Master? Hereat the other
ashamed, said; Sir, I might rather learn of him. Then (said his Highness) he is
sufficient to teach me.

One said to him looking on a coffer painted on a wall, Sir, open that coffer,
and bestow some gift on me. Whereunto his Highness answered; Find you a keye to
open it, and I will do so.

On a time as he was walking in the heat of the day, one told him, that the
Sun would scorce his face. To whom he answered; It is no matter, I am not a
woman.

Another telling him, that his face was already scorcht with the Sun, put it
then away from me (said his Highness.)

A Servant of his, having prepared himself to wait on him, as he was to ride
abroad with the King privately, his Highness found fault with him for so doing.
Whereat the other taking the snuff, and saying that he cared not for goeing
abroad, his Highness jeasting at his impatience said; I pray you good Sir, be
not angry.

To another of like humor, taking in evil part somewhat that he had said to
him, Sir, (said his Highness) you wlli take no exceptions against that I speak.

His Highness as he was shooting, asking at a Gentleman that stood by, at what
marck he should shoot at. The Gentleman said, at a Welchman who was present.
Will you see then (said his Highness) how I will shoot at a Welchman, and with
these words he turned his back to the Welchman, shooting his arrowe the
clean contrary way.

A Welchman, who had taken a good carouse in the Kings hearing, saying, that
the Prince should have forty thousand Welchmen to wayt on him against any King
in Christendom, the King asking; what to do? his Highness answered merrily; to
cut of the heads of 40000. leekes.

A Preacher in his presence preferring Cambridge before Oxford, the Prince
asked him, if he did not use in his Sermons to say, Cambridge and Oxford. He
granting that he did so, his Highness said; But the first time I preach, I
will say Oxford and Cambridge.

The Kings Majesty telling him, that he might not go abroad to hunting with
him: because the weather was very hoate and unwholesome; Then will I take my
Physician with me, said his Highness.

A merry Gentleman, who was said to take his liquor very largely and kindly,
giving his Highness to understand how he drank oftimes to his health, said
merrily, that his Highness had part of every draught that he took. Then said
his Highness, I must needs be every day druncke.

A number of young Gentlemen that daunced in his Highness company, failing
somewhat in the right measure of the dance, and he who taught them saying;
they would not prove good soldiers, unless they kept always true order and
measure in marching. What then must they do (said his Highness) when they pass
through a swift running water?

A skillful Musician, playing in his presence, one asked him, whether he could
play the same again. Not (said he) for the Kingdom of Spain: for that were
harder then for a Preacher to repeat word for word a Sermon that he had not
learned by root. A worthy Churchman, who stood by, saying, that he thought a
Preacher might do that. Yea (said his Highness) for a Bishopric.

One telling his Highness, that some Hawks were to be sent him, but that he
thought the King would intercept some of them. He may do as pleases him (said
his Highness) for he shall not be put to his book for the matter.

A young jeaster came out of France, telling his Highness, that the French
Kings daughter sent him her heart. Have you it then about you to give me, (said
his High.) Note, that to this Ieaster he spoke in French.

The same Ieaster craved a favor of his Highness, and his Highness, giving him a
box on the ear, persisted still in his demand, whereupon his Highness gave him
another very soundly. Then the jeaster asking him whether those were his
favors. Yea (said his Highness) good enouch for such as you are.

Understanding how some of his Uncle, the Duke of Holsteins men, behaved
themselves very ill, in forcing of women, and wounding of some men to the
danger of their lives, but that they were spared by the people, for that the
said Duke was the Queens Brother, his Highness said; whosoever other spared
them, my Uncle himself should cause them to be hanged.

Some of the young Gentlemen about him, inuiting one another to look on some
fair Gentlewoman, that passed by, and saying to one that found fault with
them for so doing, that it was no sin to look on them, his Highness said;
of looking comes worse, and the Scripture says; Averte oculos tuos, ne
videant vanitatem.

A certain Physician telling him on a time that he rode to take the air, that
he did ride too fast, he ansvvered; must I ride by rules of Physic?

The same man a little after seeing a Beacon near hand, and saying it was in
Latin (Specula,) his Highness lifting up from the sadle his hinder part, and
turning it toward him, said; Hoc speculum for you Master Doctor.

The Prince using in hott vveather to eat sometimes of a cold Capon roasted
the morning or evening before, one day that happened to be colder then the
days immediately precedent had been, Mr. Doctor told him, that was no good
meat for so cold vveather. Then see you Mr. Doctor (said he) that my cooks are
no good Astronomers.

The same Physician telling him at the same time, that it was unvvholsome for
him to have eaten hot meat and cold meat together, I can not help that now
(said his Highness) though they should both run at tilt together in my belly.

One of his Highness Carvers by chance having cut his Highness finger, and
sucking out the blood thereof with his mouth, that it might heal the more
easily, his Highness being no ways displeased with him therefore, said to him
in pleasant manner; If (which God forbid) my Father, I, and the rest of his
Issue, and kindred should fail, you might claim the Crown; for you have the
blood Royal in you.

His Highness at a certain play having chosen his young Gentlemen to play with
him, and excluded his Servants, it chanced that one of them well grown in
years coming where they played, his Highness called him to play with the young
Gentlemen. Some that stood by asking his Highness why he admitted him rather
then others; Because (said his Highness) he may lawfully be of our number: for
Bis pueri senes.

The Kings Majesty upon some mention made of his youngest daughter Lady Marie,
saying to the Prince that he had been once a girl (for such indeed at the
first the Midwife fained him to be) his Highness said to some that stood by; It
was only vir, non Rex.

At the solemnity of S. George, whilst the noble Knights of the Garter stood
in a row washing after supper, his Highness being Lieutenant of the order, said
to some that stood by; Is it not strange, that I should be Lieutenant having
23. brethren all men?

Some of his Highness young Gentlemen, together with himself, imitating in
sport the curvetting and high going of horses, one that stood by, said, they
were like a company of horses. Which his Highness noting, said; Is it not
better to resemble a horse, which is a courageous beast, then a dull and slow
going Ass as you are?

His Highness said to a fatt and corpulent Gentlewoman, who asked of him some
Venison, should I give you venison to make you fatter, that have need to be
made leaner?

His manner at the play at the Basse being to choose out of every couple one,
represented by one of two things, and being asked whether he would have the
white Rose, or the red, he answered; I must have them both; for they have been
so long and so well joined together, as they must not be separated.

At a solemn supper, a merry honest man of a swarfe and fat complexion, whom
he called his page, whom he bid come near to the table, and he saying that he
durst not come near, least he should be taken for a dish of meat, then must it
be (said his Highness) for a gamond of bacon.

A dish of Gelee being set before his Highness in form of a crown with three
Lilies, the said merry man said to his Highness, that that dish was worth a
crown. His Highness answered; I would I had that crown. The other replying
that to be a great wish, how can it be great (said his Highness) whenas you
value it but at a crown?

The same man, looking at a picture something lasciuiously made, and some
saying that he blushed, others, that he blushed not thereat, his Highness
jeasting at his swarfe and grimme face, said to him; Pull off your visard, that
we may see whether you blush or not.

At Greenwich his Highness missing at his table some meat that he fancied, and
was wont to have, and it being told him that the Officers said; there was no
more allowance thereof, he ansered; yet let them send me more, and let them set
it on my head.

Once in the same place, some telling his Highness whilst he was at dinner,
how an undiscreet Officer had refused to send him some fevv Cherries: because
(said he) there was no more allowance, then of those which were send him
already, his Highness, without shovv of displeasure, looking to a Trout that he
had disposed to eat of, and seeing no vinegar on the table, asked, is there no
allowance of vinegar neither?

Some Abricots being sent to him, he presented them to the Kings Majesty, who
tasting of them, and saying they were not ripe, his Highness answered; I can not
mend that Sir, they grew not in my Garden.

Maintaining the precedence of Oxford against a Doctor of Cambridge, and the
said Doctor alleging for the honor of Cambridge, that the King had thence
great Statesmen and Counselors, his Highness answered; As you of Cambridge
brag of the Kings Council and wisdom, so can we of Oxford of his Treasure.
Whereupon the Doctor asking him, whether Treasure were to be compared with
Wisdom? His Highness answered him with another demand, to wit, whether he had
rather have more wisdom and learning, or a good benefice?

His Physician telling him that it was unwholesome for him to eat cold meat,
his Highness answered; that he had a hot stomach.

His Schoolmaister willing to further him in other exercises as well as
learning, and for that cause using with him the practice of the Pike; on a time
when he tossed the same before his Highness, failed insome points. Whereat his
Highness telling him his faults, jeasted with him, which his said schoolmaister
misliking in some manner, said; that it was an evil humor. Master, said his
Highness: I take that humor of you. His Schoolemaister replying that it became
not a Prince. Then does it worse become a Princes Schoolemaister, said his
Highness.

An old man some what choleric, who taught him to dance, finding fault
with him and other young Noblemen, for failing in the measures, and taxing
them as careless boys, his Highness said unto him; Remember, I pray you, that
your self was once a boy.

Having by chance cut his finger, and the same carver, who once cut it, and
sucked the blood thereof with his mouth, offering then to suck the same, some
remembering the Prince his former jest, asked him, what became of the blood
Royal, that he has already sucked? and he ansvvered, that it was at his
heart. It seems so indeed (said his Highness) for it has lately made you a
Justice of peace. Note, that a fevv days before he came to that preferment.

His Highness once playing him after the manner of children, his Schoolmaister
desirous to dravv him to some more manlike exercise, amongst other things said
unto him jeasting; God send you a wise wife, his Highness added; that she may
govern you and me. His Scholemaister saying, that he had one of his own, the
Prince thereto ansvvered, But mine (if I had one) would govern your wife,
and by that means would govern both you and me.

On a time for that he bestovved not a fevv Plumbs that he was eating, on
some of his young noblemen, his tutor taxing him merrily, as not being liberal
enough, Master (said his Highness) when you come to my house, you shall find
me liberal enough. Whereupon his Tutor saying, I had rather entertain your
Highness at my house, if I had one, whereas now I have a wife, and no house
for her. His Highness ansvvered, that is not my fault.

Mention being made of the marriage of some of his young Gentlemen, his Highness
said, I would not be so soon married, and yet I vvish to see my Father a
grandfather.

A Gentleman much delighted in the study and exercise of Poesy, telling to
his Highness. some strange and incredible things, another, who had been a
Traveler said, that he would leave the report of such strange wonders to
him that was a Traveler. Nay (said his Highness) this privilege is rather due
to him who is a Poet.

A Gentleman, taxing his Highness somevvhat undiscreetly for some pleasant and
merry sports and gesture, which on a time he used, said; that he resembled a
little Ape. And you (said his Highness) a great Baboun.

The same man affirming eftsoons a thing, which his Highness with better
reason denied, I yield to you (said his Highness) for it must be as you will
have it.

At another time, the same man going about in an angry mood to disprove
somewhat that his Highness had spoken; Say what you list (said his Highness) I
will not challenge you to the combat for the matter.

On a time his Highness shooting at Buttes, a Physician took on him to teach
him some rules of Archery, to whom his High. saying: that it became him better
to give precepts of Physic then of Archery: another who stood by, commended
him for a good Archer; Could you not then Mr. Doctor (said his Hs:) hitt an
urinall at the other Butt?

A Gentleman, who having his hair cut very short had only left a tuffe of
hair on his forehead, being asked by some, why he kept that tuffe? It is (said
his Highness) to the end that Mahomet may pull him up to Heaven thereby.

The Marquis of S. German, asking him whether he had rather be a hunting then
at his Book, his Hs: said; he might well resolve that doubt himself: for he
had once been of his age.

As he was tossing a little rodd in manner of a Pike, his Schoolmaister to
tax him of trifling, said in jeasting manner, that Alexander the great, being
of his age, used the same kind of exercice. And his Master Aristotle (said the
Prince) had his beard trimmed after the same manner that yours is. Note, that
the Barber had been with him the morning or evening before.

One telling him of abuses committed by some kind of men, whereof he named but
such as were dead; You do wisely, said his Highness, to name only such as are
dead.

Being told how one of his Servants contrary to his direction had done
somewhat, and a Gentleman going about to excuse him, his Hs: said; Either shall
I be Master, or he Maisterles.

Having desired the Officers of his House to furnish plenty of wine and beer
to a great number of his Servants and others, that daunced and sported them
about a bonfire, at his Sisters birth, and some good store of pottes of wine
and jacks of beer being brought forth, his Highness thinking it to be too
little, said: he would have a Hogshead of wine, and another of beer. The
Officers making some difficulty thereat, and saying, there was enough, his
Highness compelled them to obey him, saying; Whether am I Master in mine own
house or you (Sirs?)

A Gentleman his Servant, who had been sometimes a Lawyer, speaking earnestly
and lowdly in excusing some whom his High. would have corrected for their
faults, his Hs: said to him; Remember (Sir) you are not now pleading at the
Bar.

One of his Servants accustomed much to the wearing of scarfes, excusing
himself that he might not play at Basse with his Highness: by reason of a sore
leg. Why then, said his Highness, do you not bind up your leg with a scarf?

It being the custom of his Highness and the young Noblemen about him to tell
every one an History by turn, all of them delivering some observation upon the
History told, one of them recounted how Papirius Cursor, a severe and rigorous
Commander among the Romans, commanded the executioner to bring forth the axe,
as it were to behead a certain Captain, for coming through fear too late to
the field, and he looking for no other then present death, the said Papirius
having thus terrified him, said to the executioner; Cut up this root, that it
may not hinder our walking, and so laying a fine on the Captain, dismissed
him. His Highness being desired by his Schoolmaister to declare his observation
hereupon, said; The Observation that I gather hence, is, that as Papirius was
not so terrible as he threatened, so will you not likewise be in keeping me all
after noone at my book, as you have threatened to do.

He took great delight in ryding of great horses, and labored to have of the
best and rarest horses that were to be found, and had such care of them, that
he went often to the stables to see them, and accounted them to be a part of
his best Jewels, as on a time he declared evidently. For having sent one of the
best that he had, and which he loved dearly (named Pied-Admirall) to the Duke
of Brounswick his Cousin, who had been far in love with him during the time
that he sejourned in England, and one of his Servants, who had gone over with
the horse to the Duke, having brought back from him to his Highness for a token
a certain book full of pictures of horses, with such furniture as belonged to
them; after that he had some what slightly, and as it were in disdain turned
over some of the leaves thereof, he uttered this speeches before the said
Servant, and all that stood by; I would rather have my Pied-Admirall again
alive then all these painted beasts.

I had almost forgotten his Barriers, which I will hear set down after his
witty and pleasant speeches.

The sixteenth year of his age, being come the time of his inuestment in the
Principality of Walls, and Cornuall, he did advance his own Title and Right,
so far as with modesty he might: which presently was gently and lovingly
entertained, and granted of his Majesty, with the consent of the right
honorable the high court of Parliament, the fourth of June following, being
appointed for that solemn action. The Christ mass before which, his Highness
not only for his own, recreation but also that the world might know what a
brave Prince they were likely to enjoy, under the name of Meliades Lord of the
Isles (an ancient title due to the first borne of Scotland,) did in his name by
some appointed for the same, of purpose strangely attired, accompanied with
Drums and Trumpets in the Chamber of presence, before the King and Queen,
and in presence of the whole Court deliver a challenge to all the Knights of
Great Britain in two speeches, the relation whereof were out of purpose: but
the sum was; That Meliades their noble Master boiling withan earnest desire
to try the valor of his young years in foreign countries, and to know where
Virtue and Valor Triumphed most, had sent them abroad to espy the same, who
after their long travels in all countries and return, showing how now here in
any continent; save in the fortunate Isle of Great Britain, they had found his
wishes, which ministering matter of exceeding joy to their young Meliades, who as
they said, could lineally derive his pedigree from the famous Kings of this
Isle) was the cause that he now sent to present the first fruits of his
chevalry at his Majestyes feet, thereafter turning with a short speech to her
Majestye, next to the Earls, Lords, and Knights, excusing their Lord in this
their short and sudden warning, and lastly to the Ladies, they, after humble
delivery of their cartell, concerning time, place, conditions, number of
weapons, and assaillaunts, took their leave, departing solemnly as they
entered. Now began every where preparation to be made for this great fight, and
happy did he think himself who should be admitted as a defendant, much more
assaillant. At last, to encounter his Highness with his fix assaillants 58.
defendants consisting of Earls, Barons, Knights, and Esquieres, were appointed
and chosen 8. defendants to one assaillant; every assaillant being to fight by
turns 8. special times, fighting twice every time with push of Pike and
Sword, twelve strokes at a time, after which the bar for separation was to
be let down until a fresh onset. The great night of this solemnity now
approaching, his Highness in his own lodging in the Christmasse time, did feast
all the Earls, Barons and Knights, assaillants and defendants, until the
great Twelfth appointed night, on which this great fight was to be performed,
which being come, his Highness, to the great vvonder of all the beholders, did
admirably fight his part, giving and receiving that night 32. pushes of Pikes,
and above 360. of strookes with swords, which is scarce credible in so young
years, enough to assure the world that great Britains brave HENRY asp^ed to
immortality.

Against the morrow after the said fight, was also provided a magnificke feast
at his Highness house of St. James, at which their Majesty's, his Highness
Brother, and Sister, with all other the Earls, Lords and Knights of the Court
were present, where after supper (according as before they had been judged) his
Highness gave three prizes to the three best deserving, namely, to the right
Honorable the Earl of Montgommery one, and to Sir Thomas Darcy and Sir Robert
Gordon Knights the other two.

I will add one Observation more, drawn out of mine own experience, that out
of this one particular it may appear in general, what opinion our neighbor
nations had of his Hs, and how much the greatness of his name had anxiously
perplexed many of their minds, which is this; I being in France about some 9.
years ago, and with others traveling along the River of Loire betwixt
Orleans and Tours, there fortuned to be in our company a Gentleman of the
city of Bourdeaux, who upon some discourse that we had together of English
affairs, told me; that those of that city a little while before his Highness
his death, were mightily affrayed of some invasion to be made by him, having
for a long time before together with the whole country of Gascony conceived no
small jaelousie and fear of his high and generous Spirit, the cause of this
late fear being, for that the harvest quarter (at which time the English and
Scottish Ships use to arrive there to provide themselves with wines) being
then spent, and the winter season come already, and no Ships arriving as they
had wont to do, the more vigilant and wary sort did verily suspect that the
sea ports of England had been shutt up, and all Ships stayed for some great
enterprise, which they could not think to be intended otherwise then against
them, and that by the Prince his means only, as fearing no other. And
moreover, that at that time the city was not provided to endure a siege,
chiefly through want of corn, which they could not provide to any purpose
without some time and leisure; namely, since the same could not be effected
without some show of fear, which they were loath to show openly, for
discouraging of the citizens, and doubting that they might in end have been
laughed at, if it should have come to pass that they had mistaken the matter,
as it fell out indeed. For at lenth (though very late in the year) the Ships
so long expected, arrived after the accustomed peaceable manner, some quantity
of wheat was brought down the ryver of Garumne by accident, and not long
after they had certain news of his Hs: his death. All which things falling
out almost together, did banish all fear out of their minds, and suddenly
filled their hearts with joy, being rid of all danger through the death of the
Prince. And the foresaid Gentleman affirmed constantly, that, although they
were exceeding glad to be thus delivered from so great a fear, and to live in
peacable security, as they had wont to do, yet on the other part they could
not choose but be sorry for the loss of such a brave and hopeful young Prince,
who in his youthead had already become so famous and redoubted, and had made so
many nations to admire him, and stand in fear of him.

I might set down many more Observations and proofs of all manner of Virtues,
wherewith this Heroical Prince was richly adorned, If I did not labor to
eshew prolixity, fearing that this Treatise might grow to big. To be short,
therefore I will only in fevv words add, that; He was most virtuous all his
lifetime, charitable and pitiful, familiar and gracious to all persons; of
fevv words, using gravity with such as were grave, severe in time and place,
merry with those that were so disposed, and wise in all his actions, far
above his age. He kept his household Servants in good order, and was very
vigilant and careful of all his affairs: His Court for Noble and generous
behavior did resemble some college, that had been pikt and chosen out of the
best and rarest Spirits of great Britain. He favored learning much. He made
so much of Soldiers and men of war, that he made diverse Captains Gentlemen
of his privy Chamber, and took great pleasure in their company, discoursing
with them often touching military discipline. He admired great and rare
Spirits, yea even those of mechanical and mean persons, retaining diverse of
that sort, and went sometimes to see them work in their trades.

He delighted much in Architecture and building, and had already made some
beginning thereof at Richmond house; And doubtless, if God had prolonged his
days, he had caused build many curious and sumptuons buildings. Out of his
Heroical mind, which breathed nothing but noble deeds, he adorned likewise
the British Ocean with that stately Prince, a fit name for such a goodly Ship,
being as it were a Prince compared wieh other vessels. He loved Music, and
namely good consorts of Instruments and voices joined together. In his bodily
exercises he did not exceed the limits of lawful mediocrity. He loved the
Tinnish well. He took no delight in pleasants and jeasters, neither yet was he
carried away with any affection to stage plays. He delighted more in hauking
then hunting. He was tall and of an high stature, his body was strong and well
proportioned, his shoulders were broad, his eyes quick and pleasant, his
forehead broad, his nose bigg, his chinne broad and cloven, his hair inclining
to bleeke, whereas before it had been of a whitish color, the color of his
face some what swarfe and scorched with the sun, his whole face and visage
comely and beautiful, looking for the most part with a sweet, smyling, and
amiable countenance, and withal full of gravity, and Princely majesty,
resembling much in the shape of his body, and diverse actions the King of
Dennemark his Uncle. So that being thus beautified and adorned with so many
excellent gifts, and most rare virtues both of soul and body, he did draw not
only the eyes of many to come and behold him, but likewise did easily gain the
hearts of all men, yea even of those, which had only heard of him. This
illustrious and mighty Prince increassing thus in strenght, honor, and wisdom,
withal manner of virtues, being the hope and solace of the people, the glory
of his Parents, cherissed and loved of all men, even of strangers and those of
foreign nations, and thinking on nothing less then such a sudden and
unexpected change, as fell out soon after, this most worthy personage (far
otherwise then his tender years and age seemed to promise to us) by the will
of his supreme creator was seized with a heavy disease, and within a few days
after was a tached by death self, it so pleasing the almighty God, to take
from this world up to himself this noble Soul, with such piety and devotion,
as could be wished in a Christian soul: to the intent that he might place him
in one of his celestial mansions, and so obtain everlasting life. Which
happened about eight of the clock at night, on Friday the 6. of November, 1612.

This terrible and fearful eclipse not having been foretold and
prognosticated long before, did move and trouble each one by diverse manners,
seeing clearly herein the unrecoverable loss, wherewith God punished us, by
taking away this Prince from the earth, from the King his Father, the chief
staff of his old age, and from the people their most certain hope; which they
had, to se renewed one day in this illustrions graffe all the noble virtues of
his forefathers. The doleful and lamentatable cries of all the people were
great every where, their merrines turned into heaviness, and their laughing into
floods of tears, bewailing and lamenting daily this great and unfortunate
stroke, whereof the vvound yet still bleedeth. God, of his wonted mercy,
bless and preserve our most noble King CHARLES, and the rest of this Royal
family, without kindling his wrath any more against us, by inflicting on us
the heavy and due punishment, which our sins have deserved.

THE RELATION OF THE Sickness and Death of the most Illustrious HENRY, Prince of
Walls, etc. TOGETHER With the opening of his Body.
PRINCE HENRY in the nineteenth year of his age, being naturally very hott,
accustomed to bleed very oftentimes at the nose abundantly, yea and without
exercise, but much more after any violent exercising of the body; this natural
excretion having been stopped these three monethis bypast; the last summer of
this year 1612. (being excessive in degree and continuance of heat, more then
any that now live in England had ever seen) having continually wearied his
body with extreme exercices, and moving at hunting, in the heat of the day,
with riding, with playing at tinnish, and consequently having oftentimes chafed
his blood after an extraordinary manner (which having been stirred in the
morning, was accustomed not to setle again all the day long.) And moreover,
having eaten fruit some what excessiuely, chiefly Melons and Grapes that were
not fully ripe: having often filled himself with fish, and with Oysters both
raw and dressed with fire, at every meal, three or four days in the week;
finally, to cool the burning heat that troubled his body in the Summer, having
as often as occasion would serve, w. shed himself in the ryver, after supper,
with a full stomach, remaining in the water for some hours together. After all
these disorders, in end he fell sick at Richmond, the tenth day of October,
1612. The two next days after, he had two fits with shivering and heat,
without any sweat following after. Which being perceived by his ordinary
Physician, he having ordained and caused to give him an ordinary remollitive
glyster simply, without any loosing medicine, after a gentle operation, the
humors having been stirred, which were in great quantity, in this full body,
upon the morrow after he had 25. stools, and there came from him a great
quantity of rotten and stinking choler, and at the latter end some phlegm. The
voyding hereof did good: but the root remaining fast, and the body being
toyled with unquietness, and lassitudes, and with an interrupted and broken
sleep, his Highness his Physician thought it good to purge him with the pills,
which he was accustomed to give before meals, which wrought four or five
little times weakly with great asswaging. Nevertheless after a few days, the
disease increasing by little and little, and nature yielding to the causes of the
disease (although his Highness did strive against his pain, laboring to cover
the same, and shake it off) upon the fifth day after the first beginning of his
sickly disposition, which was on Sunday the 25. of October, his Highness having
found himself very ill the Saturday before (though he had played at Tinnish)
and far worse on Sunday morning, his face being pale and parched with heat,
his eyes hollow and of a wanne color, being at Whitehall about three of the
clock after noone, fell in a light sowning (an accident very common to him and
many of his race) which was followed by a light shivering, and with a heat;
with great pain of the head, which had lasted many days, yea and with
whirlings and giddiness, chiefly when he went about to rise out of his bed. At
last his Highness had a fit of a fever. Whereupon the Kings Majesty having sent
to him Doctor Mayerne, his chief Physician, he being come to his Highness at
eight of the clock at night, found his Highness in a fever, with a red visage,
with troubled eyes, that could not endure the light of the candle, his lips
black, his tongue dry, and an extreme thirst to drink, which has always
exceedingly tormented his Highness so long as his brain was free and able to
feel his pain. For this time the Doctor was content to ordain a cordial and
refreshing ptisane, to quench the thirst, and a broth to be taken at the end of
the fit. Upon the next day came together Doctor Hammon, ordinary Physician to
his Highness, and Doctor Mayerne, the foresaid Physician to the King, sent by
his Majesty, who having considered that his Highness had had a most restles
night (as the preceding five or six had been) and finding him to have the same
thirst and drienes which he had before, together with a starting of the sinue
parts, and the belly bent; and the urines crude and white, and costivenesse,
with common consent they ordained a lenitive glyster for him, which caused him
to void gently three or four times some very stinking yelow choler. All that
day long his Highness was without any fever, rose and played after dinner with
the Duke of York, having always notwithstanding a most pitiful countenance,
and drienes in the mouth, with some great alteration; for which cause they
ordained cordial ulleps that were tart and cooling, and (to prevent all
dangers) forgot not to minister some Behezar, Unicorns horn, and such like
antidotes. All his brothers were made according to the same intention, and all
the rest of his diet was to the same end. The next night, after the accustomed
manner, affoorded him no rest, whith the drouth, which one labored to quench
with the foresaid Iuleps. The next day about noonetide the fit returned with
cold, and great heat, which increased with greater measure of all its former
accidents, till eight of the clock: at nine, the fever decreased, and after ten
ceased altogether. The morning following his Highness sleept quietly enough. In
the mean time were heard great noyses in his belly, whereof the fore part and
sides about the short ribs and above the nauill, were bent more then ordinary.
Which being considered, the foresaid Doctors having all that day striuen with
cordials, reckoning the beginning of the disease to have been from the Prince
his being at Richmond, and not only from the Sunday; weighing the profit which
his Highness had received by the excretions, as well natural as artificial,
that had past before, and looking to the manner of living, and the great fulness
of putrified humors, that were in the natural parts, which having been
kindled had caused a fever, which followed the nature of a Tertian (though
venomous because of its notable putrefaction, and ready to turn to a
continual fever, for the quantity of the matter, as it came to pass afterward)
the foresaid Physicians (I say) advised upon a light purgation, which were able
only to diminish the quantity of the humors, judging the same to be so much the
more necessary then the last Glyster; and the stirring noyses heard in the
belly did inuit one to solace nature by that part. Thereupon his Highness was
desired by the foresaid Doctors to call a Council of Physicians, to consult
and advise more largely of this business, which he flatly refused, as being
unwilling to have many Physicians, as those that came afterward might gather by
his countenance, and the King his self can witness. So not to spend the next
day following without doing that which was most necessary; his Highness being
altogether without any fever, there was given to him a gentle medicine of
boiled Seen, and Rhubarbe infused in cordial and cooling liquours, with some
Syrup Rosate loosing. This medicine wrought with incredible pain, seven or
eight times, and brought away great store of putrified choler, and toward the
end some putrified phlegm. From that day forth the urines began to change,
and to thicken, and to show some little cloud, which betokened concoction. The
night was troublesome after the accustomed manner, save in the morning. His
breath which was always short became more easy and longer, the pain of the
head less. Singings of the ears that continued (though unequally) from the
beginning to the end; the startings being alike. In this case the Iuleps with
the Behezar, Unicorns horn, pearls, and bone of the Stagges heart, etc. were
continued. Upon the next the fit came with a light cooling, which since that
time was not felt, and from that hour forth, the fever has been always
continual, with notable remissions or breathings, and very unequal
redoublings every day; the one great, the other less. In the course of this
continual fever the tongue became black, the drouth, the startings and
singings did increase. At ths end of the fifth day nature strained it self to
void some thing by the belly, but little, the urines did nowayes show the
greatness of the danger. Doctor Butler was called aside from the rest, who
counseled only to minister internal and external cordials, analeptickes, and
approved the diet that was prescribed, and his advise was follovved. The
night was very restles, and the morning, as alvvayes, some what more gentle.
Upon the sixth the entralles having been vvashed with fruit by a Glyster in
the morning, about three of the clock after noone came the less redoubling,
during which the face was very red, the breath short, the pulse full of
svviftnesse. In the fit the nose fell a bleeding, but after the voyding of
two ounces of blood ceased, not without some easing. This bleeding shevved it
self (though in smaller quantity) the seventh and eight day; from that hour
forth a motion was made of letting blood, whereunto nature by this attempt
did invite in a fever, moreover continual, in an extreme fullness, in a
temperature excessively hott, in a subject accustomed to bleed at the nose, and
deprived of his benefit these many months bypast. Nevertheless the seventh
past over, and the greater part of the Physicians was of the opinion, that it
was expedient to wait till the Crisis were come, though the disease was
crude; and that there was no appearance at all thereof: Thus upon this day
came the great redoubling, with rauing, and that he being awake: blackness,
drienesse, and roughness of the tongue, with ulceration of the throat; the
singings and startings were waxed greater, the urines more crude, and there
was vvithall a fearful unquietnes, which continued the whole night. The
increasing of the evil, and nature beginning to bovv and relent, made the
letting of blood to be motioned more earnestly then before, as being the only
remedy to save his Highness, if the same were let in a just quantity, yea and
by reiterating the same if need were, as all manner of likelyhoods did show,
in regard of the constitution of the body, the age, the strength, and other
accidents. After a very great debate, in end the three Doctors Mayerne, Hammon,
and Butler, agreed together, the eight day after that his Highness had taken his
bed, and in their presence was drawn from the Median or middle vain of the
right arm some 7. or 8. ounces of blood. His Hs: suffered the same with
courage, desired them to dravv some more, was nothing weakened thereby, the
blood came running like a stream, and almost immediately thereafter he felt
some comfort. The blood, after that it was become cold, was seen by any
whosoever desired to see it, all putrified, blevv on the upper part, and
almost without any small stringes, not fully thickened. His Highness all the
time of his sickness never found himself so well as that day, and had no
redoubling, in such sort that it seemed by his pulse, that the fever would
have left him.

The singins of the ears and the startings were diminished, the night become
better, though with little rest; the urines and excrements better concocted, the
drouth somewhat assuaged, and his eyes began to endure the light better. Upon
the ninth, the great redoubling came with less heat then had done the
seventh day. In this fit, the breath became shorter; the pulse beating more
frequently, the face redder, the tongue blacker, and the drouth greater, the
startings continued, and the drousines began: breefly, all that appeared, which
was able to make it appear, that the blood and the humors had with abundance
and violence cast themselves upward toward the brain. This night his Highness
raued much more then before, using some discourses out of purpose, he cast
himself out of the bed, called for his clothes, and spoke of going away. In
the morning of this day Doctor Atkins was sent by the King to the Prince, who
took his coming impatiently, until such time as he had been persuaded by the
other ordinary Physicians; that he had need to be succored with all manner of
good counsel, and that the number of learned men could not choose but be very
healthful, and fit for recovering of his Highness his health. Doctor Atkins
told before the King and the Lords of the Council, that this disease was a
putride fever, whereof the nourishing heat wat under the liver, in the first
passages, and acknowledged the malignity that accompanied it to proceed of
putrefaction, which being come to the highest degree takes the nature of
poison. Upon the tenth, all the accidents were increased; and the startings
turning into convulsions, the rauing having become greater, and the drousines
more troublesome, with the fever, which was ever more violent toward the
evening, and all the rest of the evils, in the morning a motion was made to
let blood, the which being disallovved by the greater part, strong cordials
were used, and a Glyster; by the which much putrified and stinking matter
having been brought forth, his High. did cast up the stones of the grapes
which he had eaten ten or tvvelfe days before. All was without effect; and
the night of that day his High. began (the fever being increased) to rave
more then ever he did, to cast himself to and fro, to leap out of the bed; to
sing in his sleep, and pull the sheets together to him. The convulsions
(which with the rauing were foretold from the fifth day of the disease
(became more violent; the tongue, though dry and black with the whole throat
did not move his Highness to call for drink, an evident sign that the mansion
place of reason and understanding did suffer extremely. In end, all the
eleventh day, every thing became worse and worse (save some little breathing)
and the greater part of the Physicians did think it expedient to wait for
the Crises, which were far of, and appeared nowayes. In the night of the
tenth day, cupping glasses with scarification were applied to the shoulders;
and pigeons to the head being shaven. The eleventh, a Cock cloven along through
the back was applied, and the cordials were multiplied in number and in
quantity, all without any fruit. Then the danger appeared to be certain, which
had been foretold long ago. The which to withstand and help, so far as art
would permit, and the estate of the disease seemed to require, upon the twelfth
morning the letting of blood was again debated among the Doctors, Mayerne,
Hammon, Atkins, and Butler; one of them alleging, that the blood had cast it
self upward violently, and by filling of the brain, did through its venomous
sharpnes, and quantity, cause the rauing and convulsions, yet without pain,
because the spirit was troubled, which accidents did cast his Hs: into eminent
danger, more then the drousines, the cause whereof was in the ventricles, like
as the foresaid hott and choleric blood was in the caules or thin skins,
and that consequently there was no other present remedy, but to open a vein;
which his strength seemed not to withstand, since the pulse was strong enough,
and his Highness did rise to go to his stool, remaining at the same without any
weakness, which had not happened to him since the beginning of his sickness. The
rest of the Physicia^s misliked this advise, thought it good to continue, to
double and triple the cordials, and to make revulsion of the humor from the
brain with a Glyster, which wrought very well, but without any other effect,
save that his Highness after voyding, came to himself, and with judgment and
understanding gave ear to the exhortations, and prayers of the Lord
Archbishop of Canturberry, showing excellent signs of piety, and contempt of
this world, and a great contentment to prepare himself to go and possess
eternal rest. After this he sleept quietly enough, some three hours, the
convulsions and rauings being diminished. Toward the evening besides the
foresaid Doctors, the Doctors Gifford and Palmer were brought in. They went all
to a consultation together, whereat some of them having remarked some
pestilence in this disease (although none of all those that had smelled his H^.
breath a thousand times, and watched continually near unto him had ever found
themselves ill, and that moreover throughout his whole disease he had never any
sickness at the heart or vomiting, or any spott of purples, or other tokens on
his body the others having denied the same flatly, and the great necessity of
letting blood having been declared, whereof the opportunity was past for that
time, by reason of the excretion of the belly, in end, by the plurality of
voices the Diascordium was concluded, in presence of Sir Thomas Challoner
Knight, Chamberlayne to his Highness, who among others a most worthy Servant of
his Master, was continually with him, and was at the greatest part of the
consultations, together with Sir David Murray Knight, first Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, and Master of the Robbes and Wardrobe, whose faithfulness and
diligent care is known to every one. The relation of the foresaid
consultations set down in this treatise, may be controlled by these two
persons of honor and dignity, or be confirmed by their voices: and by the
consent of all his Highness his Gentlemen, that were witnesses of all things.
According to the resolution taken, at ten of the clock at night, or there
about, was ministered the Diascordium, tempered with cordials which were not
very hott. The operation hereof was small, and his Highness rested with his
ordinary accidents, though assuaged never so little. After the space of four
hours, the backe-bone, the shoulders, and the arms, with the tongue, suffered
diverse convulsions. The rauing increased, the muscle Sphincter losing its
natural faculty, did suffer some untimely excretion to come forth, and death
seemed to be very near hand. In this desperate case every one hasted to hinder
this unspeakable loss, and out of the abundance of their affection, propounded
that, which they thought might do any good. The Doctors (after that they had
given out their prognostic, which they perceived would prove but too true)
having never preassed to give his Highness any thing whatsoever, but such
whereof they knew the preparation, or making. In end, by the common consent of
all six, was given to his Highness a cordial, which had its effect, by
asswaging the rauings and convulsions, and causing him sweat abundantly, which
was the first time that he had sweat any. But all in vain, in such sort that
this most illustrious Prince, having received no comfort by this excretion,
commendable in all its qualities; the Council of Physicians perceiving nature
to be vanquished, and that art was unable to attain to afford sufficient
help unto the same, committed the rest into the hands of God, whom it pleased
a little after, to take from the world this most noble and heroical soul up to
himself, that he might inherit with his Savior Christ a perfect and permanent
felicity. This happened about eight of the clock at night, upon Friday the 6.
of November, 1612.

Upon the next day after the death, which was on Saturday the seventh of the
foresaid month, by his Majesty's command, and order from the Lords of the
Council, about 5. of the clock at night, all the Physicians that had been at
his cure, the Prince Elector Palatine his Physician, and others, the Gentlemen
of the late Prince his Chambers, and others his Servants, assembled together in
the same chamber where he died, where such were admitted, as it pleased to be
present there without confusion indifferently, in presence of the whole
assembly his body was opened, by the Kings and his Highness his Surgeons, which
in its outward and inward parts was found to be such as follows.

THe Skin (as of one that is dead) pale, nowayes spotted with black, or
blew, or lead color, which might breed suspicion of any violence, far less
marked with purples, like fleabits, which might argue any pestilent or
co^tagious poison. About the Kidneys, buttocks, and hinder parts of the thighs
full of redness, by reason of lying for a long time on the back, with great
pain and labor. The belly somewhat swelled, and stretched out through
windiness which issued forth by the least opening, that was made of the nauill
(being naturally lifted up) and immediately the belly fell down. The Stomach
whole and sound without and within, having never been troubled during the whole
sickness, nor suffered any will to vomit, vomitings, hickots, nor any other
accident, which might give evidence, that it had received any secret wrong. The
^iuer without, in its higher or upper part marked with points; in the lower
with blakish lines, and far p^ler and wanner, then it should have been. The
Gallbladder void of humor, full of wind. The Spleen above, and in its low
extremity somewhat black, filled with a black and earthly blood. The Kidneis
very goodly, and without blemish. The Midriffe beneath the parts about the
heart (which had too little matter in them) spotted with black, and as it were a
leaden black and blew color. The Lungs almost all black, in the greatest part
thereof, the rest being marked with black, puffed up and full of a parched
blood, and of a corrupt bloody serosity, which foaming issued forth
plentifully, at a part of the body of the lungs that was opened. In which
opening and cutting the parts about to show the heart, the Surgeon through
mischance having cut the thrunke of the great vein, the greatest part of the
blood emptied it self into the Thorax, leaving the lower veins empty, whereof
the company was presently advertised. From this color and framing of the
lungs, were gathered some consequences of an exceeding great fullness, and of
an excessive heat, which appeared yet more, in so far as the vvindpipe, the
throat, and the tongue were smeared over with a black sewet and among other
accidents, the tongue dry and chinked in many places. The Heart goodly, whole
in appearance, and without any fault that could be remarked, in any of its
conditions. The hindmost veins, which are in the inner cause of the brain
(called Pious mother) swelled and puffed up through the abundance of blood, far
beyond the natural order. The substance of the Brain very goodly and clean:
but the venticles thereof full of a very clear water, which came forth in
great plenty at the cutting. One part of these accidents was engendered by the
fever (venomous only because of the putrefaction of the same) of diverse humors
gathered together a long time before, his Highness not being subject to any
dangerous disease, either by inheritance, or birth. Another part by reason of
the convulsion, ravings, and drousines, which through fullness, choking the
natural heat, and extinguishing the beginnings of life through naughtiness,
have brought his Highness to his grave, without any appearance, sign, or
accident of poison.

The sum of this Relation having been penned in presence of all the foresaid
Physicians, by one of the company, was sent to his Majesty, subscribed by them
all, the day after the opening of the body.

SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MVNDI.
FINIS.

