THE SPIRITVAL PILGRIMAGE OF HIERVSALEM, CONTAYninge three hundred sixty five
days Journey, wherein the devout Person may Meditate on sondrie points of his
Redemption. WITH. PARTICVLAR DECLARATION of diverse Saints bodies and holy
places which are to be seen in the said-voyage: AS ALSO SUNDRY DEVOV'T
Prayers and meditations very healpful to the Pilgrims:

WITH LICENSE.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Seeing it is so my (Catholic brother) that this present life is no other
thing but a continual* Pilgrimage which we are to make upon the earth: and
that all the time of our life is a term prefixed of God the Creator, during
which space we ought to accomplish this voyage, which when we have
faithfully vvalked, we may come to the City of heavenly Heirusalem, which is
our kingdom and most proper contrie: were it not great folly and negligence
in us, if we should forget, or to say more truly, despise, and not account,
of the principal place of our repose, but like unwise men rather to sit down
and rest our selves in the middle of our journey, to wit in the fillbie and
durtie vvayes of this vvretched and wicked word? The trauailer or foot Post,
which is ordinarily hiered to go some Journey; although his journey be long,
the the vveather foul, and the vvayes very unclean, yet hinders not his
voyage for the dificultie he conceiues of the labor, but knovvinge that he
gets his liunige by means of the gains, and that he shall well cherishe,
and refreshe him self, when he is arrived at his Inn, with great facility
supporteth the asperitie of the travail, upon hope of the recompense which he
afterward expects. We then (dear brethren expecting the (rovvne of)
everlasting glory, which our lord has promised to such as love him, shall
we appear more vnvvillinge, or vvearie for the obtayninge hereof, then we
would be for the gayninge only of some temporal commodity? Let us behold
therefore what care and pains our loving lord has taken of our salvation; let
us learn to trauaille courageously and like devout and holy pilgrims to
follow his steps, who has left us an exsample of his blessed life and
passion, and ruminate in our hearts every day aparte, some several poinct
thereof, and after well to practice the same in our selves (for such ought to be
the end of al our spiritual exercises) by which means we may attain to the
happy end that we desire vvherof having found this little Treatise of A
Spiritual Pilgrim, assuringe my self that it would be a thing very agreeable
to al manner of devout and pious persons, I thought good to bring the same to
light. Beseechinge the gentle Reader to accept of this little gift, and to
respect more my hearty affection, then the littlenes of the thing. The rest I
remitt to the disposition of Almighty god the Creator of al things, whose
only honor and gloire I desire herein, Amen.

Thy hearty vvel-vviller in Christ Jesus R. H.

THE SPIRITVAL PILGRIMAGE TO HIERVSALEM.
I If thou desire (well-beloved) to be this holy Pilgrim, thou must first by
Confession make clean thy soul from sin: for it is impossible with an
unclean soul to receive the grace of god, or to walk the journey of a
perfect Pilgrim.

Secondly, thy sins must be washed in the seven effusions of our Lord and
Savior Jesus.

The 1. effusion, was his Circumcision, to cleanse thine heart from
concupiscence, and al thoughts of carnalitie.

The 2. effusion, when he did sweat water and blood in the Garden. to purge
thee from al Ire, and wrath.

The 3. effusion, was his whipinge to heal thee from al Sloth and Idelnes.

The 4 effusion, his crowninge with Thorn, to suppress thy Pride.

The 5. effusion, the strippinge of his garments which cleaued fast to his B.
body, for to cure thy Avarice.

The 6. effusion his naylinge to the Cross hand and foot and saying. I
thirst; to heal thy Gluttony.

The 7. effusion the peircinge of his side, to purge thy heart from Envy,
hatred, and malice.

Thirdly thou must provide in thy Purse good store of Coin, especially of fine
gould, for that it is light of cariadge. This gould is gotten by the often and
worthy, receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.

The 1. Purse thou must put this gould in, must be a firm faith against al
assaults of thine enemies; out of which Purse thou must distribute liberally
by true Love and thankefulnes.

The 2. Purse must be filled with Patience, the which thou must chiefly keep
to defray thine own expenses, least if thou want thereof, thou perish by the
way for hunger.

The 3 Purse it to be filled with all sorts of virtues and out of this thou
must, spend liberally a bout the profit of thy neighbors (whether they be in
this life or departed hence) by the works of mercy both bodily and ghostly.
Keep safe these Purces in the wallet of meekenes, fast Locked with the keye of
humility.

Fourthly, thy Apparel must be simple as our Saviors was, being king of
glory, despise the^for thy self, as Christ did him self in his life and death.

Fifthly, Thy Hatte must be Obedience to thy Superiors, as Christ was to his
Inferiors, in his Coronation.

Sixthly, Thou must be shodde with the Shoes of straight Consideration, with
desire of following the life and steps of Christ and his Saints, markinge
well the difference of thy ways from theirs.

Seventhly, Thou must carry with thee the wallet of a pure Conscience, and
clean heart, which thou art to beg of thy Savior by fervent prayer.

Ayghtly, Thou must have in thy hand the staff of the Cross, with which thou
must always stay up thy self.

Ninthly, Proceed with blessing thee, In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: (...) Invoke the aid of the glorious virgin
Mary to be thy help in this Pilgrimage. Pray to thy holy Angel, and to the
Saint who is thy Patron.

Tenthly, Daily comende thy self to god with the remembrance of thy Apparr^t.

Accompany thy self with heavenly company that they may show thee the way, and
aid thee in all thy distresses, and comfort thee.

Consideringe it is almost impossible, for a Pilgrim to go a long way
without fallinge. Thou shall recollect the Seven fallinges of Christ our
Lord, taking one of them for every Day in the week.

The 1. the fallinge of our Lord being taken, when they hastened him to pass
over the water of Cedron.

The 2. the fallinge of our Lord in the Street being sent from Pilate to Herod
and back again, thrust and thronged by the Jews.

The 3. the fallinge of our sweet Redeemer with his face upon the Steps in
Pilates house.

The 4. his fallinge after his scourginge thorough his extreme debilitie and
weakness.

The 5. in his voyage to the Mount of Caluary, fallinge Seven sundry times to
the earth by the way under the heavy burden of his Cross.

The 6. fallinge was when so inhumainly he was thrown down upon the Cross,
and most Lamentably haled and stretched forth thereupon.

The 7 fallinge, when he was nailed, lifted up, and let ral in to the mortice
of the Cross. With a most strong torture and ruful pain to al his holy
members.

And for that a Pilgrims repast is often times on green herbs, thy Meat
must be the seven leaves which came forth of the mouth of our Savior, when he
grew and was fixed on the holy Tree of the Cross.

The 1. leaf, o father forgive them: here pray for meekenes, be slow to
revenge. etc.

The 2. leaf, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise: here pray for the
forgeuenes of thy sins.

The 3. leaf, behold thy mother: here pray for divine asistance never to be
separated from god.

The 4. leaf, my God my God why have thou forsaken me? here pray for help and
comfort of god in all thy Distresses, and that he never forsake thee, especially
in the hour of thy death.

The 5. leaf I Thirst: here pray for an earnest desire and thirst of the love
of god. With a fervent and holy honger, worthily to receive the B. sacrament.

The 6. leaf, It is finished: here pray for fortitude to labor and persevere
faithfully to the end in our Lords holy service, and in thy true estate and
vocation.

The 7. leaf, O father in to thy hands I comend my spirit: here pray for the
worthy offeringe up of thy soul at the hour of thy death in to the hands of
thy Redeemer.

For thy Drink in the Tauernes, thou shall find in the the Sellers of our
Savior that wine makes glad the heart of man. Which be the seven effusion of
the blood of our Lord Jesus.

The 1. effusion his Circumcision, here pray for the circumcision of al
superfluity, and to be filled with the sweet dew of a pure and innocent life,
and perfectly to be cleansed from lust and concupiscence.

The 2. effusion, in sweating water and blood; here pray to forsake al
c^etures, and the love of this wretched world.

The 3. effusion, in his whiping: here learn to rejoice in abstinence and
penance.

The 4. effusion, In his Coronation: pray to rejoice in nothing but in the
Cross of Christ.

The 5. effusion, In plucking of his garments: pray to pluck away from thee al
old infirmities which have long cleaued fast unto thee, and the love of al
transitory things, that thy soul may be perfectly adorned with the garment of
divine love.

The 6 effusion, In his nayling: here pray to have a firm constancy in the
Catholic faith.

The 7. effusion, In the peircing of his Blessed heart: here pray to receive
worthelie before thy departure the holy Eucharist.

This Pilgrim must have also, a Tent for the night: which may be the seven
sorrows of our Blessed Lady.

The 1. sorrow to hear old Simeon say, that the sword of sorrow should pearce
her heart here pray for the obtaining of true knowledge and repentance of thy
sins, and compassion for the same.

The 2. sorrow, when she fled by night in to the country of Egypt. and here pray
for patience in all thy tribulations.

The 3. sorrow, when she had lost Jesus, and could not til three Days find him
again: here pray that thou never leese his grace, but ever find it again.

The 4 sorrow, when Jesus was caryeng his Cross: here pray that thou may
willingly carry the Cross of Christ all the days of thy life.

The 5 sorrow, when she saw her son hanginge on the Cross, and comendinge her
to his disciple: here pray so to live in this world that his holy passion be
not void and frustrate in thee.

The 6. sorrow, when Christ was let down in her lap from the Cross being
dead: here pray to have grace to receive with fruit the blessed Sacrament, and
to have the benifit of every Mass.

The 7. sorrow, when Jesus was buried, and she returned to Jerusalem. pray that
thou may ever have Jesus abidinge in thy heart, and have compassion of our
blessed Lady.

The lenght of this Journey: This spiritual voyage is divided in to Three
hundred sixty five days Iorneyes, which is for every day in the year, one
meditation: to the end thou may not be silent one hour ever in any day,
having likewise in mind all the foresaid necessaries, to wit thy Aparel, Thy
Purse, thy Staff, thy Diet, thy loginge, etc.

From London, or the like place:

For the 1. day, Meditate of God, that he is inco^prehensible, the beginning and
endinge of al, the fountain of al goodness, and abone al to be honored, loved,
and magnified

For the 2 day, meditate how god has created the Angels full of glory to
praise him, and for the sauegard of his creatures.

For the 3. day, meditate how god made heaven and earth, and all that in them
is, with in the space of seven days.

For the 4. day, Mediate, of the joy of the Angels in the creation of man.

For the 5. day, Meditate of the creation of Adam and Eve, and of their
placinge in Paradise, and what Go^ commanded them.

For the 6. day, meditate of the Driving of Adam and Eve out of Paradise, and
now Adam lived in this world nine hundred thirty years in Penance, laboring
for his bread with the sweat of his brows.

For the 7. day, Meditate of the divine council in heaven for the Deliueringe
of mankind from the captivity of the devil wherinto he fell thorough sin; and
of the union together of Gods Justice, and Peace, Mercy, and Truth.

For the 8. day, Meditate of the agreement of the holy Trinity touching the
salvation of mankind.

For the 9 day, meditate upon the amiable leave that our Savior Jesus Christ
took of his father in heaven, and of all the celestial court, and of the words
which his father used at his departure.

1. Saing, Go my son, go, and bring man hither to us that he may be
delivered from damnation everlasting.

2. Go My son in to al misery, Go out of al glory with out any manner of
consolation.

3. Go that thy pure humanity, be subject to thy divinity.

4. Go like a king to whom suddenly shall be done al princely honor.

5. Go my only child, that thy innocence may satisfy for the faults and
offenses of al men.

6. Go and remember al thy pains and torments to come, to the end they may be
the more greueous unto thee.

7. Go and I will break and cut the course of thy life in thy flourishing youth.

8. Go and I will give the sword in to thy enemies hands, with full power to
do to thee whatsoever they will.

6. Go and endure the most cruel death and look for no comfort at al of thy
father.

10 Go and accomplish entirely by works, whatsoever my holy Prophets have
spoken of thee before in words.

11. Go my well-beloved son, and make partakers both the good and the evil of
thine ignominius and shamful death, that by true repentance they may receive it.

12. Go and suffer, that thy death and passion may be so inestimable, for the
which no man can ever yield unto thee sufficient and condign thanks.

The eternal word of the father answered and said, I am ready and vvil be
obedient even unto the death.

The 1 day, Meditate how the blessed virgin Mary was conceived of Ioachim and
Anna, after their great contempt and despising in respect of their sterilitie.

The 1. day Meditate of the joyful nativity of our lady the sacred virgin
Mary* and of the great comfort and consolation her parents received.

The 12. day, Meditate of the Presentacion of our Lady in the Temple being but
three years of age, where she mounted alone the fiftene Steps or degrees
with out the help of any parson, and lived there until she was fourtene years
old.

The 13. day, Meditate how or Lady was espoused to Iosephe when she was fortene
years of age, and returned to Nazareth under the guard of holy Joseph.

The 14. day, Meditate of the Conception of Saint John Baptist, which was
showed to Zachary by the Angel Gabriel.

The 15. day, Meditate on the cries of the holy fathers in Limbo, for the
coming of our blessed Savior.

The. 16 day, Meditate how the Angel Gabriel received commandment from the
holy Trinity, to go to Nazareth, to the habitacion of this imaculate virgin,
and to deliuere unto her this great Embassage.

The. 17. day, Meditate of the great joy of the Angel Gabriel having taken the
form of a fair young man to show himself in the presence of our Lady.

The. 8. day Meditate and behold the manner of Salutation which the Angel used
to our blessed Lady, sainge Aue gratia plena, hail full of grace etc.

The. 19. day, Meditate how this pure and most chaste virgin was afraid at the
Aparition of the Angel: and of her prudent questions which she used, and how in
the end she humbly yealded her consent.

The. 20. day, Meditate on the sacred Co^ception of our Lady, by the means and
workinge of the holy Ghost.

The. 21. day, meditate upon the infinite bounty of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ God and man, how it pleased him to be lodged nine months in the womb
of the glorious virgin Mary, as in a most sacred Cabinet.

The. 22. day, Meditate on the wonderful joys, and spiritual sweetness which
our Lady felt during nine months wherein our Redeemer reposed in her virginal
womb.

The. 23. day, Meditate on the loving regard, and reverent respect the Angel
had of our Lady duringe the said space.

The. 24 day, Meditate how presently our Lady rose and went to the mountains
of Judea to visit Saint Elizabeth, and to serve her.

Passing by Trent you may visit the body of S. Simeon which is there entyre.

The 25. day, Meditate how joyful theie were at their meetinge, and of the
amiable Salutacions which passed between the mother of the king of glory, and
S. Elizabeth.

The 26. day. Meditate of the joys of S. John Baptist how he was purified and
sanctified, being yet enclosed in his mothers womb.

The. 27. day, Meditate how our Lady tarried three months in the house of
Zachary, and served Elizabeth not with standinge the son of Elizabeth was to
become Precursor, and servant to the Son of our Lady, yet did she serve her
with all humiliue.

The 28 day, Meditate of S. John Baptists Circumcision, and how Zachary
recovered his speech, which before he lost when the Angel declared unto him the
Conception of his Son.

The 29. day, Meditate how good Joseph perceauing our Lady to be with child,
would secretly have forsaken her.

The 30. day, Meditate of the return of our Lady to Nazareth, attendinge to
be there delivered of the Savior of the world.

The 31. day, Meditate how the Angel admonished good Joseph to take unto him
the virgin Mary, and how ever after he was a faithful keeper unto her, until
his death.

At Venice you may see the body of S. Marck, there is the gospel which he wrote
with his own hand.

The 32. day, Meditate how Joseph and our Lady departed from Nazareth to
Bethelem being three days Iorneye to be enrolled, and pay their tribute in
sign of their submission to the Emperor.

In Venice you may visit the body of S. Lucie.

The 33. day, Meditate how our Lady and Joseph not finding any Lodginge in all
the City of Bethelem, were forced to go forth of the gates, in great patience
retiering them selves in to an old stable, cold, and windy, foul and
unsavory, there to be delivered of the king of al kings, and Lord of al
glory.

In Venice you may also visit the body of S. Luke.

The ^4. day, Meditate of the sadness which good Joseph took in compassion of
the virgin Mary, to see her so euilly entreated.

In venice you may more visit S. Barbaraes body, and a bone of S. Christophers
at the crossed friars.

The. 35. day, Meditate of the most joyful Nativity of our lord and Savior
Jesus.

Thou may at Venice visit the body of Saint Roche.

The. 36. day, Meditate upon the humble and paineful lyenge of the tender
Infant Jesus, being naked, cryeng, and trembling with cold: beginning then to
confirm our peace between his father and us, and of the profound reverence and
perfect love our lady took upon her sweet babe, embracing, him and tenderly
kissing him:

Thou may at Venice visit the whole bodies of S. Zachary. S. christine. S.
Pancrace. S. Nerve. S. Gregory Nazeanzens head.

The. 37. day, Meditate of the Angels praising god, apearinge to the
Shepheardes, and singing,

Gloria in excelsis:

Thou may Visit S. Helen, body in a little I Will without venice* where one her
breast is a made of the w^od of our lords Cross. Also there is a finger of
Constantine her son, and a piece of Saint Mary Magdalens breast, and a
Sanctuary of Cypres fayerlie graven and painted. G^t here a Boatman to conduct
thee to these holy places, Saint Andrew, or some other according to thy
devotion:

The. ^8. day, Meditate how our Lady swadled her blessed Son, kissed him, and
laid him to her breast.

Thou may Visit at Mucano where the Glasses ar made, there are to be seen
many of the Infants body, which Herod commanded to be killed.

The. 39. day, Meditate how our Lady gave her infant to suck of her virginal
milk, with exceedinge joy and delight.

Thou ma^st at Padua (whilst thou attendest the master of the Gally) visit S.
Anthonies body in the church of the Francis ans.

The. 40. day, Meditate how our Blessed Lady laid down her sweet son in
the manger.

Now go to thy holy Angel, and desire him to h^lpe thee to a good and skilful
Pilote, to carry thee to the holy Land.

The lord of this Ship must be Saint Peter, to whom comende thy self.

Thou must agree to give the Patron of the Gally, fifty Ducats of gould for
thy passage, which are 50. paters, and 50 Aues. or some other.

The Governors of this ship, must be Saint Paul. Saint John the Evangelist:
S. Christopher, and Saint Nich^las, but the Protector must be S. Michael, honor
al these, and comende thy self unto them, Go with thy faithful friend thy
holy Angel and make thy exercise from henceforth, as thou have done in the
beginning.

The. 41 day, Meditate diligently of the burninge love and desire the little
child Jesus had to deliver mankind out of the misery and servitude wherein he
was detained.

The 42. day Meditate how the little sweet child Jesus, took great compassion
of our miseries, geuinge a pitiful Cry, and did shed tears a boundantly to
make our peace with his heavenly father, the which no man could do but him self

The 4. day, pray for a god wind and say, Veni createor spiritus etc. and
Meditate how the Angels appeared to the Shepherds.

The 44 day, Here strike Sail, and say the Salve Regina etc. and Meditate how
speedely the Shepherds went to Bethelem and adored the sweet little Babe.

The 45. day Meditate of the great Mirackles in Christ's Nativity: God is
joined with humanie nature his mother remains a virgin, and faith, and
humanie nature ar there accorded together.

The 46 day, Meditate of the Prophecy of the Twelve Sibilles.

1 Sibilla Persica* Behold the Beast of all the world ^hal be overthrown, and
the lord of all the world ^hal be borne, and the body of a virgin shall be
undefiled.

2. Sibilla Libica. The day shall come and the Lord shall give light, and govern
with mercy (the body of his mother shall be the weight and burden of every
one, that is shall be the ballaunce to weigh al our sins.

3 Sibilla Cumea, he shall mount and rise in the face of the virgin, and she
shall be worshipful, clean, and beautiful of face. etc she shall nourish the
Infant, and give him her own milk for meat.

4. Sibilla Eristria in Babylon from the highest top of heaven god has blessed
the humble of mind, and in the latter day a young Son shall be borne of an
Hebrewe virgin.

5. Sibilla Samea. behold there shall come a rich man, and shall be borne of a
poor woman, and the beasts of the earth shall worship him sainge praise him to
the highest top of heaven.

6 Sibilla Cumana: In the last time shall be sent from heaven a new line and
generation.

7. Sibilla Helespostina. Christ shall be borne of a most pure virgin.

8. Sibilla Frigia: The most highest shall come out of heaven. the council shall
be confirmed in heaven, and in the valley of the miserable shall be the virgin
saluted.

9. Sibilla Europa. He shall come that shall travail beyond the mountains and
little hills, and he shall reign in poverty, and he shall have domination in
tranquillity and modesty, and he shall come forth of a virginis womb.

10. Sibilla Tiburtina. Christ shall be borne in Bethelem, and how happy is the
mother that shall give him suck.

11. Sibilla Delptica. A Prophet shall be borne of a virgin without knowledge
and copulation of man.

12. Sibilla Agrippa: The invisible word shall be tasted and touched, and shall
dry like a leaf, and his beaw^ie shall seem nothing, the womb of a mother
shall compass him, and he shall be rejected of man, and he shall be borne of his
mother as God, and shall seem like a sinner.

The 47. day, Meditate of the great joy and humble service of Iosephe to his
spouse Mary, and to the blessed babe Jesus.

The 48. day, Meditate of the circumcision of our Lord, and the shedinge of his
blood as an earnest penny of his death and passion:

The. 49 day, Meditate of the imposition of the holy name of Jesus, in which
name whatsoever shall be asked of his father, shall be granted unto us.

The. 50 day. Meditate how the three kings came from far cu^tries in the space
of 15 days. to adore this infant as God and man, being guided by a Star
which apeered unto them.

The. 51 day, Meditate how the three kings found the little child, and offered
unto him Goulde, Mir^e, and francumcense, as to true god, and true man.

The. 52. day, Meditate how the three kings admonished by the Angel, returned
by an other way in to their contrie, and were two years in their Journey, and
lived and died most holily in the same.

The. 53. day, Meditate of the great grief and sorrow which approached the
meek heart of the sweet virgin, when she understood, what wait Herod laid to
kill her child Jesus.

The. 54. day, Meditate how this Blessed Lady presented her child in the
Temple, redeeminge him again with a couple of Turtles or Pigeons: and of
Simeon and Anna.

The 55. day, Meditate of the first dolor of our Lady by the words of Simeon
in the Temple, whereupon she shed tears.

The. 56. day, Meditate how the Angel warned Joseph to flee in to Egypt whereby
our Ladies sorrow was increased.

The 57. day, Meditate of the hasty flyeng of our Lady and her sweet child,
with all diligence, by night thorough the wilderness. for others being but or
days Journey, for them a months journey by reason they ofttimes erred. consider
with all the great periles of Thieves and murderers, their exceedinge wearines,
and poverty.

You may visit in Seuches, where Saint Heir ome in amount did his penance,
there is a Cloister of Saint Peter. desire Saint Peter thy Patron to set thee
on land to honor Sant Hierome, and 15. miles thence, is the town of Stridonia
where. Saint Hierome was borne.

The 58, day, Meditate of the humble and simple entry of our Lady with her
babe and Joseph into Egipte, at whose entrance all the Idolles fell down, and
how in Heleopolis with much ado they got a poor Cottage and dwelt therein
labouringe for their living. At Zaram in Dalmacia, the ancient Simeons body
lies, who made the Cantickle, Nune Dimittis.

The 59. day, Meditate how the virgin Marie with her Son remained in I
hebaida in the city of Heleopolis vij years, taking pains to earne their
bread, and of the injuries thy suffered of the strangers of that contrie.

The 60. day, Meditate how after seven years the Angel appeared to Joseph,
and willed him to return in to the land of Israel.

The 61. day, Meditate how Joseph rose and went to the land of Israel, with
great labor, difficulty, and poverty.

The 62. day, Meditate how Joseph feared when he heard that Archelaus reigned
in his fathers stead and being warned by an Angel, went to dwell in Nazareth,
the^e also labou^nige, and living in very simple and poor estate.

The 63 day Meditate how our Lady nourished her child Jesus and brought him up
with great care and love.

The 64 day, Meditate how Jesus according to his bigness, served his blessed
mother, and how he often wept unknowing to his mother, for the remembrance of
his passion.

You may visit in Ragusa the head of Saint Blase and her left arm. And the
Sheet with which old Simeon took our Lord in his arms. The left arm of
Saint John Baptist without the wrest. And the head of Simeon the Apostle.

The 65 day, Meditate how the child Jesus being but twelve years old, went to
Jerusalem to serve god, and tarried there three days among the docters, with
out the knowledge of his father and mother.

The 66. day, Meditate of the third dolor of our Lady having lost her son
about 4 days, and how she found him in the midest of the docters

The 67. day, Meditate how Jesus kept him self secreat and simple, without
shewinge any mirackle, until he was. 30. year old.

The 68. day, Meditate how Jesus opened and declared to his dear mother, the
Prophecies and secreats of the holy scripture.

The 69. day, Meditate how Jesus kept him self with his mother and Joseph
poorly and in secreat wise, and how they lived and did eat together, with
great sobriety, and geueinge thanks unto God.

The 70. day, Meditate of the amiaable and gracious face of our Savior Jesus,
of the most comely feature of his body, and of his holy conditions, and decent
demeanors.

The 7. day, Meditate how Jesus kept him self secreat until he was 30. years
of age, notwithstanding always he did wonderful things by reason of his
divinity, and obtained many things for us of his heavenly father thorough his
fervent prayer and devotion.

The 72. day, Meditate of the sorrow our Lady had when her spouse Joseph died,
and gave up his ghost in to her Sons hands, being but: 20. years old.

The. 73. day, Meditate how lovingly Jesus comforred his mother, when she often
wept for to consider the pains of his passion, and how he exhorted her meekely
to conform her will to the will of god.

The. 74. day, Meditate how the word of our lord was upon S. John Baptist,
preachinge penance, and remission of sins, and cryinge in the desert. Parate
viam Domini:

The. 75. day, Meditate of the leave our Lord Jesus took of his dolent mother,
to go to be baptized, and of the virgins tears at his departinge.

The. 76. day, Meditate how S. John Baptist saying Christ cominge toward him
said, Ecce Angnus dei. that is behold how like an innorent la^be he comes.

The. 77. day, Meditate how Jesus came to John to be baptized, and how first
John humbly refused to do it, but saying it was his holy will to have it so, he
baptized him.

The 78. day, Meditate how that after Jesus was baptized, he prayed, and the
heavens opened, and the holy Ghost came down in the likeness of a dove, and a
voice from heaven said. Hic est filius meus dilectus. This is my well beloved
Son hear ye him.

The. 76. day, Meditate how Jesus after his baptisinge, began to fight against
the Devil the enemy of mankind: and how he departed in to a wilderness betwixt
Jerusalem and Hierico, and did converse among the brute beasts, and lyenge
on the cold ground many nights.

The. 80. day, Meditate how Jesus overcame the temptation of the Devil, in
Gluttony, vainglory, and Covetousness, and how after, the Angels came and showed
their service unto him.

The 8^. day, Meditate how the next day S. John Baptist saw Christ come
toward Iordane, and how he showed with his finger saying again Ecce Agnus
dei, and how two of John's disciples hearing those words, followed our Lord.

The 8^. day, meditate how S. Andrew led Peter to Christ, and how Christ
entertained S. Peter, and the next day Christ caled Phillip to follow him.

The 8^. day, Meditate how Christ went to a mariadge in Cana of Galile, and how
he turned water in to wine a^ his mothers request

The 84. day, Meditate how poorly nakedly and imply Christ as apareled, and
how soberly he fed with his dis^^ple, and ^ooke the worste to him self,
suffringe cold, heat, rain, thrist. etc.

The 85. day, Meditate how Jesus, with his disciples being ignorant persons,
went to Jerusalem at Easter, and with a whippe drove out the buyers and
sellers, and chaungers, and ouerthrewe their Tables, saying make not the house
of my father a house of Merchandise. Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur. My
house shall be caled the house of Prayer.

The 86. day, Meditate how Jesus baptized his Apostles in Iordane, and S John
in Elim, whereat John's Disciples were scandalized, but John witnessed unto them,
not of him self, but of Jesus.

The 87 day, Meditate with what fervor and charity, our Savior preach^d unto
the people, and healed the diseased, and conuersed with them meekely.

The 88. day, Meditate how humbly Christ compained with his Apostles and
answered their rude questions sweetly, and with what boldness they walked close
by him.

You may visit the Churches in Candia, and in the Graye Friars, is a piece of
the holy Cross: one of the arms of Saint Simeon the Apostle: and a piece of
Saint Lawrence head: a piece of the goulden Gate. and the miter of Alexandre
the Third and ^n Image of Saint Lukes Paintinge: and a piece of the Pillar, at
the which our Lord av as vvhiped.

The 89. day, Meditate how much wrong, and injurious words our Lord had of
the Jews, for that the poor and simple people followed him.

The 60 day, Meditate how Jesus with his disciples went up in to a mountain to
watch and pray, to pacify his heavenly father who was angry with mankind.
and how in the morhinge he chose his twelve Apostles.

The. 91. day, Meditate how Jesus sittinge in the morninge taught his disciples
the viij. Beatitudes.

The. 92. day, meditate on the sweet admonition of our Lord, confirming his
diciples against tribulations, and adversities, comparinge them to Salt, and
Light.

The. 9^. day, Meditate how Christ admonished his disciples to Patience, in
turninge the left Cheek to him who has stricken thee on the right.

You may visit in Rhodes in the chief church, where the right hand of S. John
Baprist with the fingers with which he baptized Christ. Also a piece of the
Cross of Christ: and one of the Thorns of his Crown, which bear^h every good
friday tea^es, and flowers, also one of the silver pieces Christ was sold for.
Also an Arm of S ^loy, an Arm of S. George S. Blases Ancklebone. S. Barbaras
Soul: and a piece of S Clare.

The. 94. day, Meditate how our Lord taught his disciples the Pater noster.

You may visit at Rhodes in the Chapel of the great master, the Arm of S.
Anne. and a piece of S. Steven

The. 95. day, Meditate how queitly Christ did bear in his heart, al his
torments to come, not declaringe them to any of his friends.

You may visit in Rhodes at S. Catharins Chapel, there is the Ringe and
finger of her, the which Christ espoused her withal.

The. 96. day, Meditate how Jesus beheld Mary Magdalen with his merciful eyes,
and drew her to repentance. and now she entered the house after him, and washed
his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hears of her head.

You may visit in Rhodes in the Hospital of the knights of the Rhodes, with
was taken anno ^^22. by the Turks.

The 97. day, Meditate how S John Baptist was imprisoned and how he sent to
Christ, saying. Tu es qui venturus es an alium expectamus? art thou he which
art to come, or do we look for any other?

Vsite at Rhodes where the three holy kings have often been.

The 98. day, Meditate on the praise and reward which Christ gave unto S. John
Baptist.

Visit without Rhodes where S John's Head was found there is a pleasante
fountain.

The 99 day, Meditate of the glorious death of S. John Baptist and how the
daunsinge damosel, gave his head to her Aduoutrousse mother.

You may visit in Rhodes a wood where S william made his Penance.

The 100. day, Meditate how Christ taught his disciples not to lay up their
treasure in the earth, but in heaven, and so to embrace voluntary poverty.

The 112 day, Meditate how Jesus taught his disciples not to be careful what o
eat, or what to wear, but to seek first the kingdom of heaven.

The 102. day, Meditate how Jesus fed his disciples with his sweet words,
when they could get no meat.

The 103. day, Meditate how midely Jesus showed him self toward Judas whom he
made his Steward and knowinge he should betraye him, he much lamented him as
often as he saw him.

The 104 day, Meditate how Jesus gave power to his disciples to work
mirackles, and sent them to preach two and two, as Lambs among woules,
exhortinge them to patience.

The 105. day, Meditate how Jesus went him self by Sea and by Land to preach
and after cured their diseases. and conuersinge rather with the poor then with
the rich, for which the Scribes and Pharisees maliciously hated him.

The 106. day, Meditate how our Sa: willingly suffered with patience, of the
magistrates, and ministers of the Temple, their mockes, disdainful looks, and
preuie conspiracies against him, condemninge him for a soole, and an evil man.

The 107. day, Meditate how meekely our Savior suffered the docters of the
Temple, who would have put him to death but for fear of the people, and how
our Lord then shuned the same for that his time was not yet come.

The. 108. day, Meditatete how Jesus was received in to the house of Martha and
Mary with his disciples: and how Mary did narrowly observe his behavior, his
abstinence, his sobriety in eatinge, his prudent and ghostly talk, and his
divine words.

You may visit S. Helens goulfe where she threw one of the nails Christ was
crucified with all, and ever since that Sea has been more calm.

You may visit Baffa where the. 7. sleepert rest.

The. 109 day, Meditate how the blessed Mary Magdalen followed our Lord every
where, and provided for him, and for his Disciples.

The. 110. day, Meditate of our Lords wearines, and sitinge at the Well, and
how he asked water of the woman of Samaria, and how his disciples marueiled.

The. 111 day, Meditate this day, of the painful journey and travail of our
Savior passinge through the contries to preach the Gospel, and cure their
diseases, sustaininge in the mean time many wants, as if he had not been the
only Son of God.

Visit in that part where S. Catharin was brought up.

The. 112. day, Meditate how meek and gentle our Lord was when any did
dishonor him, speakinge against his doctrine and saing his works were done by
the power of the Devil

The. 11^. day, Meditate of the great meekenes, and clemency of our Savior
toward the Jews, notwithstanding he knew the great malice and envy they
bare toward him.

The 114. day, Meditate of the sweet countenance and louinge tears our
Savior often shed in the Temple before the Altar, for the finnes of the
people.

The 115. day, Meditate how the most mighty king of glory, the heavenly
father (who could have destroyed al people in the world in amoment, and made
others in their places) most ^beningly, and m^rcifully, with great patience
and long sufferinge chose rather for to see his only begotten Son our
Savior Jesus to be Incarnate, and to show us exsample of life by his own
steps, and precepts, where by we might please god.

The 116 day, Meditate how Christ answered the Jews when they brought to him
in the Temple the woman taken in Aduoultrie, and how mercifully he delivered her

At Famagusts, of old Fama Costi, of S. Katharins father king of Cipres:
where in a Chapel is one of the Hidries in the which Christ turned water in to
wine. vi. mile from thence is the ancient Fagus, where S. Katharim was borne.

The 117. day, to Tire goinge toward S. Catharins body. Meditate how as our
Lord was preachinge a woman cried out sainge, happy is the womb that bare
thee, and the papes that gave thee suck. and of Christ's answer. yea hapie ar
they that hear the word of god and keep it.

In this contrie is sons hortorum, and puten^^ aquarum viuentium. In Tire the
woman of Cananie was healed.

The 118. day, Meditate how Jesus proved the faith of the woman of Cananie,
making intercession for the health of her posessed daughter, which she
obtained, and was also highly commended for her faith.

Goinge to Acon, and thence to mount Carmolus, where Elias the Prophet was. in
thy place the friars Carmalites began, and al (especially that wear a
Religions Cloacke) ought to give themselves to great devotion.

The 119. day, Meditate how our Lord did teach Nichodemus (who came to him by
night) and said to our Savior, Lord and master, we know thou come from god,
for no man can do these signs thou do, except he be of god. how Christ
taught him the entrance to heaven, to be by Baptism. and that as the Serpent
was lifted up in Moises time, so shall the Son of man be exalted, that
whosoever shall believe in him shall not perish but have life everlasting.

The. 120. day, meditate of our Lords instructions to his disciples, not to
fear them who could kill the body only, but to have fear of offendinge him,
who could cast both body, and soul, in to everlasting fire, and that who so
shall confess me before men, I shall confess him before my father which is in
heaven.

The 121. day. Meditate how our Redeemer told his Disciples for what cause he
came in to this vale of misery, and to what intent he did choose them unto him,
sainge, I am come to put fire in the earth, that is the fire of the holy Ghost,
to inflame the hearts of men, and to make t^e^ burn in divine love. An so I am
come to be baptized with a certain baptism, and how much I am troubled until
it be perfected in me understanding by this his holy passion, the which he so
greatly thirsted.

The 122. day, Meditate how Jesus said to his Disciples, I am not come to
bring peace (meaning temporal) in the world, but war. and who so loves his
father or his mother more the^ me, is not worthy of me, and who so embraces
not his Cross with patience, and carries it after me, he is not worthy of me,
that is of my grace and everlasting glory and he that loves his life in this
world, shall l^ose it, and he that shall forsake this present life for the love
of me, in despisinge of these ^orldly preasures, he shall keep it, and find it
in the life everlasting.

The 124 day Meditate of the great love and reverence Christ had to his
Apostles, saing unto the^, he that hears you, hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me also. and he that receaueth you, receaueth me, and
he that gives you but a cup of cold water shall not loose his reward. for I
will say at the day of Judgment, I was a stranger and Pilgrim, and you
received me, I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink. etc.

At Gaza Samoson took the gates of the city, and carried them to the top of
the mountain, and after having his eyes put out and his heare^h ^uen in which
consisted his force, he prayed to god, and his strenght retorninge to him a
^^ne, he pulled a way two of the pillars which sustained the house, and the
whole house fallinge, he slew a great number of his enemies.

The 124. day, Meditate how Jesus entringe into the desert, taught his
disciples, not far from Tiberias, when he heard that Herod had put John Baptist
to death. not that he feared death, for that his time was not yet come, but to
show his elect an exsample, that it will be best sometimes, to give place, and
avoid from the wicked.

The 125. day, Meditate with what great fervor, deuotione, and zeal, the
humble people followed our Lord Jesus in the deserts to hear the word of god,
and how Jesus came down from the mountain, and sweetly received them, and
also healed their infirmities, both in body, and soul.

The 126. day, Meditate how our Lord Jesus having compassion of the multitude
of people, willed his Disciples for to prepare them meat, namly speakinge unto
Phillip, who answered that two hundred peniworth of bread would not be
sufficient that every one might have a little; S. Andrewe told him of a boy,
who had five barley loaves and two fishes. whereupon willinge them to sit down
he fed therewith, five thousand men besides the women, and little children, and
they carried away twelve baskets full of that which was left of this banquer by
reason whereof the people glorified god, and confessed that Jesus was the great
Prophet that should come to save the world.

The 127. day, Meditate how Jesus fled, and humbly retiered him from the people
when he knew they wuold come and make him king, as he who refused wordly
honor. but coming to apprehende him to have him crucified, he then most
willingly offered him self unto them.

The 128. day, meditate how Jesus went up alone upon the high mountain of
contemplation (contemning all the honors of the world) for to pray, and to
render thanks to his heavenly father for all his benefits.

The 129. day, Meditate of the said refection of five loaves, and of Christ's
blessinge of them, by the means whereof until this present hour, al spiritual
hearts, are greatly refreshed, and made strong, and how it is he who
nourishes al creatures.

The 130. day, Meditate how our Sauiour-said, I am the true bread which came
down from heaven, and am sent in to the world to gene everlasting life, he
that cateth me shall not hunger everlastingly.

The 131. day, Meditate how Jesus said unto the Jews. The bread which I will
give is my fleash for the life of the world, by the which al holy souls shall
be enriched, with all graces and heavenly virtues.

The 132. day Meditate of the words of Jesus, he that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dweleth in me, and I in him, not as your fathers have eaten
manna in the desert and. are dead, but he that eateh-this bread shall live for
ever.

Al Heliopolis our Lady with Jesus remained, when he did fly with him in to
Egypt.

The 133. day, Meditate of the departin^^e of the gros headed people, and
Disciples, and how mildely he speak unto his Apostles sainge, and will ye go
and leave me also? To whom Peter answered Lord to whom shall we go, seeing thou
have the words of eternal life? we believe that thou art Christ the Son of
the huinge god, and Jesus said again, I have chosen you twelve and yet one of
you is a devil but fear you not, a bide in your faith, and I will abide in you,
and fortify you, and nourishe you in all virtue

At Cayrus, or Babylon where the Sow^den is of whom the use is to obtain a
pasport and license to visit the holy places: comende thy self and thy cause to
the Patriarche Joseph, who was Lord of Egypt.

The 134. day, Meditate how Jesus said If the the grain of corn fall not one
the ground, and die not, it remains alone; but if it die, it brings forth
much fruit. meaning thereby the increase of the gospel, after his passion.
You may visit a Garden in Cayrus of the Souldaine where balm grows, and
where are 7. fountains vvher with the Garden is watered.

The 135. day, Meditate how Jesus went twice with his Disciples to pray, and
repose him self. and how the people followed him, and brought to him many sick,
and posessed of devils, and he healed them al, and how they praised him, and
gave thanks unto God.

The 136. day, Meditate how Jesus fe. 4000. men, with 7. loaves, and a few
little fi^hes, and of the 7. baskets of fragments which did remain. Also how
the people did love him and would have tarried still with him if he had not
commanded them away.

You may pass toward the red Sea where kirge I harao was drowned and so
to mount Sinai where. S. Katharins body lies.

The 137 day, Meditate how Jesus was tempted of the Pharisees who required a
sign of him from heaven, to whom our Lord made this answer, you know and can
judge the times without signs from heaven, but the tokens of my coming
fortolde by the Prophets you cannot know, by reason of your unbelief and
malice.

You may Take Ship to pass the red Sea where if you find none ready, pray to
Moses, that with his Rod he vvil open the way to you, or to the holy
Prophet Helias that with his Cloak denidinge the waters, he vvil make
passage for you.

The 138. day, Meditate how Jesus asked his disciples whom do men say that I
am, and they answered some say thou art John Baptist some one of the Prophets.
but Peter laid, thou ar^ Christ the son of the living god.

The 139. Meditate upon the sweet comfortable words which our Savior gave to
S. Peter saing, blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for that fleash and
blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven.

The 140. day, Meditate how Jesus caled al his Apostles by name, and how he
gave specially preuiledge to S. Peter, and to them, saing whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall bind ^n
earth, shall be bound in heaven.

The 141. day, Meditate of the heavy newees which our Lord Jesus foretoulde
unto his Apostles ascendinge to Jerusalem, how that he was to be betrayed;
mocked; whipped; and crucified from which when S. Peter dissuaded him he said,
go b^hinde me Satan, for thou understand not the things which are of god,
but of men.

The 142. day, Meditate how Jesus commanded his Apostles to imprint these
words firmly in their hearts, that the Son of man should be betrayed in to
the hands of sinners, and how they should kisle him. and that he would rise
again the third day, and of the sorrow his Disciples had, to hear tell of his
death and departure.

The 143. day, Meditate how Jesus went toward the mount of Thabor, and how he
took with him Peter, James, and John, and ascended with them to pray, and how
whilst he prayed, he sequestered him self from al earthly cogitations.

You may Visit the Cloistre of Saint Ka^harin at the foot of the mount Sinai
where in the Church nighe the high Altar, is a Tobe of white marble with
(...) steps to ascend it, where in the bones of S. Katharin virgin and Martyr
lies. there is the sheet (al bloody) where in the Angels lapped, and carried
the body of this blessed Martyr. there is also the wedhir holy head to the
Pilgrims. now is it necessary that our pilgrim stir up his denotion, and
with al instamed affection, invoke the asistance of this blessed virgin and
martyr.

The 144 day, Meditate how our Lord whilst he prayed, was transfigured before
his three Disciples, and of the brightness of his face which shined like the
son, and the whitenes of his garments as the snow.

The 145. day, Meditate how Moises and Helias appeared gloriously with Jesus
upon the mount Thabor, and ^ould al his passion which he should suffer in
Jerusalem.

The 149. day, Meditate how Moises coming from Limbo from the holy fathers,
and Helias from Paradise terrestre, rejoiced to see the Savior of the world
our Lord Jesus Christ to be come* and of the great compassion they had to see
that glorious face, how it should be defiled and spitte on, buffeted and mocked.

You may pass from the church of S. Katharin ^^to the mountain of Moises: at
the Iron gate as you go out S. Kath. church, is the fountain of water,
which issued forth of the Rock, when Moises with his Rod struck the stone.

The 147. day, Meditate how Jesus on Mount Thabor showed his divinity to his
Disciples, and how by divine illumination they knew Moises and Helias, whom
they never saw.

You may visit goinge up the hill of Moises, the Cloistre where our lord
appeared to the Monks, when they fled from their Cloistres for fear of the
savage beasts.

The 148. day, Meditate of the vehemency of S. Peter's words, Lord, said he,
it is good for us to dwell here, if it please thee let us make three
Tabernacles* desierous* that his master might continue still in such glory.

The 149. day, Meditate how Moises and Helias departed away from* Jesus, and
of the bright cloud that came and covered them, and of the voice forth of the
cloud, sainge, this is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased hear ye
him.

You may visit descend^ng the mountain, the church of forty martires, in the
valley where the children of Israel daunsed about the goulden calfe, and
Moises brake the Table of stone.

The 150. day, Meditate how the Disciples hearing that diuin^ vo^ce from
heaven, fell down to the ground for fear.

The. 151. day, Meditate how Jesus came to his Disciples and sweetly saluted
them, and touched them, saing, arise and be not afraid. and liftinge up their
eyes, they saw none but Jesus alone; and as he went down from the mountain,
he charged them to tell this vision to no man until he were risen up from death.

If you pass from the Monks of S Katherin^, to the desert, (...) days
Journey long, provide for store of victual.

The 152. day, Meditate how Jesus descending the mountain, his Disciples asked
him, how is it that the Scribes say, that the Helias must come before the
Savior of the world? and Jesus answered Helias is come (meaning S. John
Baptist) but they believed him not, but did unto him whatsoever they would, and
so shall the son of man also be crucified.

The ^53. day, Meditate how Jesus delivered many possesed with devils, and
restored them whole to their fre^des and parents.

The 154. day, Meditate how the disciples demanded of Jesus, why the devils
went out so hardly and would not obey them sometimes. and how Jesus answered,
if ye had as much faith as a grain of mustard seed, you should command this
mountain to remove, and it should obey you and if you believe, noth^ng^ shall
be impossible unto you.

The 155. day, Meditate how Jesus is come in to this world for the love of
thee, the hundred sheep which was lost, and straied away, forsakinge the.99.
which at the Angels in heaven, he is come to seek sinners, and to call them to
repentance, and gladly to carry them on his proper showlders, by mercy and
grace, in to the kingdom of heaven. and that there is greater joy in heaven
upon one repentant sinner, then of.99. just.

The 156 d^y, Meditate of the parable of the prodigal son, of his conversion
returninge to his father, and his receauinge in to favor again.

The 157. day, Meditate how Jesus taught his disciples to forgive their enemies
and S Peter demandinge how often, Christ said, I say not.7. times, but.70.
times.7. times.

The 158. day, Meditate how the young man asked our Savior what he ought for
to do, to obtain the kingdom of heaven. and Jesus answered, keep the
comandements. The young man replied that he had kept them al from his youth,
demanding what more ought to be done: and Jesus answered if thou will be
perfect, go and sell al thou haste and give it to the poor, and come and
follow me.

The 159. day, Meditate devoutly of the three counsels of the holy ghost 1.
voluntary poverty 2. perfect obedience 3. chastity and perpetual continency.

The. 160. day, Meditate of volu^tarie poverty how S. Peter said, for him self
and his brethren, Lord we have forsaken al, what re-ward shall we have* Jesus
answered verily ye that have forsaken al, and followed me, ye shall sit on xij
seats, and judge the xij tribes of Israel, and shall receive a hundred foulde
in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting.

The 161. day, Meditate now Christ compared the kingdom of heaven like to a
good husba^dman, ^ho hiereth workmen into his vineard for apenny a day to
labor until the sittinge of the son. which shows this life is to be led in
Penance of us until our death.

The 162. day, Meditate how Jesus councelled al men to make them friends of
their Mam^on of iniquity, that when they are gone hence, they may receive him
in to everlasting Tabernackles.

The 163. day, Meditate how spiritual and devout persons, may do their Alms,
by preachinge, teachinge, and prayinge for others, who are in adversity or in
Purgatory.

The 164 day, Meditate how ten lep^rs came unto our Lord Jesus, and liftinge up
their voice said, Jesus Master have mercy on us, and Jesus answered them, go,
show your selves to the Preistes. and how one being a Samaritane, and
perceauing that in the way he was made whole, he returned and gave thanks to
god. Whom Jesus recommended.

The 165. day, Meditate how Jesus said, many are called, but few are chosen:
Seneca says no man comes to death more gladly, then he who prepares him
self for death.

The 166. day, Meditate how the A^nte of Jesus, the mother of the two sons of
Z^bedee, asked of Jesus that one of her sons might sit on his right hand,
and the other one his left hand when h^ came in his kingdom, and of the
answer our Lord gave unto her.

At Hebron which stands in the valley of Mambre there you may see Abraham's
house, where sittinge under the Oak, he saw three parsons cominge to warde^
him. Tres vidit, and vn^^ ad^rauit he savv h^er, and vvorsh^ped one, and h^w he
received the Angels into his house Joshua first came to Hebron when he went to
be we the land of promise, before that the children of Israel entered. king
David also did reignein Hebron vij year, and a half. In Hebron are the
sepulchers of Abraham, Isaac. and Jacob, and of their vviues Lot also is buried
there.

The 167. day, Meditate how Jesus taught his Disciples to fly from al pride,
sainge, the kings and Princes of the world bear rule over them, and they are
caled Benefici, but among you it shall be otherwise, and he that will be
greatest shall be servant to the others, like as the son of man is not come,
to be served, but to serve al.

You may visit Hiericho which was a strong City, and was miraculously
taken by Procession. where Rahab and her family was saved.

The 168. day, Meditate of the vocation of good Zacheus, and of the words which
he had with our lord, and our lord with him. That the son of man is come to
save that which is lost.

In Hiericho You may see the house of this Zacheus, who went up into a vvilde
ffiggetree to see jesus, into whose house our lord went. bear Pilgrims
were wont to rest.

The 169. day, Meditate how upon the mountain by Hiericho Christ healed the
blind man who sat begginge by the way, and cried, Jesus son of David have
mercy one me.

The. 170. day, Meditate how God the father declared, that in Jesus his Son
was his delighte, and the fulness of al grace, which we ought to ask, and to
remember our promise in Baptism, and that Christ baptiseth with the holy
ghost. Hic est filius meus dilectus ipsum audite. this is my well-beloved Son
hear ye him.

You may visit the River of Iordana which deuideth Galilee, from Idumea, and
Basan, and faleth under the ground and rises in Eueldame where is the
sepulcher of Job, and thence is the end of it into the dead Sea, which is the
place where the five cities, Sodom, Comorah. etc stood which were burned
with fire and brimstone from heaven On the right side of the river ^oth wife
was turned into a Pillar of Salt. thereby is the Church of Saint John Baptist.
and there by Jesus was baptized in Iordane where the Pilgrims commonly do
wash them selves. There god was heard speak from heaven, and the holy
Gh^ste was seen come down in the likeness of a Dove, and all the holy Trinity
was present in that place. The children of Israel passed dry foot through
the bottom of the water. Helt also did strike the water with his Clo^k and
rassed thorough the bottom d^footed, and Helizeus also. and Naaman the Sirian
was he I him seaue^ times in the river, and was healed of h^s Leprosy.

The. 171. day, Meditate of our Saviors fasting, prayers, tears, watching,
and lyenge on the ground many nights, solitary, without consolation or
comfort of any man, among the wild beasts, for thy love and iustruction;
have compassion of him* therefore, join thy heart to his, and follow his
steps by austeritie of life.

In this desert where our lord fasted.40. Days, and 40. nigh^es, caled the
mountain of Quarantine, where the Devil tempted him, there was an
Heremitage. and there is the water which was made sweet by the prayer of
Elizeus.

The 172 day, Meditate how the Angel saluted the glorious virgin Mary of her
Conception: and how after she nourished our Lord in Narazeth. of his humble
conversation with all men and how being king of heaven he vouchsafed to be
caled Jesus of Nazareth, and being the Son of god, was named the Son of a
Carpenter.

At the mountain where the devil carried our lord, h^ winge him all the
kingedomes of the world, and sainge he would give them al to him if he would
fall down and worship him Th^ee thorough the coutries, until ye come to Silo
where god appeared first to Samuel in Heli his days, and so to Suhar, by
which is the fountain of Samaria: one of Hieroboams goulden Calves, were
erected thereby at Bethel. In this City of Suhar, Dina the daughter of Jacob
was rauish^d, by occasion where of, Jacobs sons s^^we all the inhabitants of
Sichem The mountain of Garizen isthereby, where the Samaritanes were wont
to pray. On Garizon Abraham offered his son Isaac to god. In the plain is
the Cesterne, in to which Joseph was th^owen before his brethren soulde him.
And thence is the way to Samaria which was the seat of the king of the ten
Tribes of Israel, and is now caled ^^baste. Saint John Baptiste was buried
^here but he was beheaded at Macherouda. Julian the Apostata caused his body
to be burnt, and his ashes to be hurled in to the river of Iordane, but the
finger vvher with he pointed, sainge behold the lamb of god, remains yet
entire. Saint ^ecla carried his finger beyond the Alps. The Emperor caused
the head to be taken from ^ebaste, where it was inclossed in a wal and found
al bloody vvrapped in a ^^^ete, and carried, to Saint Sil^^sters church in Rome,
the hinder part of the head, with the nether law and Chinne, and some of
his ashes, and the dishe in which his head was carried. Thence by diverse to
^^^es of Galilee, until you come to Nazareth where the Angel saluted our
blessed Lady.

The 17^. day Meditate how our lord Jesus called his Disciples, and on the sea
of Gallie taught them. preached to the people, and caused Peter to walk on the
water.

At the montaine of T^abor there is a place caled the school of god, where
Christ taught his Disciples. There Christ was transfigured before his
Disciples. At the foot of Thabor Melchisidec king of Salem (which is
Jerusalem) met Abraham when he had overcome the 5. kings, and delinered his
brother Lot, from captivity. One mile farther is the mount Hermon; on which
vva^ situate the city of ^^im where Jesus raised the widows son as he
was carried to be buried vij miles from Nazareth is the place where Lamech
who was blind, slew Caine, who had killed his brother Abel. Thence ye go
^uer the sea of Tibe^^as; in to the land of the Gerazins. upon the se^ of
Galilee, Jesus walked on ar^foote.

The. 174 day, Meditate how Jesus healed the poor man which had been* sick.8.
years, biddinge him to take up his couche and wal^e and of the murmoringe of
she Pharisees because he took up his bed on the Saboth day. and how Jesus
findinge the man in the Temple, said unto him. Go and, sin no more, least any
worse happen unto thee.

At Tiberias is the Table upon the which our lord and Savior did eat with his
Disciples at Ema^s and not far of, is the place where our Lord fed v^ thousand
men, with v. loaves and (...) fish. besides there is Sephorin, where S. Anne
our Lad^es mother was buried: and beneath that is the house of the Centurion.
in returninge you come to Cesaria Phillip, whence king David had many goodly
Ce^ars toward the buildinge of the Temple in H^erusalem. The land of Promise
is in enght, from Dan to Bersabe, that is north and South 29. miles of
Combardie and from Hierich^, to lapha 90. miles.

The 175. da^, Meditate ho^ our Lord in the Temple of Jerusalem restored to
sight the man who was borne blind, with anointinge his eyes with spittel and
dust, bidinge his go wash in Silo. and of the great murmoringe and detraction
of the Jews.

At lapha the haven town where you lad. 117. iorneye, caled of lapha the
son of Noe, and the aun^ients city in the world. it is caled lopp^ in the
Ackes, Peter saw the sheet with al kind of beasts let down from heaven:
and raised Tabitha from death there say Tedeum, and Salve Regina for
thanksg^ueinge to our lord vvh^ h^th sofely conduct^d thee thi^ long journey
here as lapha thou must send to them ster of the Gality, to send to the lord of
the cuntrie for thy safe conduct to pass to Jerusalem, who is wont to come
with ag^eat company well appointed, and bring^^h with him the reverend Garden
of the ffriers of Sion, and one, or two of his brethren, who instruct the
brethren bovv they must use them selves in visitinge the holy places. first he
asks of they have license of the Popes holiness to visit the holy sepulcher*
for it is excomunication to do it without his leave: but if by chance any
become without it, the Garden may absolve him, and license him also. first he
vvarnet h^that they do no-reuerence the one to the other, least thereby the
Turks do know their estate. 2. That vvhea they g^e to visit the holy
places, they go. 5. or. 6. together for fear of the infidelles. And that they
neither go nor ride over the Seapulchers of the Infid^lles. If they be injured
in those places by the Mahumetanes, or runnegate Christians they must not
reu^nge it but suffer al for Christ's sake, who suffered much mo^e in that
place for us. That every one purge his conscience, and give himself to devotion
This done they go to the lord of Hie^usalem, who takes al their names, and
sirnam's. The spiritual P^lgri^e must call to mind his baptism and profession,
and to renew his promise in Baptism, and from hene forth to purge his
conscience, withful purpose of amendment, and to take patiently. al detraction,
and adversity. Their nam^s being registered, they are put into sellers by the
sea sidevntil horses, Asses, Mules, and Camels be provided for them to ride on.

The. 176. day, Meditate how out lord raised sazarus from death being. 4.
Days dead, when Jesus cried Lazarus come forth.

At Rama where is a church of our Lady* and an Hospital for Pilgrims founded
by ^hillip Duke of Burgundy.

The. 177. day, Meditate how the Jews sat in council oftentimes how they
might put Jesus to death, such was their hatred and malice. And how Judas came
to them and sold his master for. 30. pence.

At lidda or. Dispolis, where Saint Peter healed Eneas of a palsy. There
Saint George suffered his martyrdom.

The. 178. day, Meditate how Christ sent two of his Disciples from Bethpage to
Jerusalem to feten the Ass and her fool: how he did ride upon the silly
beast: and how he was received of the people singinge Hosanna filio David, how
behouldinge the City, he wept upon it, foreseeinge the miseries which should
fall on it for killinge of him.

To the Castle of Emaus a mile from Jerusalem, where Christ did eat after
his resurrection.

The. 179. day, Meditate how Jesus from Palm Sunday, to the wensday folowinge,
was daily in the Temple, preachinge to the people, where the Scribes and
Pharisees had laid diverse to wacth and repehend him, and his doctrine, and they
forbad that any one should give him bread or drink, in such sort that every
night he was enforced to go to Be haine to take his food, where he remained
al wensday at the request of his mother.

At mount S^lo (whereby was the city of Gabaon) on th^s mount the Ark of god was buried. There on this mountain you may see Jerusalem.

The 180. day, Meditate how Jesus took his leave of his doleful mother at
Bethaine, upon Maundie Thursday in the morninge, to go to Jerusalem. And how
our Lady requested. 4. things ^1. if it were possible that he might not
suffer. 2. that she might suffer for him. 3: that she might die before him. 4.
that he might die a mild kind of death. and how he passed a long by mount
Caluarie. and how he sent two of his Disciples before him, to prepare his
Passover, geueing them this token to follow a man carienge a pot of water in
which house they prepared the Pasche.

From Silo you shall come to Jerusalem, and before you enter the city, the
names of the Pilgrims ar registered again, where remember again vvhe thy
name was first given thee, and what promise thou made in Baptism.

The* 81. day meditate how many sad and sorrowful steps, Jesus took thorough
the streets of Jerusalem, etc how his color changed passing thorough the
streets, whilst he went there meditatinge of his bitter passion and torments,
and how his most precious blood should be trodden under their vile feet.

To the city of Jerusalem, and first to the holy Tempie of the holy
Sepulcher: before the Temple is a fair square place, in which is a fair square
stone, having many crosses graven there on: in this place our lord fell with
his heaui^ Cross on his showlders: here the Pilgrims creepe^ devoutly and
kiss this stone from thence they go to the church door to the holy Cross,
the Sepulch^r, and the place where our Lady did sit houldinge her son in her
arms being taken from the Cross. In comninge forth of the Temple. is showed
the place, where our lord Jesus did appear in the day of his resurrection to
the. Mary's, three Thence as you go to Saint Ieames his church (where he^^
was be headed) is the place where our Lady dweled and deed. There is a fair
great stone in that place, from whence our Lady was carried being dead, to
the valley of Iosaphathy the Apostles. Thence you go to Sion to the Hospital
of the Rhodes, and think that the graye friars that lead thee, are Saint
Francis, Saint Bonauenture, Saint Anthony of Padua, Saint Barnard etc. whom
thou must salute with some de^out prayers, Nere that is the place, where S.
John (the well-beloved Discipleand Evangelist.) celebrated Mass before our
Blessed Lady.

The* 18^, day, meditate of the wonderful humility and benignity of out Lord
Jesus, on Maundy thursday at night, peparing him self to be offered, the true
Paschal lamb, for the sins of all the world: and to eat the Passover with
his Disciples and Judas, who now had sold him for money to the Jews.

Goinge from the Hospital of Sion, you are to go to the Cloister barefoote,
and barehead saing the psalm. Fu^da me^tum eius in mo^^^bus Sion. with a
collect, that our lord will asiste thy prayers in that place and going up 7.
steps ye enter the Cloister of sion, where is a Table set with bread and
wine, for those to take thereof who vvil: then the Eriars singe the high
Mass, which ended they go to ward the holy Cross.

The. 183. day, Meditate how humbly our Savior prepared him self to wash his
Apostles feet first he did of his garment, and gyrded him self with a Towel,
kneeled and washed every one of their feet, even the feet of Judas with the
sweat of his brows, and tears of his eyes, shewinge us a special exsample of
brotherly love and humility.

You may visit the place where the Paschal lamb was eaten: returninge to the
church quior, on the right hand is the place where Christ vvashed the feet
of his Disciples.

The. 184. day, Meditate how Jesus after the washinge of his Apostles feet
sat down, and drank to them al, in token of his love. and how he gave his
most precious body and blood to his Apostles to eat and drink, in the
remembrance of his painful death and passion, and to Judas also, whom in
secreat he warned of his sin and treason, in token that there is nothing
hidden or unknown to him. And of S. John restinge on his breast to who^ by a
secreat toke^ of a morsel dipped and given to Judas, he opened who it was that
should betray him. and how after the receauinge of the morsel the devil entered
into Judas and imediataly goinge out, he joined him self with the enemies of
Christ, and prepared armoure and weapons to take our innocent Savior. And how
Jesus told Saint Peter that he should deny him of the sermon Christ made to
his Apostles, full of love. how he rose, said grace, and prayed for his
D^sciples and folowers, And how our Savior went again from that house
acompained with his Apostles, teaching them, until he eame to the mount of
Oliuet.

Thou shall again visit these holy places in the Church and Quiare with great
devotion and affection, and especially the blessed body and blood of our lord,
with some devout prayer. And before thou g^e of the church thou shall go
down 8 steps under the Qutar, where is the Parlour where the Apostle: hid
them selves, and where Jesus after his resurrection entered (the doors being
^h^t) and said to his Disciples Pax vobis, peace be unto you. In which place is
also a Chapel where Jesus appeared after to S. Thomas, and shevved him his
wounds to feel, when Thomas vvor^hiping him said. Dominus and Deus meus my
Lord and my god. In the Quiare of this Chapel, is asquare Chapel, where is
an Altar. where the Apostle, received the holy ghost, here thou art to say
thy Beads, or some prayer to the holy ghost As thou go out of the Church
thou ^halt visit the place where the last supper was made ready Not far from
thence was S. Stephen first buried. And nere there king David made the 7.
psalms. Behind that, at the foot of mount sion, was the city of David, and
there are the sepulehers of the kinge^ of Israel. There is a piece of the
Pillar to the which our lord was bound and vvhipped, this place has an Iro^
door, of the which the Mores keep the key, and before the door is a place
where Christ our Lord and Savior was wont to sit and preath, to his
mother, and his Disciples. And there is the stone on which our Lady fate at
the sermon, Not far thence our Lady was wont to prey, Thereby is the place of
the Apostles assembly, when they held their Council, before they wet thorough
the world. and in this place Saint Matthew was chosen in Judas stead. To
wards the valley of Iosphat, is the place where S Paul kett the garments of
those who stoned S. Stephen, Thence is the goulde gate through which Christ
came rid^nge of the Ass on Palm Sunday. And below under the wal, is the
vall^y of Iosaphat, over the brook Cedro^ over the bridge. Also beyond, at
the foot of sio^, is the Sepulcher of our Lady, forty steps under the
ground. In the middle of those steps is the Se pulcher of Saint Anne, which
Saint Helin translated to Constantinople and there was buried Ioachim our
Ladies Father, and Joseph her husband. At the Sepulcher of our Lady, is a fair
church deep under the ground, which is so, by means of the ruins of
Jerusalem. The Sepulcher of our Lady is covered with a stone of mount Sinai
brought by the Angels. say here thy Beads in honor of the virgin Mary.

The 185. day, To the garden of Oliuet. Meditate how Jesus came with his
disciple to the mount of Oliver, and took Peter, James, and John with him,
leauinge the others below in the garden, and how he went further alone, and
began to be sadd, and said unto his Disciples, that they should watch and pray
least they enter into temptation and how he went a stones cast farther, and
prayed to his heavenly father.

The 186. day, At the Cave where Christ pray^d the first time, Meditate of the
sadness and tears of our blessed Savior of his trembling, falinge on the
ground, and praying to his heavenly father the first time saying, father if it
be possible let this cup of my bitter passion pass, always reserved the
health of mankind. then appeared to him all the bitter pains he was to suffer,
and he wept bitterly. and how then he found his Disciples sleepinge for sadness.
and. how he awaked them sweetly and said to S. Peter. Simon sleep thou? the
spirit indeed is wilinge, but the fleash is weak.

The 187. day, Within that Cave where Christ prayed the second time.
Meditate how Jesus went back from his Disciples, without having any comfort,
and prayed in like manner as before. he began to tremble for anguishe of the
torments he saw were to come on him and came again to his Disciples sleeping,
and awaked them, and returned again without having any comfort of them.

The 188. day, Within the Cauerne where Christ prayed the third time.
Meditate how Jesus went the third time to pray laden with extreme sorrow,
stretchinge him self in form of a Cross with great affection of love and
charity, that he might suffer his passion for the redemption of the world,
praying most harely as before. and thereupon he did sweat water and blood for
anguishe of death, which distilled on the ground. And how the Angel appeared
and comforted him with the redemption of the world. His drops were Nintie
seven thousand, three hundred, and sine, as after was showed by a revelation.

PRAYERS FOR THE VOYAGE OF THE CROSS, WHICH ARE IN NUMBER. 15. WHICH you may
say at any other time.
THE 1. STATION.
BY the bitter anguish which thou enduredst upon the mount of Oliver, when thou
did sweat water and blood, asiste me to resign my self always to thy
holy will (specially at the hour of my death) and to join and unite my self
to thee.

The 189. day, From the Cave to the Garden of Oliuet, where Judas came to
kiss him, and betraye our Sa: Meditate how Jesus rose sorowfully from his
prayers, and came to his Disciples, and bid them rest, and sat down a while
with them, and then by and by willed them to rise. and went and met Judas, and
the rest with lanternes, and weapons, and how Judas kissed our Lord, being the
token he gave his enemies to know Jesus from the others The sorrow of our
Lord for this ingratitude of Judas saying, Amice ad quid venisti? friend
wherefore come thou? betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? and how
then he went forwards toward the multitude.

The 160. day, In the Garden of Oliuet. Meditate how Jesus came before his
enemies, to whom he said quem queritis? whom seek ye? how they fell to the
ground. And how S. Peter drew his sword, and cut of Malchus right ear and
how Jesus healed Malchus ear, by touching of it and commanded Peter to put up
his sword. and of Christ's words to the multitude, haec est hora vestra, this
is your hour, yealdinge him self willingly into their hands.

The 191. day, In the Garden of Oliuet. Meditate how the son of god, was
delivered into the hands of sinners, without help or comfort from his father,
how they bound his holy hands, and how meekely he suffered them. how they beat
him, and hurled him on the ground, and abused him most villanouslly. and of
the great discomforte of his Disciples.

You may visit in this mountain the place where the Angel appeared to Saint.
Thomas, Apostle and brought unto him our Ladies girdel. A Little higher is the
place where our Lord wept on Jerusalem. Higher is the place where the Angel
brought our Lady tidings of her death, and a branche of Palm from paradise to
be carried before her. Again higer is the Castele of Galile where the Angel
toulde the woman of Christ's resurrestion. Thence to the round Church, where
our Lord stood when he ascended up to heaven. And the figure of his sacred
feet are there printed in a stone, by which it appears that he looked to
wards the North, when he ascended. Going down is the house of S. Pellagian,
the common sinner where she did her pennaunce. On the North side thereof is the
place where the Aposteles made their Creed. Also the place where our Lord
sat being weary, when his disciples a^ked him of the day of Judgment. Thereby
is a house where our lord did teach his disciples the Pater noster Going down
is the place where our Lady did often use to pray, after the death of her
son. Lower under a Rock, is the sepulcher of Absalon; upon that sepulcher the
Infidels passinge by, cast stones, and say cursed be Absalon who persecuted
his father, and all that do the like, be cursed everlastingly. There is a
little bridge over Cedron, where the Jews drew our Lord being bound, thorough
the water.

The 192. day, To the River of Cedron. Meditate upon the pitteous drawinge and
pullinge of Jesus, from the mount of Oliuet in their fury thorough the water
of Cedron, into the city, and so to house of Annas.

Nere Cedron is the Cave whereunto S. James did fly, and would not eat nor
drink until he knew of the Resurrection of our Lord. Nere to this toward
Bethanie, is Judas the Traitors house. Above within the bridge toward Sion,
is the Temple of Salamon, high and round, and covered with lead, in to which
Christians cannot enter. There by this Temple is the Rock of Bethel where
Jacob slept and saw the Ladder from heaven, where upon the Angels went up and
down. There also David saw the Angel stand which killed the people. There
our Lord preached, and pardoned the woman which was taken in adultrie. There
the Angel appeared to Zachary father of S. John Baptiste. Melchisideche here
offered bread and wine to Abraham, in figure of the holy Sacrament. Upon this
Rock David kneeled, when he saw the Angel strike the people, and prayed for
pardon, and would have builte the Temple, our god forbad David to build it,
because he had killed vrias. but Solomon did burlde it. Out of this Temple our
Savior did cast them that did buy and sell. And between the Temple, and the
Altar, was Zachary the son of Barachias, slain. Nere to this is Probatica
piscina. Where the market of sheep for the Sacrifices, were soulde. Where when
the Angel had troubled the water, who ever went first down and washed therein,
was healed here Christ healed him who had been sick 38. years. In this
Temple our Lord was presented, when holy Simeon took him in his arms. Higher
is the place where S. Peter wept bitterly for his den venge of Christ. Yet
higher on that hille, is the place, where the Jews would have stayed the corpse
of our Lady. when she was carried to be buried, but they were by mirackle
hindered. Hard by is the house of Annas.

Again in the house of Annas (which is now a Church) there dwell Greek Monks
who ar Christians.

The 19^. day, Meditate how Jesus was led like a Th^ife to Annas house, who
skornfully entreated him, and was marvelous glad, thinkinge now to be revenged
on him. questioninge of his Disciples, and his own Doctrine. to whom Jesus
answered, I have always taught openly in the Sinagoge and the Temple, ask not
me, but ask them who have heard me one of the servants (unthankful Malchus as
some think) struck him with a greueous blow upon the face, in so much that
Christ fell to the ground greatly bleedinge at the nose and the mouth, and
risinge said in mild manner: if I have spoken il breare witness, but if I have
spoken well, why do you strike me?

The. 2. Station.
O Lord who sufferedst thy self to be bound and taken violently of those
ministers of malice, and to be haled, and trailed to Annas house, there to be
skorned, abused, and injuriously strike^ so that the blood followed. I beseech
thee to pardon al my sins whatsoever paste, and so bridel my tongue and my
speech, that I may speak nothing to the offense of my neighbor, but that
ever my mouth and heart, may sownde forth thy praise, and with all patience, to
suffer detractio^s and reproaches, with humility and constancy in all
adversities.

To the house of Caiphas. which is now a Church in which is the stone which was
laid at the mouth of the sepuliber of our Lord, which is very great and
beauty.

The 104. day, Meditate how Annas sent Jesus bound in great despite, guarded
with those perverse ministers to Caiphas house, where by the way he received
many sore blows, spittinges, and mockeries, there being gathered al his
mortal enemies who desiered his death and findinge not any sufficient cause
sought for salfe witness against him and not findinge these neither, Caiphas
adjured Christ to tell him if he were the son of God. Where upon Jesus
answered. Thou haste said, notwithsta^dinge you shall see the son of man sit
on the right hand of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven, wheirvpon
Caiphas said Blasphemauit he blasphemeth, and asked the rest what they thought,
they answered he is worthy of death.

The 165. day, meditate what great sorrow Christ had in his soul when he was
so injuriously handled accused mocked, haled, beaten and stricken, in the house
of Caiphas and how they covered his face and bid him divine who it was that
struck him. And what great sorrowne he received when his Apostle denied him
three times. And how he looked on Saint Peter with his merciful eyes. At the
which S. Peter remembering him self, leaving his Lord in the hands of the
wicked, he went out, and wept bitterly.

The 196 day, to a dark Chappelle on the South side of the quiet called the
prison of God, Hear Jesus was put in prison, and guarded with 8 of the vilest
and cruellest villainies that might be found, who did many villainies and
torments unto him, all that night. And there is a pillar of stone to the which
our Lord was bound. Meditate with what incomprehensible patience and
humility, the great monarcke of heaven and earth suffered all these villainies
and injuries, being all that night in the hands of these perverse and wicked
men.

The 3. Station.
O My Lord, by the excessive love which constrained thee to be bound, to the
end to loose me from the bonds of sin, give me grace never to forgette thy
great love, and the injuries which thou sufferdest this night; and that I may
suffer patiently all wrongs done unto me, that I may drive all slouthfullnes
from me, and exercise al works of charity toward my neighbor. Amen.

Without the Chapel is the place. Where S. Peter denied his master.

The. 197. day. From Caiphas house, to the house of Pilate. Meditate how in
Caiphas house Jesus heard the wicked Jews consulting to accuse him before
Pilate as a traitor to the Emperor a breaker of their laws, and a blasphemor
against God. And how in the morning they led him again into the council
house, and asked him if he were Christ; which he denied not. Where upon they
bound his hands behind him, and put Iron chains about his neck. And our good
Lord, suffered him self thus to be led through the streets, whither they
would, until he came to Pilats lodging.

Behind the house of Caiphas is the field caled Haceldama, or Ager sanguinis,
which was bought for ^o penece, for the burial of strangers, being 50 foot
broad, and. 72. foot long. In this is a Seller having nine hoales, thorough
which th y let down d^rie stians that die there. There ^udas repented him.
Also in that pit is a deep hoale, where the Apostles hid them selves when
Jesus was taken In that place is a fair tree with a seat to sit on, where
it is said that Esaias was hanged by the ^eeles, and vvas^ wen a sonder thorough
them del of his body, to h^ head, with a widden saw Below in a great valley,
is Natatoria Siloe, vvhetherour Lord bid the man that was blind from his
nativity, g^e wa^ he. Lower is the valley of ^osaphat: In ^h^ valley is the
selcher of our Lady, cut out of a Rock, covered with a marble stone
fairvvrought, in the midel of a fair church Entringe into Jerusalem by Potta
S^erquilinia, in a litel street there by, is the house of Ioachim where our
Lady was borne. This place the Infidels abuse for one of their Temples. Alitel
beneath is Probatica Piscina, where the vvood of the holy cross for many
years was bide^. here the sick receive their health. A little lower is the
house of those who led Christ to Pilate, being. 300 in number.

The 198. day. In Pilats house. Meditate how meekely Jesus stood before
Pilate, hearing al patiently which he was accused of, and that which was
feigned against him the chief Preistes, for envy and malice. the false
witnesnes, for bribes and money* the people for flattery and favor of their
rulers. and of the sorrow of heart sweet Jesus had for them, and for Judas
the Traitor, whom he knew to be damned everlastingly, by reason of his
despair, although he confessed his fault, and restored back the money.

The 199. day, Before Pilate in the council house. (...) Meditate how Pilate
took Jesus from the Jews into the council house, and asked of him if he were
the king of the Jews. Jesus answered my kingdom is not of this world etc:
Pilate said. then thou art a king. Jesus said, I am. etc. Pilate said what is
truth: and so rose, and went forth to the Jews, and said, I find no fault in
this man. The Jews said he has stirred up the people, teachinge from Galilee
to this place. Pilate hearing he was of Herod's Jurisdiction, sent him to Herod
who was then in Jerusalem.

The 200. day, From Pilate to Herod's house Meditate how Jesus as led to Herod
with great confusion, who was glad of his coming, for many a day he longed
to see Jesus because of his mirackles Herod asked Jesus many questions but our
Lord answered nothing. Herod and ^^s court despised Jesus, cloathinge him in
white, and fendinge him back to Pilate as a fool.

The 201. day, From the ^alace of Herod, (...) the house of P^late* M^ditate
how Jesus came back to Pilate with great pain and confusion, whom Pilat
excused that nether he nor Herod had found any thing in him worthy of death,
thinkinge to let him go free in steed of Barrabas. But the Iewees chose
Barrabas, and required Jesus to be crucified.

The. 202. day, To the Chapel where Pilate caused Jesus to be whipped.
Meditate how Jesus benige stripped naked, tre^bled and was ashamed. How meekely
he suffered him self to be bound to a Pillar and whipped so terribly, that from
the top of his head, to the soale of his foot, no part of his fleash remained
whole, and seemed so weak that he was not able to stand, receauinge 624.
lashes with rods and whippes.

The. 20^. day, To the place where our lord was crouned with Thorns. Meditate
in what distress our lord was, when the wicked servants took him being so
scourged, and clothed him with a purple garment, mocked him, and crowned him
with a wreathed crown of thorns. what extreme pain Jesus felt at his
Coronation, chiefly in his brains and sinnowes. Also in the impression of the
said Crown, how the blood sprange out of his veins, and how the blood of his
heart trembled. and how the blood ran down about his face and neck, when he
was stricken upon the same crown with the Reed. what greueous skorne, and
torment this was altogether* and how they kneeled and mocked him.

The 204. day. To the place where Jesus was shevved by Pilate, sainge. Ecce
Homo. which is a vault^, In which is an arche, in the which two stones of
white marble are set, upon one Pilate stood, and on the other stood Jesus.
Meditate upon the excessive love of Jesus heart, when he so gently suffered him
self to be showed to the people being skant able to go. and what sor owe
Christ suffered when Pilate said. Ecce Homo. and again the people cringe ^olle
Toll, crucifige cum. Where upon Jesus wept most bitterly.

The 205 day To the place where Pilate led Jesus, and inquired if he were the
son of god. Meditate in what piteous estate the noble soul of Jesus was,
having so great dishonor, despite, and torments done unto him by these wicked
men, how patiently he heard their crienges, sainge, we have no king but Caesar.
Also of his meek silence, when Pilate asked him of whence he was etc.

The 206. day. To the place where our Lord received his judgment and sentence
of death by Pilate. There were 80000. Jews who cried for his death, as it is
revealed.

Meditate what inexplicable love was in the heart of Jesus, which constranied
him to be judged of his creatures, (who were able to do nothing without him)
and that unto so ignominious and vile a death, as the death of the Cross, and
of his so great patience, content, and willingness to suffer al for man's
redemption.

The way of the Cross to wards mount Caluarie.

The 4. Station.
O Most puisant judge of heaven and earth, by the incomprehensible love, by
the which thou sufferedst for me incomparable torments, of mockinge, whippinge,
Crowning, false witness, and haste received of Pilate sentence to be
crucified, and to die on the Cross most willingly. I beseech thee o La^be of
god, to give me true knowledge and despisinge of my self, and also perfect
obedience to thee my Lord, and to my superious; and to judge here of my soul,
and of my doings, to the end I may not sear thy straight and just judgment
hereafter. Amen.

The 207. day, To the place where the Purple Robe was pulled of, when he was
to bear his Cross Meditate how humbly and piteously our most louinge lord
stood in the midest of the people, when they spoiled him of his purple
garment, and how the people stood gasinge on him to his great pain and
grief, how they put on his own garments, that he might be the better known
of al men. and how he carried the heavy burden of the Cross for the sins of
all the world with excessive great pains.

The Cross was. 1^, foot long and 8. foot^ ouerthvvart. and it weighed,
150. pound weight. From the place where Christ was judged, to the Place
where the Cross was laid on him, were 1^. paces. and from the plac where
the Cross was laid on him to the plac where he first fell, are 40. strides,
and every stride contains two common paces, or six foot. And from that to
the place where his woeful mother met him* were ^0. strides, and three foot.
There went with our Lord to mount Caluaries 15000 parsons.

The 5. Station.
O Most noble king, and valiant Sta^dard beater who for the love of me did
permit the heavy burden of the Cross, to be laid upon thy shoulders (which
were full sore with stripes) and there with all, all the sins of the world,
offeringe the same by thy death upon the Altar of the Cross, to thy heavenly
father, I beseech the healp me to carry my Cross, that I may willingly
sustain the same, and to serve thee according to my vocation. Amen.

The 208. day, Toward the mount Calnarie, to the Chapel where our Lady
stood caled Sancta Maria in plasmo where the Blessed virgin sounded, Here
was the second falinge of our Lord. Meditate how Jesus went forward with his
painful and heavy Cross, and for weight, and pain thereof, our good Lord
went almost double under it. and how the soldiers used him, cruelly striking
him, and reuilinge him. al which he took with as great patience and mildenes,
as if he had been easily and gently entreated. and how peaceably he went
betwixt two thieves, as if he had been the captain, being rebuked despised and
reviled of the people as he went, until he went out at the gate of the city,
whereat his mother met him. and with what intolerable sorrow he cast his
looks upon her.

The. 6. Station.
O Merciful Lord god by the fountain of thy tender compassion, which thou
boarest to our infirmity, which constrained thee to carry thy Cross to thy
great confusion and pains, goinge between two thieves as the Captain of them,
with thy head crowned, thy face swollen with blows, disfigured with spittel,
and al thy body wounded with effusion of thy precious blood: and by the great
compassion in behouldinge thy well-beloved mother, when thou perceived her also
so discomforted because of thy dolours. I beseech the most faithful mediator,
that I may continualy follow thee by love, to the end that I may be pertaker of
thy most sacred, and most bitter passion, Amen. Here say the Salve Regina, or
thrice Aue maria. from the place where our Lady stood, unto the place where
Simon Cirenct^, was compelled to carry the Cross of our Lord.

The 209. day, In the place where Simon C^reneus was compelled to carry the
Cross of Christ. and here is the third falinge of our Savior. Meditate now
how our Lord fell for faintnes, and was not able to go any father without
healp. and how Simeon was constrained against his will to bear his Cross.

The 7 Station.
O My Lord Jesus Christ, most pure glass of perfect patience, by thy great
pain and wearines which thou enduredst in caring thy heavy Cross, and
falinge often times upon the earth, and by the love and ardor of thy holy heart
which caused thee to proceed. I beseech thee my refuge, renew the puporse of
my slouthful heart, wilingly to carry after thee the spritual cross of religion,
and what other soever it shall please thee to lay upon me, the which of my self
with Simeon, I am loath, and repine to carry, and for want of courage, fall
under the same to the end that by enflamed desires, I may follow thy holy
steps, and never to or faske thy cross, until thou dischargest me of the
same at the hour of my death, whereby I may afterward dwell with thee
everlastingly, amen.

The 210 day, To the place where veronica presented her self to our Lord,
There was the fourth time our Lord fell. and so to the foot of mount
Caluarie, which was the fifth time. Meditate how veronica presented to our
Lord, al fainte, extremely weary and sweatinge, her kerchir to wipe his
face, and to refresh him with all. and how our Savior took it in thankful
manner, and wiped his face there with, leauinge the print of his visage in the
cloth. for a reward of her great chariritie, and love.

The 8. Station.
O Jesus fountain of mercy who so continualy proceeded, laden with pains and
dolours. and gave the grace to that good woman veronica to ru^ne al weepinge
among the midest of the souldiears, to see thee once more before thy death, and
to present to thee that cloth where in thou did leave the image of thy face.
I beseech thee give me grace always with continual compassion, for to behold
thy blessed face so disfigured, that so thy Divine heart may be printed in my
heart, that it be never defiled with sin and that thy face may always show
mercy to me Amen.

The cloth of Veronica is at Rome, in Saint Peter's Church, and is often ^h^wed
in the holy week, and the Ascension day and on the next Sunday after Saint
Anthonies Feast.

The 211. day, To the place where Jesus turned to the women that be vvailed
him, here was the sixte faling. Jesus beheld the mount Caluerie with very
great heuines and sadness, where he was to end his days in torments.

Meditate how Jesus turned to the women that wept after him, and said unto
them, ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not form, but weep for your selves
and for your Children.

The 6. Station.
O Most meek lamb, by the great violence thou sufferedst of those feirce and
cruel Lions, who hastened to traile and draw thee to be crucified, and to
shede thy precious blood, and who mercifully looked with thy eye of compassion
upon the women that lamented, and knew not the mystery of thy passion to be
for the redemption of mankind, and for the sins of the world. I beseech
thee to soften my stony heart, that I may shed a fountain of tears in
contemplation of thy bitter passion, which my iniquities were the cause of and
that I may escape the everlasting torments. Amen. The 112. day, Before the
door of the temple of the holy sepulcre, which is near to the foot of
mount Caluarie, near the stone where our Lord fell the last time.

Meditate with what ardour of love our Lord beheld the great height of mount
Caluarie, and how he went up laboring, and bearing his heavy Cross, and
hear fell once more, which was the 7. time, and lay there as if he had no life
in him.

The 10 Station.
O Bottomless deapth of love, our Lord Jesus Christ, by the fervor of this
love, where with thou so much desiredest the salvation of mankind and thereby
wast drawn up the high hill of Caluarie, to which thou ca^est with so many
blodie steps, to offer thy self to thy father, on the painful Altar of the
Cross in satisfaction of our offenses, and for faintnes did fale on thy
face at the foot of the hill upon a hard stone, lieng as if thou hadest no
life in thee. I beseech thee who art ready to take mercy on all sinners who
do convert and repent and pardonest all such as are truly contrite. I
beseech thee to pardon me all my enormious offenses, with the which I have
been overthrown, and houlde me up with thy holy fear, that I may always
stand firm in the state of grace. Amen.

Hear thou shall enter the Temple of the holy sepulcre, where thou shall say
the Psalm. Letatus sum in his. etc. Anthiph^na terribilis est io^us iste, vere
non est hic, andt. verse. Domum tuam Domine de^et sanctitudo Resp in longitudine
dierum. or say 3. Pater noster, and (...). Aue maria.

The 11. Station.
O Lord who vouchsafed to send thy dear and o^e^y Son, to be Crucified,
anointed, and buried, and rising to appear to Marie Magl^lene, I beseech thee
give me thy grace in this life, and in the life to come everlasting glory Amen.

Now you are to go to the Quiere of our Lady where the Gaurdaine of the
friars does lead the Pilgrims to vis^te all the holy places. Desire S.
Francis, and the rest of this holy company, that thy will pray for thee,
and obtain for thee a singular grace, of compunction for thy sins, and
compassion of the pains of thy Savior, and to have a most ardent lou^ovvardes
him. And thou must have a burning Candel in thy hand and say the Himme Christ
qui lux es et dies. Antiph O Crux spes Vnica andt. The littanies. and Salve
Regina. In the Cloister is a Chapel where our Lord did sit on the stone and
is caled the prison of our Lord.

The 123. day, At the Stone where on our Lord did sit. Meditate how these
unmerciful Jews did with great violence pull of the clothes over our Saviors
head which did stick to his body, where by all his wounds began to bleed a
fresh, and how he stood also in a pitiful manner, naked before all the people
also how humbly he behaved him self, when he was set upon the stone betwixt the
two thieves, full of sorrow, attending whilst the cross was made ready, and
there they gave him vinegar mingled with gaul to drink, and to the thieves
good wine. consider also the greueous wound he had on his showlder with
carieng the heavy Cross, and pray thy Lord, that by the deapth and pain of
that wound, h^ will heal thee of al thy wou^des. There were round hoales
about the stoe through which his seete went.

The 11. Station.
O Sweet Savior Jesus, my love and hearts desire, who vouchsafedst to be
spoiled of thy garments with spite and villainy, to thy great pain and shame,
and to see those vile men cast lottes for thy garments, and divide them,
settinge thee upon a stone betwixt two thieves, and deridinge thee. Let it
please thee to unclothe me from, al singular affection, and self love, and that
it would please thee to appearel me, with the wedding garment of thy holy love,
by which thou haste so mercifully, by thy bitter passion, bound me unto thee,
that so at the hour of my death, I may with full confidence fly in to thy holy
arms Amen.

This garment is yet at Treuirs, and many other Relics. as the Spear which
opened his sacred side. and one of the three Nails.

The 214. day, At the place where our Lord was nailed to the Cross, Meditate
how these vile and cruel wretches did lead our Savior, from the aforesaid
stone to the Cross, where they threw him violently upon his back, on the hard
Cross that it hurt him very sore, and shook all the veins of his holy heart:
which he took in good part, with patience, for the love which he had of the
salvation of ma^kinde: and how mercifully he spread his arms a broad of his
own accord, to be nailed with those boisterous nails of Iron. Also how al
his body was extrea^ly stretched with ^o^des that it cracked, and that the
veins and sinews did break a so^der being str^t^hed like a stringe on a
Bow. and with what patience he suffered the same: and how they troade on him,
and with their feet spurned, and thrust his head where they would have it lie,
taking great pleasure in their cruelty and tormentinge of him: Also how they
struck on his head and sides with their hammers, in so much that the blood did
issue forth of his nose and mouth. Remember also the great sorrow his blessed
mother had when she heard the blows of the hammers, and What countenance she
had seeing the body of her dear son al bloody, and in so piteous a plight.
The Jews give him 50. blows with hammers when they fastened him upon the
Cross.

The 13. Station.
O Sweet Jesus by all the pains and anguishes thou sufferedst when thou wast
stretched on the Cross, with great courage and patience for me miserable
catife, being most cruely fastened on the same give me grace I beseech thee to
use well all the members of my body in thy holy service, and that when the
bitterness and panges of death shall stretch al my members, I may then remember
thy greueous pains and dolours, and with thee offer my self in Sacrifice, and
patiently to endure al which thy holy pleasure shall be to send me.

At an Altar in the quier, is a place where the wicked played at dice for
Christ's garments, at which place our blessed Lady and Magdalen did greatly
sorrow. On the left hand it is where the Jews prepared the vinegar and gaul.
In a Chapel under the ground is the place where saint Helin was wont to
pray, and where the died, and was first buried, but after was translated to
venice. Yet deeper is the place where S. Helin found the three Crosses, and
three nails, and the Crown of Thorns. Ascendinge on another Altar thou
shall find under the same a short Pillar, where on our Lord d^d sit when
the crown of Thorns was put on his head now you ascend the mount of
Caluarie which is a wh^te Rock there is afaire Church or Chapel which is
all gilded with goulde and azur, and is paued with marble. On the one side
there is the place where our lord was hanged on the cross into this place
fevve people do enter. By the door there is the hoale of the holy Cross all
open two foot deep, and a space broad, into which you may put your arm.

The 215 day. To contemplate how our Lord Jesus was lifted from the ground,
and carried to be set between tow thieves to his greater shame, and to suffer
most bitter death for the redemption of mankind. Meditate of the excessive
love which our Savior Jesus had of the health and salvation of mankind, which
was kindled in his divine heart like a burning fire, which caused him so
patiently to be lifted up, shaked, and let fale upon the ground, with
unspeakable pain to all his holy members, which stroke unto the hatre of his
dolorous mother. The which fale he sustained that the divine justice should not
eternally condemn the poor sinner, at every time he should fale into
deadly sin. And how he was lifted up and se^te betwixt two thieves? and how he
was annoyed with the stincke and savor of the dead bodies which were on mount
Caluarie.

The 216. day, meditate with what great patience our Lord endured to be
crucified, stretched, nailed, blasphemed and dishonored as well in his
divinity, as in his humanity, by the high Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and
Elders, who contrary to the law followed after for this effect, which was
more tormente unto him then any of his other pains, whereupon with great
humility, he began to pray for his enemies, (the 1. word) My father forgive
them they know not what they do.

The 217. day meditate in the same place, with how great patience our Lord
Jesus endured in those intolerable torments, the space of three hours hanging
on the Cross, having not the means to move any one of his members, where one
might easealy number every bone, and see his ^^ines and sinews. Of the
blasphemy of one of the thieves, and of the repentance of the good thief. And
of the words of Jesus to him (the 2. word) The day thou ^halt be with me in
Paradise.

The ^^8 day, meditate this day of the unspeakable sorrow which our lords
broken heart did feel, when he did behoulde his heuie and discomforted Mother
by him, to whom he spoke in this manner. (The 3. word) Woman behoulde thy
Son. And after to S. John. Behoulde thy mother. Where at they both held
there peace, not being able to speak for sorrow and tears.

The 219. day meditate in what great distress the body of our Lord did hang
seeking with intollerabe pains, to turn, or vvinde himself upon the Cross,
thinking to find some more ease, and so weeping bloody tears, cried to his
father with a high voice, (the 4 word) M^ god my god why have thou forsaken
me? thy only son into the hands of sinners. and how darkness came over all
the whole earth from the sixth hour to the ninth hour, and the sun also lost
his light.

The 220. day meditate what extrea^e poverty our lord endured upon the
Cross, when all his natural humors were spent and run out, and in his
exceeding dries cried out (the 5, word) I thirste. And how he could not
get so much as a little could water. How one of the unjust and wicked
ministers filled a sponge with vinegar, mingled with gale, and put it to the
mouth of Jesus, but when he tasted it he would not drink it. To the end that
we should not taste of the cup of death everlasting.

The 221. day Meditate how our Lord endured peaceably, and patiently all the
pains and torments of the Cross by which means he satisfied and paid to god
his father the det for our sins: which Jesus consideringe from point to
point thereof, and findinge al to be fulfilled which the Scriptures and
Prophecies had fore told of him, he cried (the 6. word) It is finished.

The 222. day, Meditate how our Lord Jesus prepated him self to die, and of the
great patience he had when death was now come in to his wounds, in to his
bones, and began to assault his sacred heart. at the first assault heaven and
earth trembled. At the second, the stones and Rocks did cleave a sonder and
the graves of the dead did open. At the third assault which was most feirce,
thorough love, he willingely yealded his heart to be transperced to death, and
therefore cried (the 7. word) In to thy hands o Lord I comend my spirit, and
bowinge down his head he gave up the ghost.

In his death all the world was moved. the earth trembled: the stones cloaue
in pieces. the Sepulchers opened. the veil of the Temple rent in two. The
Centurion seeing al these mirackles, and that he died vveepinge he said, verily
this man was the son of god and the people astonished at al they saw and
heard, returned to their own houses knockinge their breasts. The mount of
Caluarie also cleft as it is now seen, four foot from the boale where in
the cross was put, at the left side toward the evil thief, it is so long
that a man may lie here in, and 18, foot deep as is thought. In he cleaunige
of the Rock the Cross of the eui be^fe went farther of. Our Savior did
ha^ge on the cross with his face toward the west. he was then 33. years
old 3. months, and 9. days. There was found thereby a writing in greek
letters sainge. Illic deus rex noster ante saecula operatus est salutem in
medio terrae.

The 223 day. Meditate how the most noble soul of our Savior left his sacred
body hanginge on the cross in most miserable and doleful plight, when it
departed forth in so great violence, his cheeks were riueled, his nose sharp,
his eyes and sweet mouth were half open, his head inclined and hanging down
upon his breaste, his sides were very raw, and thin, and so as every bone
might be easily toulde, his belly was suncke inward to his back, his legs
were turned to one side, and his feet to a another, al his whole body was full
of wounds, and of color red, black and blue that it was pity to see it. If
it be thus o Lord in thy body which was conceived without our sin, borne of a
virgin, most pure and innocent in all thy life, replenished with thy divinity.
what ought I miserable sinner to have expected, if thy great mercy o Lord had
not prevented me. and with thy bitter pains and torments thou hadest not
redeemed me.

The 224. day, meditate of the incredible sorrow of the blessed mother of god,
saying her sweet and well beloved some hanging dead on the Cross, and what
abundance of tears she shed, with S. John, and other women of his freindes.
and what fear they were in when as the officers came and brake the legs of
both the thieves that hanged with Jesus that they might die the so^ner. And how
that (seeing Jesus was dead) one of the soldiers stroke our. Lord to the heart
with a spear, whe^^ issued out blood and water, for our redemption, and the
remission of our sins. The which thrust of the spear peirced the heart of our
blessed Lady also.

The 13. Station.
O Most mighty conqueror of all our enemies, by the incomprehensible love and
pain which thou sufferedst being streched like a stringe upon the Cross, as
well inwardly as outwardly, thy veins and sinnewes being broken there withal
that thy precious blood issued forth like fountains of water. And by all the
mocks blasphemies and injuries thou then did suffer, when in so great
torment thou yealdest up thy blessed soul unto thy heavenly father in full
satisfaction for all our sins. I beseech thee give me grace to persevere in
true penance and to die to the world and hear to satisfy for mine offenses.
O Lord hold me fast by those three nails of my christian profession, that is
to renounce the world the flesh and the devil. As also by these 3. nails of
Religion, Poverty Chastity, and obedience, that I never fall from thy love
into any sin or greueous temptation and that I may at the hour of my death
with full confidence say. In to thy hands o Lord I commend my spirit. and so
hear thy voice full of mercy with the good thief sainge. This day thou stalt
be with me in Paradise, of heavenly glory. Amen.

The 225. day. To a Chapel on mount Caluarie, where our Lady and S. John
stood, when our lord spoke to them on the cross. Thereby is an Altar where
Abraham made sacrifice to our lord. Before this Altar lies buried S. Godfrie
of Bullein, Baldwine his brother, and many christian kings of Jerusalem. As
you go to the door is a black stone having. 7. lamps hanging over it,
which is the place where our Lady sat, when Jesus was taken from the Cross
and laid in her lap, as she with tears requested. this is almost the
half way betwixt the Cross and the Sepulcher The wounds our Savior
received in his body were. 6666. or as some other say, 5475.

Meditate how the noble man Joseph of Arimathia and Nichodemus came to take
down the body of our lord from the cross with marvelous great reverence and
devotion, both to the body, to the cross, and to his blessed mother. which she
received with marvelous and incredible doloure.

The. 14. Station.
O Most merciful redeemer, by the great sorrow of thy dear mother, when thy
most sacred body was taken from the Cross and laid in her arms, in a fair
cloth, which she washed with many tears. I beseech thee by the same sorrow
and compassion, soften my dry, hard, and stony heart, being a most wretched
and vile sinner, that I may incessantly lament my sins and wickedness, and
with compassion and thankfulness, to bewail thy bitter death and passion, and
at my death, to receive devoutly and worthily thy holy body and blood, and so
with a pure conscience to be always united unto thee. Amen.

Note that the distan^e betwixt the Croste, and the Sepulcher, is 15^. foot.

The. 226. day, Toward the place of the Sepulcher which is in the midel of
the body of the Temple, which Temple is round with in, and vaulted about
having 73. Pillars, every one being 30. foot high. vvon the Sepulcher is a
great round houle, as large and wide as is the Cave of the Sepulcher, so as it
is open fovvardes the element. the entry to the Sepulcher is But. 3. foot
high, and the color of it within is gray. It is. 7. foot long, and 6. foot
vvide, and. 9. foot and a half high. And on the right side toward the
North, is the holy Sepulcher of our lord, and eight handfulls high from the
ground, is a stone as big as a man's head of the Sepulcher, fastened in the
wal, which Pilgrims do kiss. In this Tabernackle is no vvindowes, but only
la^pes burninge. there is a lamp hanginge before the holy Sepulcher, but on
good friday it goes out of it self, and lights of the one accord on the
holy night of Easter at the hour our lord did rise from death. Also at the
Sepulcher is a fair Tomb of marble, which is an Altar, very straight, where
there can enter but three or fouer persons. there burn. 18. lamps, and there
is Mass said before the knights of the Sepulcher, which are kinghted in the
same place. Noble men and gentelmen are here made kinghtes, having a girdel of
goulde and a gylte svvorde put a bout them, and gylte Spurs o their heels.
and enclininge in prayer before the Sepulcher, take an oath, and are doubed
kinghts by the gardein of the Friars, of whom he receaueth. 3. blows in the
neck.

Meditate how the night being come, the honorable friends who took Jesus
down, desiered the mother of our Lord, that it would now please her to permit
them to bury his dead body; and how Joseph and Nichodemus wrapped Jesus in a
clean Sindon or cloth, with mirrhe, Aloes, and sweet spices, and rolled a
great stone to the mouth of the Sepulcher, when they had laid Jesus there in,
in the sight of his doleful mother, who wept bitterly, with other his friends:
and so they al departed home because of the night in great heaviness.

The 15 Station.
O Merciful Lord, and Savior of mankind, whom it has pleased to endure so
much for my love, wretch that I am, I being the cause of thy death and
passion. I beseech thee by the merits of thy precious death, which thou have
endured with so great love for me, that thou will give life to my soul, and
pardon al my sins, and pains due for them, both in this life and at my
death, and that I may every day learn to die well, to the end I may live with
thee everlastingly Amen.

The 227. day, Meditate how our Lord Jesus did arise by his own proper force
and verru the third day out of the closed Sepulcher victoriously, like a noble
and valiant Champian. and first appeared to his dear mother, accompained with
a multitude of Angels: who ioyed with unspeakable joy and gladness, and the
Angels sounge Regina caeli letare. etc.

Before the high Altar in the quiere is the place where our Lady was when
our lord appe^red to hiron Easter day. Before the great Altar is a fair marble
stone, where on (...) Lord stood when he appeared to our Lady And this is
the stone upon which S. Helen proved the; Crosses by layinge a dead body under
them On the left hand there is an Altar on which the holy Cross remained a
long time after S Helen found it. on the right hand of the quiare is a long,
and great piece of the Pillar, where unto our Lord was bound when he was
whipped. Where he received. 624 stripes. Nere there unto are 4. Pillars which
continualy sweat water.

The 2^8. day Meditate how our Lord appeared to Mary Magdalen in likeness of a
Gardner, when she sat weepinge at the Sepulcher, and how sweetly he comforted
her, commandinge her to declare his Resurrection, to his disciples, and to S.
Peter.

Between the Sepulcher of our Lord and the quiare of our Lady, ar two
Tombs, which are two marble stones upon the which our Lord on the one
appeared like a Gardner and Mary Magdalen satt on the other. Before the Church
of the holy Sepulcher toward the South is a great Hospital of S. John
Baptiste, where was Zacharies house S. John Baptists father. Bethanie lies
toward the North two miles from Jerusalem before the mount of Oliuet nere
Bethpage. At the end of Bethanie is the Place where Martha met our Lord and
toulde him that her brother Lazarus was dead. There is also shevved the place
where Jesus went to lodge. Nere that is a Castle of Magdalen. Nere Jerusalem
is the Castle where Lazarus dwelt, and the Sepulcher whence Jesus raised him.

There is the house of Simeon the eper, where Mary Magdalen anointed the feet
of our Lord. Returninge to Jerusalem you pass by the Figtree which our Lord
cursed and it withered incontinently.

The 229 day. Meditate how Jesus after his Resurrection appeared to the three
women in the way, whom he saluted lovingly saing Auete where they cast them
selves prostrate on the earth, and kissed his feet.

The 230. day At the Cave where. S Peter wept bitterly for that he had denied
his master. Meditate how Jesus appeared to Saint Peter who was extreme full of
sorrow for that he had denied his master and how Jesus lifted him up lovingly
and pardoned his offense. likewise how he comforted S. James caled the brother
of our Lord, because of the resemblance he had with our Lord, who had vowed
he would neither eat nor, drink, until he had seen our Lord to be risen.
likewise he comforted Joseph of Arimathia, and Nichodemus.

The 21. day, meditate how Jesus showed himself like a pilgrim to the two
disciples going to Emaus, how they knew him by breaking of bread, and how
they returned to serusalem, and showed to the disciples that our Lord was risen.

The 233. day, meditate how Jesus that Easter day at night, the doors being
shut, stood among his disciples, saing, Pax vobis and showed them that he was
cruely risen from death

The ^32, day, meditate how Jesus. 8. days after his resurrection appeared
again the doors being shutt, and showed his disciples his wounds, and said
to Thomas put thy finger into my wounds, and thy hands into my side and be
not incredulous but believing. Thomas said my Lord and my God. and Christ to
him. Because thou have seen me thou beleuest, but blessed be they which
believe and see not.

THE VOYAGE OF BETHELEM LYING TOWARD THE South a great mile of Almaine from
Jerusalem, a faier way full of Vines.
OVt of the gate of Jerusalem is the house of just Simeon. A little farther is
the place where the 3 Kings did see the star, which appeared in the East.
Bethese^ is a little town, long, and straight, compassed with great dit^hes,
situated upon a little mountain near the valley of Hebyon, and is extended
from East to weste there is the fairest Church of the holy land. with 48.
Pillars of marble adorned with histories from the Creat^on of the world, to
the nativity of Christ, covered with marble of diverse coullours, and the
wales seeled with allablaster and marble 2^0 foot long and broad. There are
12. Religeous Friars.

The 234 day, meditate how Jesus showed himself near the sea of Tiberias to
his disciples who were gone to fish with S. Peter, and had caught nothing all the night, and when the morning came our Lord appeared unto them standing on
the bancke, and asked them some thing to eat, commanding them to cast their
netts on the right side of the baote where they caught 153. great fishes. And
Jesus afterward asked S. Peter three times if he loved him, commanding him to
to feed his lambs and sheep.

Within the Cloister of the friars down under the ground is the sepulere of
S. Hierome. and there ie S. Eusebius Sepulcher on the other side. There is the
place where S. Hierome translated the Bible out of Hebrew into latin.
Toward the South is an Altar where our lord was circumcised. on the
north is an Altar where the three kings made the^ ready to make their
offeringe. Goirge lower is a Chapel ioyninge to the Rock, where Jesus was
borne in this Chapel is a fair stene like a Star with five or six beams
vvhereon our Lady kenceled and adored her son when he was newly borne, over
this stone is an Altar. Three steps lower is the manger where our lord was
laid, being of marble, underset with two pillars, and a foot high. say here
thy Beads Pray here to Christ newborn in the manger t^ grant thee grace to
be newborn in him, and that as he was pertaker of our humanity, so he vvil
make us partakrr of his divinity. Behind this Chapel is a hoale, where the
Star did lead the 3 kings, and abide there a while* retorninge to the Chapel
of Saint Katherin in this Church, there is a place where some of the Innocent
children were cast. The number of the children which Herod slevve, were
CXLiiij thousand Goinge from Bethelem Eastward about half amile is the place
where the virgin Marie, went with Jesus and Joseph when she should fly into
Egypt thence ye go into a pleasant valley where the Angels appeared eo the
Sheppards, and told them tidinges of the birth of our Lord.

The voiages toward the mountains of Judea
THese mountains are ten miles north from Bethelem, and the way very cragged.
there Zachary dwelt and Elizabeth, and there is yet the house where our Lady
and Elizabeth, met and greeted so lovingly there is also a fountain where our
Lady fetched water whilst she remained there. About a shoot fartheris
Zacharies house where Saint John Baptiste was borne. A litel thence is a
Church where Saint John was circumcised, and there is the Cave where Saint
John was kept prisoner by Herod. Between Emaus, and Jerusalem you come to a
Church caled Ad Saincta^ Crucem, where is a Cloister of Greek monks of S.
Benetts ord^r. Goinge to Jerusalem say the psalm Lauda Jerusalem Domiu^m.
etc use some prayers in all the holy places, according to the conneniencie of
things there done.

The. 235. day. At the mount Oliuet where is a Chapel. Meditate how Jesus
often filled the hearts of his Disciples with joy, especially at his Asce^sion,
his mother, his disciples, and friends both men and women, accompained with
infinite nombers of Angels, and Patriarchs, and of fathers from limbo, ascended
with great glory.

The 36 day, To the mount of Sion, where i^ a Chapel ascending behind the
high Altar, where the holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles. Meditate how
the father and the Son sent the holy Ghost unto the Apostles in the
similitude of fiery tounges, and rested upon each of them, and were there by
confirmed in in faith so that they preached bouldly thorough out all the world.

Now prepare thy self to return again to thy home, comending thy self both
body and soul to almighty god, and go now once more to the holy Sepulcher
to take thy last leave.

The. 337. day. At the Sepulcher, and the mount of Caluary say here the Prayer
folwinge.
O My lord god, and Savior Jesus, I yeald thee humble thanks for my creation
and redemption in this place, and have by thy vocation and inspiration caled me
and brought me to the understanding and knowledge of thee and having so
patiently atte^ded me, fallinge so often in to many sins, and delivered me
from infinite periles, and afflictions, which I have justly deserved. I give
thee thanks for thy gifts and graces begune in me, and I beseech thee o lord
to reform me, and direct my ways, that I may in the end come to thy
everlasting glory. Amen.

An aduertisment.
ALL the good and devout Pilgrims having visited the holy places, in their
returning home look often times back again. so likewise the spitituall
Pilgrim may well look back unto the holy places, and especially he ought to
consider our Savior hanginge on the cross, to the end that the bitter death
of thy Savior go not out of thy heart.

First consider how the soul of our Savior hanging on the Cross regarded all
the sins, both mortal and venial, of all the world, for which he sighed
most bitterly* Do thou knock on thy breast and sigh for thy sins, for which
the Son of God has sighed most biterlie.

The 2, 8 day, From Jerusalem to Rama. Secondly meditate looking back to the
holy places, making thy prayer, and think what sorrow and grief the heart of
thy lorde-Iesus sufferred, when he thought and co^nsiderd what a small number
should participare of the fruits of his passion, the which he so willing^, he
sufferred; and with such excessive, love, as that he would rather sufferre for
every man once again, then that any through this defaulte should remain
lost, such was his ardent love to the ungrateful and hard hearts of outs.

The 2, 9 To Iapha. Thirdelie meditate of the great bitterness which the soul
of Christ endured on the Cross when he considered that religious persons and
clerks retired from the world, would yeat soil the^ selves with carnal works
for which he trembled and weepte on the Cross.

The 340 day, In the oulde sellers of Iapha. where the Pilgrims lodge.
Fourthlie consider the biternes of the soul of Christ when he considered that
the estate of marriage would be defiled with foul and execrable sins,
whereby so great a multitude of married people should be damned.

The 341. day, fifthly meditate what sorrow the soul of Jesus Christ was in
on the Cross, to think how the state of virginity should be defiled, so
many virgins loosing the crown of their virginities, by consenting to foul
and filthy thoughts and deeds, for which he sighed piteously.

The 342 day, sixthly consider the great sorrow of the heart of our Savior
Christ, to think upon the wonderful unthankfulness of man to his heavenly
father, for all the benifites, and passion of his only son bestowed on v^
with so great love.

The ^4.3 day, From Iapha to the ship of Saint Peter, recommending thee to S.
Fraucis and to al his order, recomme^ding thee to the holy Trinity. Give
thanks to our Lord who has conducted thee to these holy places, and that he
will be our guide and conducte us to his heavenly kingdom. when the ship
begins to go say Tedeu^. Seaue^tlhie meditate the bitter sorrow of the
soul of our Savior, considering that so many Christians should be damned
for there wicked life, and then he cried. My god, my god why have thou
forsaken me.

The 344. meditate in what grief the soul of Jesus was in to consider what
number of people should remain without the christian faith, and therefore
should never see the face of God.

The 345. day, meditate how the most noble soul of Jesus was exceeding
sorrowful, when he did consider that the grace of God should be of so little
estimation with many, or altogether clean rejected.

The ^46. day, meditate of the sadness of the^ soul of Jesus when he did forsee
and know, that yet so many Christians should go back and fall from the union of
holy church, and give them selves to diverse sects.

The 147. day, Meditate of the sadness of the soul of Jesus, when he considered
how often the son of god should be crucified again, by the occasion of
sinners and unbelieving people.

The 248. day, Meditate of the soraowe of the soul of Christ upon the Cross,
when he perceived so many people should take a just cause of a mendment of
life in hand, but not persevere in the same.

The 249, day, Approachinge to Cypres which contains, about it seven
Italian miles. Meditate of the great sorrow of the soul of Jesus, when he
considered the soul of man created to the similitude of god should be defiled
with sin.

The 250. day, In Cypres where Lazarus lined before he went to Marselles.
Meditate on the bitter sorrow the soul of Jesus suffered, when he considered
that the nature of man who was created to no other end but to desire heavenly
things, would apply it self so much to base and earthly things, and so defile
and spot it self.

The 251. day, Upon the mountain of the Cross in Cypres. Meditate of the
great sorrow the soul of Jesus had on the Cross, when he did see so fair an
ordinance of holy Religion should be overthrown, by gluttony, dronkennes, and
fleashly sins.

The 252. day, Meditate of the most^ bitter sorrow of Jesus when he
consi^^eced that charity, the service of god and his service, would decay, war
cold, and be almost abolished, in all estates.

The 253. day, Meditate of the sorrow of Jesus, when he saw the great confusion
that was to come upon sinners, at the hour of their death, for their
ingratitude.

The 254. day, Meditate of the sorrow of Jesus, when he did consider the great
sorrow, and il will of sinners, when they should be delivered to perpetual
damnation.

The 255. day Meditate of the great sorrow of Jesus, when he considered that
the habitation of the holy ghost, which is the soul of man, should be in many
the habitation of the devil.

The 256 day Meditate of the sorrow of Jesus when he did consider that one man
would by persuasion and exsam^^e of sin, lead another to damna^^on.

The 257. day, Meditate of the sorrow of Jesus when he did consider how the
devil would hinder so many noble creatures, to come again to their first
beginning.

The 258 day, Meditate of the great sorrow of Jesus when he did consider that
so many huminie creatures would receive the Blessed Each trist vow orthely,
which was one of the greast sorrows his soul suffered on the Cross.

The 259. day, Meditate of the great sorrow of Jesus when he did consider that
so many creatures should with mouth confess that they knew god, ^ad in their
works deny him.

The 260 day, Meditate of the sorrow of Jesus when he considered so many humane
creatures, would carry under a Religious habit a sleathly heart.

The 261 day, Meditate on the sorrow of Jesus soul, considering how small
regard should be made, of the extremities, cruel pains, and torments which he
suffered for us.

The 262 day, At Baffo where the 7. ^^^persdor lie.

Of the works pains, and pou^rtie of Jesus changed in to glory Meditate
how the eternal son of god after al his pains and tribulations, is received
of his father very joyfully, vith great gladness of all the Angelical Spirits.

The 263. day, Meditate with what triu^phantioy, not only the three kings, but
also all the heavenly powers, do make incessant joys, offeringe in heaven
without ceasinge, the goulde of love and charity, the Francumsence of
iubilation and thank sgeucinge, and the mirthe of honor and reverence, with
most sweet admiration.

The 264. day, Meditate how sweetly the most noble humanity of Christ is
^^alted and praised in heaven, for his circumcision, when his first blood was
shed on earth, and he was named Jesus.

The 265, day, Meditate of the imperial city of his father full of al joy and
sweetness, where our Lord Jesus sits in all glory, al sorrow and grief
being far from him.

The 266 day, Think how the passion of our Savior is like a sweet hearbour
or garden to them that are laden with the Cross of Penance temptation, and
tribulation, in the which singular comfort is to be found.

The 267. day, Meditate how amiablely the heavenly father embraces his most
dear son, who has always been so obediente unto him, even to the death of
the cross.

The 268 day, Meditate how the voice of the Son of god is heard so sweetly,
and produces incessantly the eternal and divine sapience the which although he
did here on earth also, yet was he not esteemed.

The 269, day, Meditate how sweetly our Savior takes the fruition, and sweet
influence, without any ceasing or intermission.

The 270, day, Meditate how Christ Jesus in heaven does enjoy his kingly
dignity, being in earth saluted king of the Jews in mockery.

The 271. day. Meditate how in heaven it is neither pain nor grief, to praise
and laud god, and our Savior Jesus, to wom it was no grief (for the ardent
love he had to man's salvation) to be contemned and mocked here on earth.

The 272. day, Meditate with what glory our Lord in heaven is compassed with
Seraphins, who here on earth was compassed and environed with sinners.

The 273. day, Meditate what joy of heart Jesus has now among the Cherubins,
in recompense of the great affliction of heart which he suffered an earth a
monge the multitude of the Jews.

The 274, day, Meditate how Christ is now inuirened with the diuiue brightres
and joy, for on the earth he was compassed with sadness upon sadness, when he did
sweat water and blood.

The 275. day, Meditate how Christ feels him self so much at ease, and
sweetly entreated, when he bears the voice of his friends sweetly reioycinge
in heaven for that on the earth he heard his enemies cryenge, we seek Jesus of
Nazareth.

The 276. day. Think how incessantly Christ is behoulden of his heavenly
father, and of all the celestial court, for that upon earth he had so gently
suffered, the unworthy and cruel countenance of his enemies, who so cruelly
had pulled him by the hear of his head and beard.

The 277. day, Think how joyfully Christ is now elleuated and rests sweetly
in the throane of his heavenly father, for that here on the earth, he lay
miserably under the feet of sinners, and was spurned and troaden of them with
great contempt.

The 278. day, Meditate how sweetly Christ rejoices for that he is the only
judge of mankind, who being upon earth, was by them judged to be whiped,
crowned with thorns, and crucified, and yet will be their mercifully judge.

The 279. day, Meditate how god the everlasting father crowns our Savior,
with the crown of everlasting glory, who being on earth carried and sustained
the most in famous Cross upon his shoulders for the health of us al.

The 280. day, Meditate how Christ in heaven is clad with glory and gladness
who on earth so wilinglie carried, the purple garment for mockery, shame, and
dishonor.

The 281. day, Meditate how his holy members are most sweetly united
together, and do give so sweet a smell, that al his elect are by the same
refreshed, who on earth suffered in all his members most greueous pains and
sorrows.

The. 281. day, Meditate how Jesus so sweetly feels him self now touchig his
sacred blood enclosed in his veins, who being on earth did loose al his
natural beauty.

The 283. day, Meditate how his divine face shines in heaven, which seamed on
earth to have lost al comely form and beauty because it was so changed and
disfigured with strokes and buffetts.

The. 284. day, Meditate what delicious savor Christ feels continually
proceedinge from his glorious humanity, in steed of the filthy savor he
suffered on earth, and cheiflie of the spittinge in his holy face.

The. 285. day, Meditate how Christ is compassed on the right hand of his
heavenly father with an innumetable multitude of Angels, who so infamously on
earth was hanged between two thieves.

The 286. day, Think how by the mecites of his passion he does obtain all the
delights aforesaid, with diverse other innumerable merits, al which descend and
flow upon sinners, by the streams and course of his mercy.

The 287. day, Consider how he drinks the wine of joy and everlasting love.
who on the Cross tasted of the bitter gaul and vinegar.

The 288. day, Meditate how Christ feels him self in respect of his
humanity being so high raised in joy and gladness, who being on earth suffered
so many abuses and dispisements.

The 289. day Meditate in what incredible rest and sweetness the soul of
Christ is in, aboundinge in all divine delights, which one the earth has
endured so many bitter sighs and sorrows.

The 290. day, Meditate with what sweetenes Christ is now an host to his
elect, whom he feeds and feasteth with diverse amiable and pleasant delights.

The 291 day, Meditate how love has opened the noble and divine heart of
Christ, from which issues the noble and sweet wine, which makes drunk all the inhabitants of heavenly Jerusalem.

The 292 day, Meditate how our noble Champion Christ Jesus shall return at the
last day, to give judgment on the quick and dead.

The 293, day, Meditate of the day of judgment when the voice of the majesty
of god shall be heard, which shall co^mande the thunder, lightninge, winds and
death, to go forth in their fury to the end that al flesh shall die, for the
day of judgment approaches.

The 294. day, Meditate how the winds, thunder, and lightninge shall rore one
against another whereby death shall come on al men for terror and fear.

The 295. day, Meditate in what* wrath and Ire the divine justice shall send his
Angels fainge, go with sound of trumpet and c^l al people before me to
iudment for I am now ready, and vvil judge al people according to their
works.

The 296. day, This day in Rhodes salute. S. John the Baptist, and all the
Parriarkes, and Prophets, because thou haste now received great knowledge of
their pomises and prophecies which they have long since foretold.

An Advertisement.
About this place often happens great tempests, by occasion of which,
follows. 17. exercises of the judgment and pains of the damned.

Meditate with what agilitie the Angels do fly out of heaven, and divide
them selves in to the four corners and winds of the world, to assemble al
people, cryinge by the sound of a Tro^per. (...) Arise ye dead and come to
judgment.

The. 297. day, Meditate how Christ will appear very terrible to al men, even
from Adam to the child last borne; and every one shall take his proper body,
and assemble him self to the valley of Iosaphat.

The. 298 day, Meditate of the horrible and dreadful estate of sinners cryinge:
woe, woe, woe;.

The. 299 day, Meditate in what horible manner the damned souls shall come out
of hell, and shall take again their stinkinge bodies, with noise, and terror
most dreadful and terrible

The. 300. day, Meditate of the poor souls remayninge then in Purgatory not
fully purged, and how that their horror, pain and affliction shall be
augmented, and shall cleanse them that they may be the sooner delivered.

The. 30^ day, Meditate how hard and insupportable it shall be to sinners, to
heat that dreadful se^tente, Goeyeecursed into everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. And what a terrible thing it shall be to heat the
damned to howl, roar, and lament.

The. 302. day* Meditate what a terrible thing the tuninge to and fro of the
deuilles shall be among the miserable and damned souls.

The. 303. day, Meditate of the great envy and malice of the Devils, who would
not that any one person should be saved.

The. ^04. day, Meditate how unwilling the sinners shall be to appear before
the judgment seat of the majesty of God, for that they certainly know their
everlasting damnation.

The. 305 day, Meditate with what great envy the Devil shall thrust forward the
damned prisons to go to judgment, and to make their account of al their evil
works, words. and thoughts, and to receive the most^ bitter sentence of the
judge.

The. 306. Meditate how ashamed the sinners shall be when god shall give the
whole world to understand their evil deeds, and there shall see and clearly
know, that they shall dwell for ever more in hell with the curssed Deuilles.

The. 307. Meditate what sorrow and anguishe the condemned sinners shall be in,
when they shall hear al creatures to consent to their damnation. and that no
man shall have pity, o^ compassion on them.

The. 308 Think how unwillingly sinner, shall be to behold the face of the
divine Majesty, which then shall be very terrible, yet not with sta^dinge they
shall be constrained to behold it.

The. ^09, day, Think how the great number of the damned shall far exceed the
number of the saved: and how that many are caled, but few are ^nosen.

The. 310 day, Think how horrible it shall be to the damned, that their
damnation shall be everlasting.

The. 311. day, Think and think again that there is not so little a sin
committed in this world, but shall have in hell his particular pain, if it be
not amended by penance.

The ^12 day, Meditate how god shall harden his heart, and be highly offended
with sinners and wicked persons, when Justice shall shut the gates of hell, and
lock them in, which never shall be opened.

Of the Joys of Paradise.
The 313. day. Meditate what great joy the Angels and all the elect shall have,
when they return to heaven with great triumph with their Lord and maker.

The 314. day, Meditate how sweetly all the saved souls shall rejoice, when
they shall hear the sweet and melodious word of the Judge, saying. Come ye
blessed of my father and posesse the kingdom prepared for you before the
beginning of the world.

The 315. day, Meditate what praises and thanksgeueing shall be yealded to god
the father eternally, by his elect and saved creatures, for that by his grace
he has preserved them.

The 316. day, Meditate how the most excellent praise of Sanctus, Sanctus,
Sanctus, is song in heaven without ceasinge. blessed be thou o Christ
eter^nally, that haste redeemed and saved us.

The 317. day, Think how the heavenly spi^ittes, and saved sowles, do rejoice
in behouldinge the face and pleasant visage of our Lord, out of which may be
drawn alioy and pleasure.

The 318. day, Think how al, saved creatures do now rejoice in making joy,
being set at the heavenly table with full delighte^, perpetual rest, puisance
and riches, and do drink of the abundance of gods house, and talkinge of
such great joy* as never ^ie has se^ne, care has heard, nor ^^uer ^ntre^ in
to the heart of man.

The 3^9 Meditate how god has created the ^urning Seraphins, most noble, and
incomparable faier shaning a houe al Angelical creaturs. And how the beutie of
the most high and holy Trinity, shines infinitlie about the ^outie of the
Seraphin^.

The 320 day, meditate how the roble Scraphins burning in the love of God, do
joy without ceasing in the divine fulness, in behoulding continually, the
heavenly and most divine iufluence between the father and his welbeloued-Sonne.

The 321. day, Think how the noble Cherubins, have there regard amiablie
fixed on god, and do admire of the excellent sweetenes and influence, of his
most noble diui^iti^.

The 322 day Think how much wisdom is given to the most excellent Cherubins,
whereby they have knowledge of their Creator, and do enjoy the illumination
of the most high divinity.

The 323. day meditate how the Throanes do rest the selves quietly in God, and
do enjoy a marvelous sweetene^ in him.

The 324. day, meditate how all the happy spirits of the caelestiall Courr^
abounding with innumerable and inestimable delights, without ceasing do give
continual praise, to the most high and holy Trinity.

The 325. day, meditate how the holy Trinity is the fountain and increated
nature, from whence al things do descend, in form and Creation.

The 362. day, meditate how the holy Trinity is the clear glass wherein all
Saints do behoulde and contemplate, the divine power, wisdom, and boun^ie,
them selves also, and all things

The 327. day, Meditate how the father without ceasinge gives influence
ingenderinge his son in new delights of joys.

The 328. day, Meditate of the person of the Son, who is the eternal
wisdom of the father, being eternally engendered and borne of his father, as a
most shinning beam of the light of the Son.

The 329. day, Meditate how the Son of god rejoices all the heavenly city,
and gives recreation to all the blessed spirits, who without any means, are
united and conjoined with god.

The. 330. day, Meditate how the Son of god loves the Father, and the Father
the Son, and what great joy the Son has in behouldinge his Father, and
again the Father in behouldinge his Son.

The. 331. day. Think of the holy ghost proceeding from the father and the
Son, and how continually he fills all them that are in heaven with the
pleasant sap of joy, and entertayneth them without ceasing with fre she joy.

The 3^2, day* To S. Georges Church in Venice where is his arm and his hand.

Meditate of the great joy that the Queen of Paradise and mother of god
Marie has at this present, of the honor that shallbe showed to her evermore
in heaven of God, and of al faued creatures.

The 334 day, To S. Barb aras Church where her body is, and a great bone of S.
Christopher. Meditate how the sweet flower of the Virginity of Marie
incessa^tly marueleth, for that the Creator of all creatures was so much
humbled as to suck her pappes*

The ^3^. day, Meditate how the mother of God is now an Aduocatrixe and a
pacifier of al sins, before out heavenly father, with her Son showing her
Virginal pappes, for the which all humane creatures which be saved; yeald
therefore to her evermore praise, honor, and thankes-geuing.

The ^35. day, meditate how great the sweetenes is which M^cie tak^th now in
the glory of Paradise, for the riches of the nolie G^o^t is opened unto her.

The 336. day, Within Venice where thou art to reckon vv^th the Patron of the
galley S Peter wi^h h^s com^anie. If thou haste satisfied all thou ^rom^sed
him in the ^0. date and give him thanke^ with some prayer to his honor:
Meditate vv^at great ^oy the Queen of Paradise has being set next the most
holy and glorious Trinity.

The ^37. day To Palia. Meditate what great joy Macie takes in that she has
been the another of the euerla^ting word.

The ^38. day, meditate how sweetly Marie lowly gi^eth th^nkes to the holy
Trinity, and gi^eth thanks without ceasing, and knows perfectly she is
beloved.

The ^^9. day, Meditate how our Lady is sweetly en^^roned with holy Angels
and the heavenly noste, and how her ^rightnes and theirs compared together, are
like a ^hadow to the bright Sun.

The ^40 day, Meditate how the Apo^tels rejoice in heaven clothed with ^auce,
pou^sered wit^ stars of Christian faith, ^hining like the sun.

The ^4^. day. A^ Tr^nt where is the body of the Infance Simeon vvh^e was
martyred ^y the Infide^ls meditate how greatly the Apostels rejoiced for that
they shall be set of twelve seats iudginge al^ nations of the earth.

The ^41. day Meditate how the holy virgins do follow the Lamb of God
clothed with long white robes ^hini^g with cleannes and Virgintie.

The ^4^ day meditate with what f^veeroues the espouses of the lamb who
Virgin^s do carry the singular garland and Cro^ne of gold, (which is caled
Au^eola) over the faier Corone of the heavenly glory.

The ^44. day, Meditate how heartily the spouses of the lamb are beloved of the
holy Trinity because that for the love of him they continued, notanie white
soptted or defiled.

The ^45. day, Meditate how the holy Virgings do receive of our lord Jesus,
the collar of gold with other ornaments for their necks, by most sweet
love.

The 346. day, meditate how the Patriarckes and Prophets rejoice without
ceasing for that they see in glory hi. whose death accomplished all which they
did Prophecy of him.

The 347. day, Meditate how sweetly the holy m^rtyres do rejoice with our
Lord for that for the love of him they have shedd their precious blood.

The 348. day, Meditate what companies of holy Martirs with Palms in their
hands in sign of victory and triumph, proceed in order before the Holy
Trinity and receive abundant treasures of heavenly joy and glory.

The. 349. day, Meditate how the holy Martyrs do become drunk with the
sweet fountain of heavenly comforts, for that they suffered such bitter death
for Christ's sake.

The. 350. day, Meditate how in the holy Confessors, the merits of their
holy devout thoughts and contemplations, is now brightly shininge in them.

The. 351. day, Meditate how all the Saints in Pardice have done, no one so
little a good deed, but has now his particular recompense and reward.

The 352. day, Meditate how all the elect Sanites of god do now triumph in
Paradise, and are highly rewarded there for all their labors.

The. 353. day, Meditate how all the Saints are comforted in heaven, for all
their travail they have so patiently suffered on earth.

The. 354. day, Think how all the Saints in heaven are now crowned with
crowns of inestimable joy, for that they have here on earth behaved them
selves so valiantly, in fightinge and conqueringe, the world, the fleash, and
the Devil.

The 355. day, Think o Pilgrim for what life thou art created and made of thy
creator. Wherefore behave thy self valiantly and fight manfully whilst thou art
here, for the life of man is but a war-fare on earth.

The. 356 day, Think o devout soul, to what holy and happy end thou art
elected, for the which cause bear thy adversities with all patience, and suffer
gladly here for a little time

The. 357. day, Meditate of the soueraing and clear brightness of everlasting
life, and humbly crave that the same blessed brightness may happpely shinein thy
soul.

The 358. day, Think of the most pleasant sweetenes of the everlasting life,
and heartily pray that thou may even now somewhat feel and taste the same, to
the end that thy dry heart may be sweetened and comforted there with.

The 359 day, Meditate of the most happy felicity of the eternal life, and
desire with most earnest heart that thou ma^^t have comfort of the same, and
be filled there with.

The. 360. day, you may visit at Colin the bodies of the. 3, ^inges o^ Saint
Vrsula, and the XI. thousand Virgin^ Meditate of the life to come which is
^e^er to die, being without a^ sor^^v^or want of any thing, and desire of thy
lord god that once thou may behold and enjoy the face of ^is di^ine Ma^e^te

The, 361. day, you may visit at Ac^n the Smock of the B. Virgin, the Hose of
Saint Joseph, and many other relics Meditate how joyfully one day God the
Fa^h^r vvil give him self to the power of thy memory.

The. 362. day At Maistrike is the body of Saint Seruace cosen to our Savior
in the fourth degree. Think how svvetly they Son of God shall be wholy
enclosed in the power of thy understanding.

The. 393. day, Meditate how comfortably the Holy Ghost like running streams
of water, shall be continualy povvringe in the desiers of thy heart, with
great and unspeakable sweetness to thy soul

The. 364. day, Meditate how the Holy Trinity shall aboun^antly fille thee
with al kind of heavenly delights in his glorious kingdom of Paradise, yea
with much more then either eye has seen, eat has heard, or the heart of
man is able to conceive.

The 365. day, At thy lodginge in London, or from whence thou departedst.
Meditate how al faithful Pilgrims, after this mortal Pilgrimage, shall be in
great ease, rest, and svvetnes for evermore, and shall remain happy with out
end. The which, the Holy Trinity, by the intercession of the Blessed mother,
and of al Saints grant us, Amen.


