VISIONES RERVM.

THE VISIONS OF THINGS. OR Four Poems.

1. Principium and Mutabilitas Rerum. Or, The beginning and Mutabilitie of all
things. 2. Cursus and Ordo rerum. Or, Art and Nature. 3. Opineo and Ratio
rerum. Or, Wealth and Poverty. 4. Malum and finis rerum, Or, Sin and Virtue,
concluding with the last Judgment and end of all things.
Wherein the Author expresses his invention by way of dream.

By JOHN HAGTHORPE Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop and are to be sold at his house in Distaffe
Lane at the sig^e of the Dolphin. 1623.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND most excellent CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, Earl of Chester, etc.
AS all Eyes gaze upon the Sun (most excellent Prince) the Treasurer of Light
and Time: so for the most part all thoughts level at the bestower of dignities
and rewards, the Prince, who resembles the Sun in his sphere. And though it
be true that to me (the least and most unfortunate of all men, wrapped up through
infinite calamities in a Cimmerian night of unknown obscurity) whether I
consider the humbleness of my Muse, or Fortunes, it may seem sufficient, to
obtain by reflection even the least heat and light from the smallest star in
your Horizon. Yet having ^o particular respect, nor influence from any of
^hese, being indifferently a stranger to all, and therefore fearing a wrong
star, like a bad Seaman, ignorant (save by uncertain relation) both of their
aspects and effects, their diverse motions propper, for^t, etc. Ignorant of all
planetarie reuolutions and eccentricities: and, in this Age of doubtfulnesse,
where the most certain things are most subject to question, seeing least
reason (with Copernicus) to believe, that which strives most to enfo^ce the
sense. I resolved upon a sudden boldness to look up to your Princely light,
constant still in its course and shining. And having of late presented your
Royal father with a small book of Meditations, and a Suite. So renewing the
said Suite, I mak^ bold now again to present your Grace with these most rude
and most unpolished lines, but honest matter, and not unfit for your
contemplation, which my poor Mus^ having wandered round the World to gather,
lays down at length at your Princely feet (as a measure of sweetes and
spices) brought from the gardens of India: upon which if it please your Grace
to cast but the least beam of your bright splendour and perfection^, it kindles
in me such a flame of affectionate zeal to to your Princely service, as the
length of time can never extinguish.

Your Graces most poor but loyal and devoted servant, JOHN HAGTHORPE.

TO THE READER.
REader I present to thy view some few things most obuious and most necessary
for every man's contemplation. Namely,

1 Time, Folly, Reason, with the mutabilitie of all things. 2 Nature and Art,
the two Parents of all things. 3 Wealth and Poverty the two balances of all
things. 4 Sin and Virtue, the recompensers of all things.
With the descriptions of most of them ab effectis.

The first shows, how Folly first entertaines us at our entrance into the
house of Time, del^ding us with a more certain assurance of things most
incertaine (until Reason approaching, brings us truer releation, showing the
mutabilitie, vncertainti and change of all things.

In the second, Art and Nature seem to vie which of them ought to be
accounted the more indulgent mother to mankind, with many reasons to to
intimate whether it were better to be governed by Art and Discipline, or to
live as some of the West Indian savages ^o, only by the rule of Nature.

The third objects a contentious litigation between Wealth and Poverty, with
the most frequent objections used on either part, their events and accidents
incident, wherein I must entreat the judicious Reader not to think me
Satericall (as perchance some carper will) but rather that I aim at the Ideas
of the things, which I protest is truth.

The last seems to demonstrate the misery which Virtue suffers under the
burden of Sin: wher^n Sin seems to erect four Altars to her self, where
she receives adoration and sacrifice from the high and mighty. What the scope
of this is, the Reader may quickly see; and it is concluded with that which
concludes all things, the last Judgment.

Now for this way of expression that I seem thu^ to present things past,
present, and to come; the beginning progress, continuance and end of all
things in a Dream. Let no man marvel, for this life is no better, whether
you respect the shortness and uncertainty. Prosperity is a pleasant Dream,
Adversity a troublesome: only the good or bad euen^ is all. To which (gentle
Reader) I leave thee wishing thee as my self, not what thou desire (...)
deseruest.

I. H.

Visiones Rerum.
Principium and Mutabilitas rerum.
CONTAINING A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE PALACE of old Cronos or Time; and Logos
his speech concerning Mutation.

CRONOS, Time. MORIA, Folly. LOGOS, Reason.
1.
BE still a while ye Wolves that me devour,
You sadder thoughts and sorrows of my (...)
Which through my soul an Icy numnes power,
And wholly rob me of that better part,
Which God and Nature did me once impart,
Until I briefly can unfold and show
An accident be fell me long ago.
2
Which Story that I here intend to write,
A Dream or Vision is that me befell,
When drowned in deepest sleeps of Darksome night,
I seemed transported (how I cannot tell)
Into a Palace, which did so excel
For glorious structures, that mine Artlesse pen
Mu^t pass their praise, unfit to utter them.
3
A stately Hall me thought I entered,
The Pauement set with Marble and pure Gold;
An A^ure roof, with Stars illumined,
And in the same a Sun I did behold,
Which seemed by Art about the Center ^old;
And Silver Cinthia thirteen times the year,
Seeming quite darkened, and as often clear.
4
All sorts of creatures proper to the Land,
All those the watery deepes inhabiting;
Or such as twixt them both indifferent stand:
All those the (...) Region traveling;
All Shrubs or Trees in Earth, or Sea, that spring,
Framd for Man's pleasure, and his use alone,
Within these walls were wrought in wood and bone.
5
Where whilst I wandered with no ^mall content,
Gazing about, aloft I ch^nc't to spy
These lines: Thou Mor^all that art hither sent
To Cronos house, prepare thy self to die.
This touch^ me deep: for often heard had I
Of cruel (...).
Cronos, and his cutting Sith,
Often (tho I felt it not) the effects did lithe*
6
But straight there did before mine eyes appear,
A wanton Dame that came with folli^k grace,
Moria vain, who scoft my drooping cheer:
Fain^ Heart (quoth she) what means this sorrow base?
Can lusty Youth fear Cronos wrinckled face?
This Dotard shall not find thee many a year.
Lo, while he sleeps, I Will steal his Wings and's Gear. * Folly.

7
This said, away she went, and straight returned,
Bringing a Read whereon she got astride.
Me thought 'twas brave to see her thus adorned.
Two wings she fitted then with nimble pride
To her own shoulders, hanging down each side;
And to be sure Times Glass should not run out,
She broke that all, and strewn the sand about.
8
Then (quoth she) for thy Hat (and reached her wing)
Pluck out this feather. it is an ornament
For all my followers well fashioning;
And such as scorn old Cronos detriment.
Come, let us spend our time in merriment;
Let Us laugh, let us gather Flowers Here many a Dance
She learnt me, and much wanton Dalliance.
9
But straight she vanished even as Phantasmes do,
Or Demons, which do ayrie shapes acquire;
When Cronos in the throng himself did show,
And both his old arms, and his Sith did tire
With killing, and left me her tales t'admire:
For, noting Cronos had both Sithe and Wings,
I thought her false, and longed to know these things.
10
Within this Hall a world of people were,
All Cronos children (yet destinguisht tho)
Some Friends, and some as Servants did appear.
Then looked I round, wishing to see or know
Some stranger like my self: and thinking so,
A thing of greatest strangenes did afford
It self to view, which here I will record.
11
Amongst the rest an Mutation, Times eldest child.
Actor did I spy,
Whose force (tho weak in show) did Giants prove,
(I say I saw, but nothing perfitly,
For in a Cloud it ever seemed to move)
A mighty Globe; it seemed to roll and shoue,
Where millions sought with ladders still to attain
The top, but when she st^rd, still down they came.
12
This made me now wish more then erst I did,
Some wise Oe^ipus to show me all;
Nor sooner had I wished, but I descried
A reverend Sire, which gen^ly did me call
Into a secret corner of this Hall;
And first of all himself to me he named
Reason.
Logos, and afterward this speech he framed.
13
Young man (quoth he) I see thou lately art
Armed within this place of misery;
I am to let thee know it is my part
and Office to direct this company:
Tho most of them indeed my precepts fly,
Trusting Moria rather, and her Mates;
But I of thee divine some better Fates.
14
Thou see how here each has his several guise,
Each follows his own way, and choose their like.
Some here consume their time in flatteries,
And some in Pride: diverse delight to strike
And kill their fellows: others nothing like,
But ease and belly-cheare (to feel, to taste)
But Cronos sweepes them all away at last.
15
A few there be, whose well directed mind
Retire themselves from forth the press and throng,
Whose thoughts to contemplation are designed:
Not to prevent old Cronos, nor prolong,
But to prepare for what they cannot shun:
And to avoid Morias cunning bai^es,
Who first abusde the entering at the Gates.
16
Logos (quoth I) Gramercy, I do owe
To thee my self: thast cured my doubts and fears.
And now my chief desires remains to know
Her, that behind that turning Globe appears.
Content (quoth he) lend then a while thine ears;
While these feast, fight, or sleep; my task shall be
To spend an hour upon her History.
17
It is Mutation, Goddess great of things.
That in her turn does triumph over all;
Who tramples on the heads of mighty Kings,
And makes the strongest Towers demolisht, fall,
Of whom I muse, and marvel ever shall,
That ancient Rome such Temples should erect
To triuiall things, and yet her power neglect.
18
For if the course of mundane things below,
Be guided by the ^uer chan^ing Fate
Of Heavenly Orbs, from whence the causes flow
Of their effects, and what they procr^ate.
Her birth is then Divine, and may relate,
And challenge Alta^s far more due, then either
Fortune, Lyeus, Venus altogether.
19
Some few examples therefore will I take,
And small remonstrance from the memory
Of former times, her forces known to make;
That men asleep rockt by (...),
Which vainly dream here of eternity,
May wake and see, since Human and Divine
Things feel her force, they must account with Time.
20
That they which d^e repute their states so fixed,
As Lightning cannot blast, misfortune shake,
Might hence observe, the web of chance is mixed,
And as they give themselves, so must they take,
Whereof examples thousands may we make
From every Age; yet shall a few suffi^e,
Drawn both from Men's and Times best memories.
21
First, to begin with Heaven; the Heavenly The fall and mutation of the Angels
into devils.
Quires
Have not been ever from her power exempt,
But fell by Pride into eternal fires;
From complete Joy, from happy true content,
To be tormented there, and to torment:
Where tho the rest's by one example warned,
Yet are not men by thousand thousands armed.
22
The Change in the Planets.
Lamps of Heaven, the Planets change above,
As well in sight, aspect, as influence.
The Sun from his diurnall arch does move
After his proper motion, either hence
Certain degrees, or nearer us; from whence
Proceed the diverse seasons, Autumn, Spring,
Winter and Summer, whose change, change ^ch thing.
23
And gadding Phoebe, whose still changing face,
Does so much spot her female chastity,
Varies not only in her way, but pace;
And to our seeming in her quantity,
Which some ascribe to excentricitie.
But all of them till Plato's year be run,
Stray from the place of their creation.
24
The The continual change and transmigration in the Elements.
Elements, on which each thing's composde,
(Beneath the Moon) being and Vegetiue
To daily transmigrations are disposde,
And among themselves retain a mutual strife
Each to become other (much like our life)
Air does sometimes to Fire or Water run;
And Fire an earthly habit does put on.
25
Some think, the The cause of Fountains and Rivers, according to Aristotle,
by reason of the Airs condensation and changing into water.
Air in hollow Caves condenc't
To be the Founts of Or^noque or R^yne:
But all men see the vapors which (...)
And ra^ified, ambitiously do clime
To th'Ayres cold Region, whence they* straight decline
To snow^e Clouds conucrted, then to ^aine,
And seeking so their native place again.
26
The The generation of Thunder.
hot dry ^umes with watery clouds shut in,
Enuiron'd round, and as in prison gyude,
To struggle straight for liberty begin,
Tho long in va^ne, repulst on every side;
Until at last (enflamde) ^hey flames forth glide,
Shunning their foes embracements, while their thunder
Amaze the people, both with fear and wonder.
27
The The change of Winds, Seas, Days, Nights, Winter, Summer, etc.
Winds still change, the Seas still ebb and flow;
The Days succeed the Nights, Nights follow Days.
The checquered Meades give place to Frosts and Snow;
And cloudy Winter, when the Sun^e displayes
His Sun-daies suit, her sto^my Camp does raise,
And yields to conquering Time, as Time must do
To him that Earth shall change, and Heaven to.
28
Who maruels now if ha^lesse The fall of Adam, and his change from great
happiness to unspeakable misery.
Adam fel^
From Innocence, and from his blessed estate,
His earthly part being stuff so mutable*
Subjected unto change by laws of Fate,
And influence of Stars contaminate
Amongst things ever changing here confinde?
Or that to's issue he this plague resignde?
29
Who maruels now, that Change and vi^issitude of Greatness.
Princes, great and wise,
Are subject to her power among other things.
The Assirian Monarchs, whose great Emperies,
Reached Western (...), first example bri^gs;
First, King, then Madman, Beast, yet last a King,
And Ze^xes he that made the (...) ^lote,
Who fled from Salamine with one poor bote.
30
That Croessus, whom old Solo^; wit implored,
To cen^ure no man happy till his end;
Those hidden Caske^s that he so adored,
Proved but a bayte his Neighbor King to send
To's (...), where recording this his Friend,
(...) guies him Life and State,
Least some should make him like unfortunate*
31
Caesar and Pompey, that with tragedies
Filled this Worlds grand cirque. Iugurth, Hannibal,
Cassius, Brutus, both the Anthonies,
Make all repayment when revenge does call;
And some by foes, some by themselves do fall:
But diverse others far more strangely feel
The Effects of our great Goddess changing wheel.
32
Great Marius, sprung but from rusticke sire,
And in the fields of Arpos nourished;
First, but a Legionarie, rising higher,
Was sixth time Consul; lastly, banished,
In ruined Carthage forced to beg his bread:
Yet after all, by lands and seas thus tossed,
Did with far greater glories then he lost.
33
Why should I hear Sertorius relate,
That tasted erst so many ebbs and flows?
Agathocles, a Potters son, attained the Kingdom of Sicily, and being driven
from his Kingdom, yet again regained it, and in his old age again lost all,
and died in misery. Iustine.
Agathocles? or woeful Mithridates Kindred in his Infancy sought his life many
ways, setting him to manage a fierce Horse, which danger by his dexterity he
escaped. They attempted the like by Poison, and thereby compeld him for
safeguard of his life to live four years in the Wilderness. After which
reassuming his state and kingdom, his wife (having played false) seeks to
poison him; which he escapes by his Antidotes. Grows mighty; conquers diverse
Kingdoms with good success. But making war with the Romans, he suffers all
the changes and adversities of Fortune with great constancy (the very Elements
fighting against him, and his most trusty Servant betraying his children to
the Romans); till his own Son rising against him, and besieging him,
constrained him at last to kill himself. Iustine.
Methridate,
Then whom none tasted greater wealth or woes?
Valerian, Emperor of Rome, being overcome in battle by Sapor, King of the
Parthians, was made his Foote-stoole.
Valerian (Sapors Footstool) each man knows.
And, Gelnier, Vandal Prince, compeld to beg
Three To wipe away his tears: To make him merry: To relieve his hunger.
things, a Sponge, a Harp, a Loaf of bread.
34
^ut no example does illustrate more
The power of our Mutation, then the pride
^f Bajazet, whom (...) adore,
Coop^ in a Cage* that (...)-like lived and did.
^ut here at home I (...) have esp^de
Eclipst; the British Eledur^s thriee
Enthroned, deposde; and our late Edward twice*
35
The The change and demolition of Cities.
Courts where heretofore the Trojan Knights
And all this (...) pomp did keep;
And where the tents were pight of haughty Greeks,
Now on their back the Plowman furrows deep,
And silly Shepherds feed their nibling Sheep.
Stupendous Babell to, that lasting wonder,
L^es with her name entombed, her ashes under.
36
And Babylon (where Chaldian Ninus reigned,
And Percian ^yrus conquered) by whose ^owres
Heavens studded Canopie did seem sustained;
Her guilted (...), her vaulted Orchards, Bowres,
And pleasant soil, made ^at with fertile showers,
To dens of Beasts and Th^eues converted be,
And barren Sands, as Esaias did foresee.
37
Where Is stately Jericho and strong Acre?
What Is Egypts Thebe:, her Alexandria?
Where Is E^batane, and mighty Niniuie?
What Is ancient Sydon and C^saita?
And Tire, whose Daughters Leptis, Vtica,
And Carthage? tho they life to others gi^e,
Have long ago themselves disseast to li^e.
38
What of the E^hesians glory is become,
Built for the honor of Diana's grace?
The stately Temple of proud (...),
Where Golden veins did (...) and enchase
Each costly Stone? Alas, in deep disgrace.
The Labyrinthes of Candie and of Nile?
Some no where found, the rest are ruins vile.
39
What Is now the shells, where sometime Athens grew,
And Lacedemon that so much did prize
Wise Solons and Luurgus Laws? where is now
Delightful Deinde reductum pro fundum littus in finum Baias apperit, aqua s
que calidas, and ad voluptatem and ad sanandos morbos accommodissimas. Strab.
Geographicorum, lib. 5.
Ba^a with her Luxuries?
Great Cuma, vetustissimum Chalcedensium and Cumeorum aedificium antiquitate
cunctas Sicilliae and Italiae vrbes antecellit. Strabo. Ibidem.
Cuma to entombed in tuins lies?
And modern Rome does now no more extol
Her self for Vaults* Circques* Collumnes, Capitol.
40
Nor does our Grandam singlely admit
These marks of hers, and changes in her face*
Whereby she seems like a Lover stripped
Of choicest Jewels, yielding chiefest grace,
But her rich intrals suffer in like case;
Even Tagus Golden streams are grown so poor,
Because the Hills their tributes pay no more. (1) Changes in the intrals of
the Earth, her Mines, and Treasures exhausted; those places that in former
times have been rich, becoming poor.

41
And but that Nature like a frugall Dame,
Does in her secret Cabinet still hold
Some thing for after times (for fear the shame
Of poverty should brand her being old,
Or Children tax her of unkindness) Gold,
Rich stones, and Minerals, this lauis^ time,
I think, to glase their places would resign.
42
And yet not these alone her forces feel,
Paying Allegiance to her powerful Name;
Not Angels, Stars, Fire, Air, Men, Towns, Gold, Steel,
But Countries and whole Nations do the same;
But even Changes of Religion.
Religion subject does remain
To change ^o in external form and place,
That men mistake her Robes, her Rites, her face.
43
For (all her old apparel thrown away,
Both Ar^ns Ephod, and his Incense too;
And all those Lambs and Goats that each where lay
On fuming Altars) her old servants now
Mutiny against her, her new tyres mis-know;
And while themselves lie plunged in Hell black night
Of Ignorance, say others lack their sight.
44
The Jerusalem.
place where erst were holy* Co^enants made,
And where Iehoua Marriage (...) did knit
With his dea^e (...), now (...) does (...),
And Irreligion and (...) ^it
Triumphing with an insolence unfit,
And true Religion banished quite away,
Is no where known within those coasts to stay*
45
And Rome where once the Martyrs blood did rai^e,
To moist the seed of Christianity.
Africa (tho nearer to the Sun) and
In utter darkness now be nighted lie,
And know it not (the greater misery.)
Fair Italy, that counted once the World
All Barbarous, for barbarismes abhord.
46
Religion there is become a very scorn,
Their Cannons and traditions have her plac^,
Which like false witnesses they still subborne,
To testify vntr^ths against her face:
But not content to do her one disgrace,
Simonie, Murder, Pride, Hypocrisy,
Lust, Blasph^my, exile her utterly.
47
Again, the North that sometime did produce
Nothing but darkness, that did naught good keep
In her frozen man^ions, naught but Snowes, Fogs, Dews,
And Icie Mountains floting in the deep;
The foster of Stupiditie and Sleep,
The parent of vnpollisht saluage minds,
Both fierce and bloody, like the Silua^e kinds,
48
Is now become more blessed then other Climes,
For pure Religions true profession:
For (that which was (...) former time^),
Her warm Zeal (...) in the (...) That is in Iseland, and some parts of
Norway, (...) the cir^le Artick.
Zone:
For here with us Religion has her Throne;
Justice and Mercy (...) at either hand,
And Truth, her (...), does before her stand.
49
Behind her come Humility and Peace,
Plenty and Charity (both wondrous aged)
And tho Bellona and Erennis fierce,
Alecto and the Furies all enraged
With this her glory, have themselves engaged
Against-her train, in hope to work her spite;
Yet guards of Angels throw them at her feet.
50
And all her Courts with Princely Servants shine:
The best of Kings her Harrold is become*
Proclaiming both her worth to present Times;
And to succeeding Ages; while his own
(Out-lasting Time) eternal shall become
Then Arts and Arms, and all the other Graces,
Are ranckt about her in their several places.
51
But now, dear Clio, I thine aid impiore,
T'impart some portion of thy sacred skill,
Or sweet Euterpe of thy Nectard store,
Into my brain some scruple to distill,
Till I have shown with this my rustic quill,
The various change of ^* Body and of Mind
By Logos, to this Micr^cosme assigned* 1. The changes Men suffers in Body.

52
This lesser World (quoth he) the (...) map*
Of Fire and Water, Earth and (...)*
The Sea of change, the subject of (...);
The Bulwatke against a world of (...)*
Oh that the Heavens had (...)*
To write the (...) of this little thing*
Which learned (...) ^all the Worlds great King*
53
The wondrous changes which it does admit,
First, from not being once, to come to be;
Then from a rude vnpollisht Chaos yet,
For to be (...) a thing to hear and see:
And from a thing of such infirmity,
That creepes amongst the dust, and li^ks the mold,
To grow a Man of Courage stout and bold.
54
Then from a thing of such accomplished form,
Whom Nature has decreed with all the best,
Both of her skill and treasures to adorn
With fairest beauties, having right impressed
Both Soul and Body; far before the rest
Imparting wit, and memory to know
Both things above, and in the earth below.
55
With crisped locks out-shining Libian Gold;
With skin for whitenes passing Atlas snow;
And (...), the Pearls in stately Ormus sold;
And cheeks, the Roses that in Jury grow:
Whose eyes like two pure Crystal* Heavens show;
Whose lips as Cherries, breath as incense sweet^,
And tongue as sweetest Music does delight.
56
That such an one (...) a span of Time
Be thus disro^de of (...) excellence,
So changed I sa^ (by (...) divine)
For our (...) high offense,
^
^
^
57
Should turn like those scratcht by the Beldam Ape,
Where Pendentes que genas and tales aspice rugas, quales vmbriferos vbi pandit
Tabraca saltus. In vetula scalpit iam matter simia bucca. Iuuenal. Sat. 10. 193.
Tabraca her shadie Groves displaies.
What change of more amazement can one shape,
Then this Times Map of ruin and disgrace;
Deaf, Sinew-shrunke, the story of ill days;
Callender of Disease, which last returns
All frosted ore, a banquet for the Worms.
58
Now here again an Of the Soul briefly.
Ocean should I enter,
Of stormy billows, where these barks of yours
Are bruisde and beaten, while abroad they venture
From our known coasts to gather gaudy flowers,
With vain Moria in her fatal Bowres;
Where against the Capes of Pride and Lust they run*
Often split before their Voyage be begun.
59
The passions of the Soul I should (...)*
Which is a sea of more extended (...);
And where more rudely crossing (...) press
Each other, then in The Ocean can be found
In Malstrom, or the (...) Sound^*
For here ten thousand contraries (...),
Both frozen Ice, and Aetna's burning flame*
60
Camelions do not colors faster change
Then these affections: nor do idle men
In wax or paper form more anticks strange
Then may be noted in the souls of them,
Whom Logos does not compass in, and hem:
New passions, and irregular desires,
New motions and mutations turning Gyres.
61
While tossed with feauours and contrary fits,
Of seeming zeal, but true Hypocrisy,
Now Hope wins ground, and straight Despair that gets;
Now Avarice, now Prodigality;
Now haughti^ thoughts, then great Humility;
Both burning Anger, and chill frozen Fear,
Do^ in their turns insult and dominere.
62
Envy, Revenge and Malice others whet,
To perpetrate in human bloody acts,
By Sword and Poison their intents to get;
Or (worst of all) by some infernal pacts:
Which done, the sweetness of those filthy facts
Tur^e into horror and confounding fear,
They wi^h (...) thousand deaths, their c^science clear^*
63
Many there be (...) Ambition^ car,
Do madly (...) the Alpine Mounts,
To get beyond all (...) and (...) far:
But find (...) of their accounts,
Not free from (...) and (...)* at the founts
Of all those (...) ^epent
That ever near (...) they went*
64
Men seek for things they wish they had not found;
They wish for that which makes them often lament;
Lament that lost, which made their griefs abound,
And grieve for lack of that they must repent:
If had, men kiss and kill incontinent.
They pine with love, and yet extremely hate,
Whom so they loved, with having saciate.
65
Now plumpe cheek't mirth, now sadness they commend,
Now sweet content yet plunge themselves in care:
To fatting ease, and sleep their Youths they bend,
And in old Age, their limbs forget to spare
Toyling for gain, whereof they loose their share,
Both thanks and travail: thus are mortal Hearts
The stage where vainest Actors play their parts.
66
Sometime they praise the Country, then the Town;
Now hi^h estate, now humble, low degree,
Now fruitful traua^le, straight soft beds of Down;
Now Courtly greatness pleases: by and by
The life retired, and leisure for to d^e.
Now bloody Ensigns, and the Cannons sound;
The^ straight way Peace, whence sweeter tones redound.
67
The married man commends the single life,
And liberti^, detesting to be tide
To still renewing cares, and wanton strife:
Yet (freed again) he cannot so abide.
He pin^s; till he some second war have tried
In all affections gidd^ly they roue,
Not constant what to hate, or what to love*
68
No certain state of goodness do they prove,
Or badnesse here: for both do by degrees
Unto their proper periods still move.
Hell is the end assigned to those that leese
The time, and grace ordaind to them: but these
That by the stairs of Virtue upward past,
Meet with perfection in the Heavens at last.
69
Now since the Heavens, and the Celestial Quires,
And all the Elements thus change. We see
Since Princes, Cities, stateliest Towers, and Spires,
In time demollish^ and forgotten be.
Since all things taste of Mutabilitie
That God created; let none think it strange,
That Times are changed, and we in them do change.
70
This said, my Vision vanished, and reuoluing
Logos discourse within my troubled breast;
And (notwithstanding my known wants) resolving
To keep that piece which in my mind did rest,
These Lines I limbd, whereof you are possessed,
Whose use is this, that Man (a changling ever)
Might learn to worship him that changes never.
Cursus and Ordo rerum. OR ART AND NATVRE.
1
THe Winter past, and Phoebus now begu^
T'approach our Northern Tropic, to r^uiue
His tender Infants hid in Flora's womb,
And with his beams their fetters to vngiu^;
When Men and Plants seemed to receive new life,
Themselves attiring in their best array,
To honor Phoebus, and adorn the day,
2
I (only I) clouded in discontent,
Wrapped up in woe, stung with misfortunes strokes,
Hid^ng my self, my sorrows so to vent,
In solitary unfrequented This was written whilst I lived in the cold C^stle
of Scarborough, standing upon a most high Rock almost surrounded by the Sea,
Rocks,
Which Thetis as enamored on, fast locks
Within her arms; here keeping of my Sheep
With Morpheus Charms, my senses fell asleep.
3
If I did sleep I dreamed: if waking were;
There was endeed presented to mine eye
Two Royal Queens, whose persons did appear
The types of beauty, and of sovereignty,
Surpassing faite seemed that, this fair and high;
That lowly seemed of modest complement,
This courtly, graceful, and magnificent*
4
That on her brow a rosy Chaplet bore,
A Lilly, for a Scepter in her hand;
A Kirtle to of grassie green she wore;
Wherein with cunning skill did painted stand
All living creatures proper to the Land:
All sorts of Trees, Shrubs, Flowers, and Vegetals,
Both costly Iems, and hidden Minerals.
5
Here silver streams slide through th'enameld Meades,
Where towering Cedars, tusts of M^rtle seem.
Here fed the frisking Cunnies, there the Herds;
And in this cirque three battles strange were seen,
The The Dragon and the Elephant have between them a natural antipathie and
war, therefore the Dragon watches him by the way, and from some high tree
lances himself upon him. The Elephant makes toward some tree to rub off
these his unkind embracements: but to prevent him, the Dragon then manacles his
legs* with his long winding tail. Then tries the Elephant with his hand (his
Trunk) to unloose himself. Into this the Dragon presently chops his head, and
there so long sucks his blood (which he mightily thirsts for to cool himself)
that at last the Dragon drunk, and the Elephant dry, they both fall down
dead together: for the Elephant falling vpvpon the Dragon, crushes him to
death; gaining that revenge in death, which in life he could not attain to.
Plin. lib. 3. cap. 11. and 12.
Dragon and the Elepha^t between;
Betwixt The Ichnewmon, or Rat of Nilus, watching the Crocodile while he
sleeps, leps in at his mouth, whips from thence into his belly, and from thence
gnawes her self a passage, killing the Monster. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 25. lin. 5.
the Ichnewmon, and N^les monstrous King;
The Serpent being the natural enemy of the Camelion, is watched by him, where
he uses to sleep under the shadow of some tree; and there the Camelion
attends him in the tree, and while he sleeps, she distills from her mouth a
clear shining drop by a thread of the same stuff, just upon the Serpents head,
which no sooner touches him, but he dies, so strong a poison it is. M. Sands
his Travels, fol. 121.
The Aspe and Camelion, whose Spit quits her Sting.
6
The Phoenix then (of winged things) was not,
Nor th*neat House-wright Sea-charming The Halcyon builds a neast of the dride
Sea-froth so strong, that Iron cannot hurt it. Arist. Animalium. lib. 9. cap.
14.
Halcyon;
Nor was This bird called Auis Paradisus (by some Apodes, or Manu codiata,) it
is found only in the Mollucaes of the East Indies. It is never found alive;
for it never touches the earth, but flies and houers continually aloft in the
air, where they lay their Eggs in a certain hollow place of their Males
back, and their sit and hatch their young, living, as some think, only by
the Air. It is now worn as a Plume, the Bird being but a very small thing in
the head of the Plume. Scal. Excercitations. 228.
Molluca's plumy bird forgot,
That has no Nest nor Cradle for her young,
But her Males hollow back, where fast tide on
With their own strings, they restless ever row
Through The Air (their fare) and wretched earth nere know*
7
The little The Tomaneio is a very small Bird little bigger then a Fly, or a
bumble Be, having most delicate Feathers, a most lofty, shrill, and
delightful Note, not inferior to our Nightingale, which is most admirable in
so little a body, whose Neast with her self in it have been found to weigh
but twenty four Grains: they be common in the West Indies. Lerius and Acosta.
Tomaneio here I spide,
And The Cucuuio a small Bird of Hispaniola, has two marvelous bright Eyes
under her Wings, besides those in her head, which serve the Barbarians in stead
of Candles, or Torches, either abroad, or at home; abroad they tie them to
their sho^es, if at any time they chanced to travel late. Pet. Mart. Decades,
page 274.
she whose forehead bears two burning Lights,
And two beneath her wings, which serve to guide
The cunning Workemans hands in darkest night:
And she of which the Britain wonders writes,
The Barnacle.
Fish, Foul and Fruit: nor was she less adorned
Byth' The Silke-worme.
seed to worm, from worm to fly, transformd.
8
Here all the Flowers of Tauris, Padoa;
And all the Plants the Eastern Orchards yields,
Upon their Downie Carpets smiling Lay:
And all the Druggs and Sweetes of Indian fields,
And Balsam: this grew first in Judea, from thence transplanted near Cairo in
Egypt, where they built a great wall to fence it, to keep it safe. They say
there is now but little of it remaining. They slit the Bark of it with an
Iuorie instrument, and from thence the precious liquor distills. Paulus Iouius.
That which we have now, com^s from the West Indies.
Balsam, for which Egypt strong wall^s builds.
The Cinnamon, the Sugar-caine, the Vine,
And The Frankencense and Mirrhe trees: they use to cut them at the time of the
year, and from them distills a liquor, which after turns to this kind of Gum.
Plin. They grow in Arabia Foelix.
hallowed boughs that weep those fires divine.
9
Arbore de raise: it is a Tree in the hot Countries, whose boughs by reason of
his natural humiditie, after they have spread a pretty distance from the first
Trunk or Bole, bend down to the earth again, and there take new root, and
from thence grow up as it were a new tree, some of them in this sort covering
an Italian mile. Linsc. p. 103.
The Indian Roote-tree shading miles of lands,
Whose moist boughs make the coolest Galleries.
The The Herba Sentida, when any man comes toward it, shrinkes in all the
Leaves; and going away, she displayes her beauty as before. Scal.
Excercitation. 182. And Captain Hercourts Tra^ailes in Guiana.
feeling Shrub, that shrinkes from human hand.
Arbore triste de diu, is a tree in the East Indies about Goa: it bears no
fruit, but the flower of it is like a Cross; the nature of it is to flourish
all the night full of these flowers, which at the Sunne-rising* or soon after,
she puts off again; and it should seem they wither thus, by reason of the
tenuitie of the Sap which feeds them. Linsc. page 105.
And mournful Tree which still at Phoebus rays
Puts off her Flowers, nights beauteous liueries.
The Euphrates Lote is one of the Solsequiae, a lover of the Sun: it has a
great long stalk which it aduanceth out of the water still by little and
little as the Sun rises: but when the Sun comes to his Meridian, he turns
his head downwards, and by midnight (as if he would seek him through the
Center, if it were possible,) he is then so lo under water, that the Watermen
can hardly find him with long poles and crookes. Plin. lib. 13. cap. 16.
Lote was here that seems to seek her Lover:
And It is reported, I know not how truly, that in Iaua there is a tree, whose
Pith is as hard as Iron.
th'Iron tree, not Iron, but his Brother.
10
Upon her shoulders then a Scarf she had
Of party colors, gray, red, blew and green,
In which the pourtraicts of each thing was made,
That in the licquid regions may be seen;
Both friendly Fish, and Monsters fell and keen,
Among whom the earth never touching Dolphin b^re
Chief place, that set the Laconian Harp ashore.
11
The Tyburone was here, whose nimble sin
Out-strips the fleetest Sail in swiftest flight,
The Echynis, stay ship Remora next him,
Tho small of body, yet of greatest might,
The Pliny speaks of this Sea- Stella, I know not how truly. Lib. 9. cap. 60.
burning Star was here that shines so bright,
Whose touch seares all things; and although it drench
In deepest waves, yet water cannot quench.
12
The double sighted The Elops or Sturgeon (a Fish well known) is said to have
in his eyes two sights, which in the water is easily perceived; the one is
directed still upwards out of the water, the other within.
Elops to was here.
The The Torpedo or Cramp-fish.
Cramp-fish to, that makes the Fisher lame:
Tritons like men: and some whose heads appreare
Like rocks. The Morse that at relief is taken,
Sea-Vnicorne, Ox and Hippopotame,
The monstrous Rhoyder, and the Oily Whale,
And she that with her turning wheels may sail.
13
Within this Scarf were intertexted to,
Three bat^ailes that my wandering eyes beguile:
Plin. lib. 4. cap. 25. lin. 20. And Seneca in his natural questions, lib. 4.
cap. 2. relates this fight between the Dolphins and Crocodiles (seen by
Babillius, then Governor of Egypt for the Romans) at one of the mouths of
Nilus, where after a long fight as it were for the Soue raigntie, the
Crocodiles (b^ing many of them slain) the rest overcome, fled.
A seull of Dolphins first that each year go
Procession to their brinie bounds in Nile,
Whom to repulse attends the Crocodile,
But to his cost: for tho he is armed each where,
Save vnder's belly, his false foe speeds there.
14
The next was of the This story is so well known to Seamen, that it needs
not any relation. The Sword-fish with his Nose or Beak, as I may call it,
being fashioned just like a Scotch Sword (of which I have seen one or two
newly taken) assaults the Whale below under water, and with his trenchant blade
so cuts and wounds him below, that he forces him above water, where the
Thresser meets him, and so pays him, that the monstrous beast rores and
trembles for woe.
Sword-fish and the Whales;
The Sword fish aided by the Thresser-fish:
The last, where The manner of the Whale-fight is this: two or three boats
armed with five men a piece, three Rowers, one Stearer, and him that strikes;
they come upon the Whale where he lies sleeping, most commonly at first
directed to his place by his loud snorting. If he be fast alseep when he is
stricken, he lies trembling and shaking in a kind of amazement, so that they
have good time to clear themselves, and to keep off at a distance. If he be
awake there is more danger of spoiling or drowning with the strokes of his
tail. But having struck him, he plunges then down to the bottom, froting his
wounded side to get out the Harping-Iron, which thereby takes the faster hold:
the Boat being often in peril to go under water by his violent motions, if
the line in vearing chance to snarle; for prevention of which, they have an
Hatchet always ready, they doing all the while nothing but follow him, whilst
he works himself to death.
Man this monstrous Fish assailes,
Whose haughti^ thoughts acquire true fame in this;
Since a small cord, and Harping iron is
The engine, which being launc't at him asleep,
Does captiuate the King of all the Deep.
15
These few I noted of her ornaments,
Before mine eyes did to that Goddess move,
Which seemd like Palace, when her course she bent
Through the blew Welken with the Queen of Love,
And jealous Juno, when with gifts they strove
To bribe the Trojan Boy unto their wills,
That fed his Snow-white Lambs on Idaes Hills.
16
Nor had she only prudent Pallac^ grace,
And sacred wisdom, but did more contain
That Majesty and Beauty in her face,
Which men ascribe unto the other twain.
In brief, she had no blemish, nor no stain,
But rather seemd more fair then in her Youth;
A wonder, and but few will think us truth.
17
In a triumphant Chariot did she sit,
By which the ^other captiue-like did stand;
Beneath her feet a Globe, a footstool fit;
That hand a Book, this bore a silver Wand,
Whose powerful charms does stocks and (...) command,
Lions and Tigers* and upon her back
Two wings she had, the one white, the the other black.
18
Upon her head a Corronet she bore
Of rich The best Pearls are got in the Arabian Gulf at Barreyn, Catifa,
Iulfar, Camaron, and from thence sent to Ormus: the next to these are those
gotten at the Cape Comorrin, or the Island of Seylon: the West Indies be far
worse, the British of least reputation. Linsc. page 131. and Maffeus.
Arabian Pearl her Curles to stay;
A Syndon Veil of Belgia she wore,
Wrought full with quaint works of Hesperia:
A Purple Robe of Maced^nia
Upon her shoulders, and with cunning rate
Therein were wrought ten thousand works most fair.
19
In stead of Genne^s* or of Flemmish Mares,
Two Eagles and two Elephants had she:
And for ^o manage such unequal paires,
Two mighty Giants, Gain and Fame went by
To whip them on; the Coachman, Industry:
Plenty and Pleasure Lacquies were assigned;
Virtue and Honor came as Friends behind.
20
And in this Chariot she was mounted hie
In a high Seat, which Contemplation hight
Sustained by four Wheels which do make it fly,
Wherein in Golden characters were writ,
First, Logic, in the second Rhetoric;
Next, (...) and (...) still pressed,
To count the (...), (...), (...) of the rest.
21
Beneath upon her very skirts, mine eye
Ten thou^and Flowers, and precious beauties spide:
(For nearer I presume not, nor more high,
It might be construed arrogance and pride
For him that there so little has descride:)
Ten thousand neat conceits and textures there,
Strange works and rare inventions did appear.
22
Therein were wrought ten thousand Instruments.
Ten thousand Wheels, measures of swift Time:
Ten thousand Engines strange for rare intents,
Such as Archimedes his wit divine,
Deuisde for Ladders up to Heaven to clime,
To steal the motions of the Stars, and here
For to comprise them in his Vitrean Sphere,
23
All scattered round about her skirts there lay
A thousand Cities wrought by cunning hand,
Where battlements and steeples did display
Their lofty pride; 'bout some of which there stands
Brave Troops of plumed Horse, and Footemens Bands,
Squadrons of Pikes to guard the thundering shot,
Some seeming for^'t, some force regarding not.
Let the Reader look for the rest of the Notes at the Latter end the Poem, by
reason of the too largeness of them.

24
Here to the life were wrought the Nauall Fights.
(1) Sallamine, (1) Actium, (1) Corinth; where the Arms
Of East and West contended 'bout their rights;
Whilst Neptune laughed, gaining by both their harms:
Tho Europe aye triumphs, who with loves charms
Has so* entangled Neptune, that he still
Is most obsequious to perform her will:
25
Much more I saw which Time and mine intent
Of brevity will not permit me say;
Which while I pondring stood, these Ladies bent
Their course to me, me thought with this array,
And with this equipage: the truth to say,
Much did I muse what such a Sovereignty,
Might have to do with my rusticitie.
26
And musing long what titles might be fit,
What complements might best with them agree,
The chief of them which seemed enthroned to sit,
Thus shook me from my dumpes. Shepherd (quoth she)
First know, that we two, Art and Nature be.
Next, understand thy Guests come from above,
Tho mortal she, immortal Fates I prove.
27
Thirdly, observe that she and I have then
A certain Argument, which of us two
Be most benign and kind to mortal men,
She Nature, and I Art. And lastly, know
The censure of our Arguments we do
Wholly refer to thine integrity,
To whom we equal Benefactors be.
28
((...) I) Great Goddesses! unworthy most
Am I into your presence for to come:
Vnworthier alas to be your Host,
Being thus dispoyl'd by Fortunes angry doom,
Both of your benefits, and of her own:
But most unworthy doubt I to appear
Judge of so great a controuerfie here.
29
But she replide: Do not disestimate
Thy better tallent for thy poverty,
Tho false opinion and preiudicate
Of vulgar wit, with dim and dropping eye
Save Fortunes) sees not any Deity;
We know Heaven loves the poor man many time,
And hates those rich, whose outsides only shine.
30
Our pleasure therefore is, that thou attend
To hear our Arguments with diligence;
Which duly heard and pondred in the end,
Then shall thou sentence this our difference,
Giving the Victor that pre-eminence
The justice of their cause deserves. And straight
She thus began, and spoke what now I write.
31 The Speech of Art.
This Dame (quoth she) of Mortals all the Mother,
Of all that be composde of th'Element,
Seems to profess, that only Man, none other,
Is the chief object whereto her care's bent,
That he is her Darling, all things else but lent
For his behoof* Now I prove she has been,
More Benefactor unto beasts, then him,
32
For when she first into this Worlds light sends them,
She kindly suits them new at her own cost,
With clothes that can from cold and heat defend them,
And still repaires their liuerie h^rt or lost.
Poor man comes naked to this f^rraine coast,
And without help of Mid wives, Nurces, Clothes,
He perishes: but Beasts need none of those.
33
The Foul with spread wings ore her Chickens houers:
Within her arms the Ape her youngling bears:
The Adder in her Maw her vile brood couers.
When'th (2) Succurathe the Hounds pursuing hears,
Upon her back a tent for hers she reares,
That scorns the Hunter. In her wondrous womb
Does the (3) Chyarca hers as often retombe.
34
But Neptunes tributaries, watery Nation,
It Is they of men have greatest odds in this,
Blessed in this kind by rights of their creation,
Whose industry and care no greater is,
About their Spawne, and breeding businesses,
Then in Earths womb to cover their ei^ction,
Then leau't to Citharea's safe protection.
35
Even to the winds and fleeting waves they throw it,
Which seuerd from them many a mile is blown*
Why's this? Because their World's their own they know it,
Kind Nature tells them that they be at home.
Then here is the first Scene where her love is shown;
For which from greatest bounty does proceed
Wants to supply, or take away that need.
36
Long are poor men appendixes to Mothers,
And half their time in documents they spend
Amongst their Nurses, Schoolmasters, and others,
To know wherefore they live, and to what end.
Long is their Seed time* Harvest quickly In'd:
But long-liu'd beasts do in a short time grow,
Fit for those ends that Nature sram'd them to.
37
No weapons she to him at all assigns,
Neither offensive not defensive Arms;
To these she has imparted several kinds,
Force to rep^ll with force, and offered harms:
Teeth, Claws, Hooues, Horns, Stings fit for hot alarmes;
And for defensive, diverse do not want
Such privy Coats, as Shot and Pikes can daunt.
38
Of these (4) Niles steely. sided Monster's one:
The (5) Tort^yse with his bullet*daunting house:
The (6) pu^ple spotted yallow Champion:
The (7) Carry-towre, that only fears the Mouse*
The (8) Armadillo, and the (9) Indian Boas.
All these in Armor well appointed go,
And diverse diversely defensed to.
39
She gives the Cockatrice a killing cie,
(10) The subtle H^en and enchanting foot;
(11) The Crampfish a benumming quality;
(12) The Cuttle Inkie humors black as soote
To die the waves, while from the nets he scout.
The (12) Zibra venomd hairs to kill her Rider;
The (14) Porcupine a neuer-empty Quiver.
40
She has enstructed beasts with Physics light:
The wounded Dear run straight to (15) (...).
The Swallows find out (16) Cellandine for sight.
The Dog in Knot-grasse finds his remedy.
The (17) Bears wih Aron cure there malladie*
(18) ^' (...) knows the use of letting blood;
(19) Tortoyce and ^oades know Antidotes right good:
41
Each one of these, and thousands more are proud
Of some kind benefit she has them given,
Only on man she nothing has bestowed,
But tender limbs, a smooth transparent skin,
Through which each little worm gives death to him
Yea, greater weaknesses in him appears,
He drinks it often through his eyes and's ear^s.
42
Beasts be not subject unto griefs, cares, fears,
No future wants their present joys control:
Blood-drying sighs, nor brain consuming tears;
Heart-eating Envy feeds not on their soul:
Not A^arice nor Pride does them defoule,
Winged Ambition that enflames the bre^ts
Of mortal men, does not disturb their rests.
43
This said, in silence Art straight sat her down,
To let her Rival answer what she could.
So Nature rising like the morning-Sun,
Whose brighter beams, moist vapors ouer*cloud,
Half vaylde in modest blushes, long she stood
At these enditements. But at last she broke
Her silence thus, and for her self thus spoke.
Here Art seems to conclude her first speech, and gives Nature leave to
reply, as follows.

44
Mortal (quoth she) these imputations here,
And foul aspersions cast on my clear fame,
I truly must return them (being clear)
On Art her self, from whence at first they came:
It Is manife^t that ^ for men ordain
One only benefit, that balances
All these that she calls disaduantages.
45
Reason, a heavenly gift, which crowns him King
Of all the Worlds so large extend^d bound:
Which (tho he is borno weak, wanting every thing)
A^foords him all, wi^h friends encompast round,
(Whom Reason does instruct with judgment sound)
And neighbors, for to help at such a time;
By charity and mutual love men shine.
46
When he is grown up, this yields him all things fit,
And to him is an armor of defense.
What Engines does he frame with pregnant wit,
Keen Swords and Spears, blessed guards of innocence?
What fiercest monster is not in suspense,
To see his glistering Helm? or a'the report
Of his fire*spitting musket scuds not for it?
47
All creatures fear him, as their King and Lord:
For of their flesh he at his choice does feed;
For him fit clothing also they afford,
Hair, Wool and Hide which he conuerts at need
To many an use, such as the Heauen^ decreed
Ere their creation, he should best devise,
To accommodate to his necessities.
48
For him the Be makes Honey; and the Ewe
And gainefull Cow for him their Milk they yield:
For him the pretty Silk worm weaues her clew:
For him, not for her self, the Dove does build:
For him the Flocks bear Wool: for him the Field
Does each year revel in luxurious pride:
The Trees bear Fruit, and Meades are richly did.
49
For him alone the Indian (20) Tunall Tree
Upon her Leaves brings forth those costly Worms
That now those Tyrian Fishes wants supply.
For him the (21) Bezars and the (22) Unicorns
Bring these their Antidotes, their Stones and Horns.
For him the Elephant his cordial Teeth*
The (23) Cat her costly Sweat, of Sweetes the chief.
50
For him and for his sake alone they know
The Weathers change, and times and seasons render,
Not for themselves, that neither plow, ne sow,
But serve the Rustic for his true Kallender:
And for him only do examples tender
Of Surgerie and Physic; loss of breath
Being to them the bent thin* Heavens bequeath.
51
Yet this is only half the good which he
Receives from beasts, whom Reason right does guide.
Of moral virtues many sparks there be
In them, which serve abundantly to chide
Their hapless Master, when his foot does slide:
The greatest grief that wise men ere be^alls,
To see their shame in brutish animalls.
52
Of these there be provided many a one,
Fair Characters, wherein poor erring men
May read their duties. First, the Haleion,
True pattern of conjugal love: for when
Old age enfeebled has her mate, the Hen
Forsakes him not, but helps his weak estate,
Because in youth he was her loving mate.
53
They have the Dove to show them Innocence,
The Pelican to ^each paternall love:
The Swallow to over come by patience:
Filial duty does the Storke approve:
The loss of friends the Turtle true does mou^
To sollitarines: for Industry
They have the Silk-worme, Ant, and pretty (...).
54
The profitable Ox, and ready Horse,
The map of courage, and of mortal pride:
The Elephant of most admired force,
And diuersthings domestic to beside,
To obedience and humili^ie him guide:
For these acknowledge some small benefits,
Which he for many great ones still forg^ts.
55
The silly (24) Cur still at his Masters foot,
Which pattern of an honest servant is,
Which knows his Masters friends, and who be not;
Defends his goods, and suffers naught amiss;
He prompts him still with his good qualities,
Being the mirror of fidelity,
Of perfect friendship, magnanimity.
56
And wherefore this? to teach the ungrateful man:
(Unworthy Bani^ter I think on thee,
Which sold thy Noble Master Buckingham)
That thankful Dogs then those men better be,
Which fawn and flatter that prosperity
Which feeds them: but if Fortune frown,
Then soonest bite, and help to pluck it down.
57
The venombde (25) Aspe, whose vengeance few can (...)
(The poison of his angry mind is such)
I force from loathsome cave to light to come
To teach those minds, whose souls no virtues touch,
That Justice has with men endured so much;
She flies to worms, whom neither hate nor love
Can make unjust like wretched men to prove.
58
I cause the ^iercest beasts of sea and land,
The Dragon, Lion, Sealie () Crocodile,
To know their Masters, and ^'endure his hand,
Growing domestic servants in short while;
To t^ach in human man that will defile
His hands with blood of those that nourisht him,
That bruitest beasts and Serpents think it sin.
59
I bring the raging (26) Lion from his den
In Nubian Deserts, where he used to pray
On weary passenger^ and traveling men,
Whose hard misfortunes led them to his way,
Unto (...) public Theater to display,
That benefits even saluage beasts does bind,
Tho thank fullness seem fled from human kind.
60
I bring the King of Pegues shady Groves,
From unfrequented saultes and places strange,
To teach Man that his own way still approues,
Only how-euer crookt and wide it range,
With streighter paths of noblest beasts to change,
Whose many virtues wise mortals discover,
(27) Deuot, (28) just, (29) faithful, (30) thankful, (31) glori^s lover.
61
A world of which examples may be found
In birds and beasts even those of brutest kind,
From whence to men great profit might redound,
If ponderd well they were, and borne in mind.
Such letters fair, as might instruct the blind.
For what is he that will not virtue love,
When Lions, Tigers, Serpents it approve?
62
This said, me thought Art thus again replide:
Blind Nature would betray the erring Man,
Who woes thee thus to follow her (blind guide)
When I alone thy prudent Tutresse am;
Teaching thee both the Monsters fierce to tame,
And to get sovereign Antidotes from these
That hurt thee wor^t, and choyce^t remedies.
63
The silly rural person, if he meet
The cordial flowers, the Vyolet or the Rose,
He passes by, or treads them under feet,
Even things that greatest virtues do enclose:
VVhilest he diseasde might often be cured by those;
Time, Hysop, ^odder, Anthos, that do grow
In's Garden, he them knows, but does not know.
64
His Cow, his Sheep, his Pullen and his Swin^,
Contain ten thousand virtues hid in them,
Which might preserve his life at many a time,
If Nature were not blind, deprived by sin,
Of her true light; and therefore this light's (...)
By Heaven to me, that I might it dispose
To those, whom God for this end fittest knows,
65
I teach him from the Scorpion to get
An Oyl^, the Antidote against her teeth,
Nothing against the Vipers sting so fit
As Merridate, where her own flesh is chief
Ingredient. Nothing gives more relief
Forth' Water-Snakes sting, or the mad Dogs tooth
Then their own livers sod, and eaten does,
66
What thing more horrid then the Crocodile?
Few parts of him which are not (32) phy^icall.
Who at the angry Elephant dares smile?
Who trembles not? His (33) teeth are cordial.
The (34) (...) yields me a stone medicinal.
The Serpents (35) Caymans, and fell (36) Tybur^ne*
They do the (...); so does (37) Lincurions.
67
Nor does she less her self mis-vnderstand,
That to her self does arrogate the praise,
In moral virtues, for instructing man;
Since I therein enlight him with my rays,
And ^each him to apply such things always
To his own good, for such as know not ^e,
By such examples nothing better be.
68
Witness (38) Brasile, Peruuia, and all
The saluage Nations of the Western world,
Where Nature has been each way prodigal:
Yet are their minds and manners most abhord,
Which few signs of humanity afford;
Of virtue none* Man-eaters, brute and evil.
Not serving God, but worshipping the Devil.
69
Those that have seen fair Florence, or the Towre^
Of Naples (...), or aged Rome,
Or Regal Tauris thy delightful Bowres,
Or the captive face of Constantines sad Town;
Or Pharoes Tower, which Pharoes Rocks does crown,
Whose lofty Turrets kiss th'enamourd skies,
Whose various objects steal men's dazzled eyes.
70
Their ornaments in Stone, Silver and Gold
Pictures in Tables wrought, Glass, Marble, Clothes,
With so rare skill, that those which them behold,
Seem changed sometime to these, and these to those;
Their purple States, and their triumphall shows
Of Princes, People, best of all can tell,
How, much my gifts to men do^ (...) excel.
71
Yet these external gif^s are poor and small,
Compard with other benefits of mine,
Who as a Gnomon do direct them all
To look from shadows, on that Sun diune,
Which through the world both Light and Life does (...)
Since (...) beauties only shadows be
Of that true complete Beauti^, One and Three.
72
This said, her finger locked her lip and me;
She beckned streight-way with her other hand,
That I enformd, now sentence should decree,
Because her modesty did here command
Her silence, and that we might understand
How much selfe-praise does true fame interest,
She ceast, well hoping I would speak the rest.
73
A task, which pondring mine own weakness right,
I found my self less fit to undertake,
Then Pigmies be with Giants for to fight;
And craving they some fitter choice would make,
Even here me thought, even while these words we spoke,
A reverend Matron entered into place,
Called Truth
Alethia, her I showed the case:
74
Requested her the matter to decide
To hear, weigh, judge with best discretion.
To which me thought she instantly replide:
Friend, for that purpose am I hither come,
Therefore observe and lis^en to my doom;
Tho bodies great, we cannot wholly view,
We judge the whole by a part, one thread the clew.
75
Nature is saire, but Art it makes her shine.
Nature is great, but Art she makes her more.
Nature is wise, Art makes her seem divine.
Nature is rich, but Art still mends her store.
Nature is strong, yet does she aid implore
From Art. Art better then by consequent,
Since she her strength, wealth, beauty does augment.
76
Nature is of her self but a rude mass,
Which of it self each day to ruin tends:
Whom Art still ^triues to beautify and grace,
And to preserve and form it ever bends
Her chief endeavor, tending still to mend
What errs, or wants in Nature, and to plain
Her ruder works with some more pollisht frame.
77
Since Nature brings Man forth imperfit then,
With sense relucting always to the mind:
And Art she tills and forms the souls of men,
Giving them light, whom Nature has made blind;
My sentence is to Art wholly inclined.
Since as the ancient sages truly tell,
It Is better never to be, then not be well.
78
This said, my Vision vanished: nothing staid
But th'airie clouds, vast sea, demoli^ht Phane,
My self and my sad thoughts, but ill appaide
With certain gifts they gave me for my pain:
For Nature angry and incenst with shame,
Warded me sickness: Art for all my toil,
Poverty, cause I did her praises soil.
(1) These three Nauall Battles were the greatest of the World: for the prime
Forces both of the East and West were drawn into them: the first was that
wherein Zerxes, the great Mo^arch was overcome by the small forces of (...),
who was so puffed up with conceit of his great, but unprofitable Army, that he
raged against the Elements, as appears by that of the Poet.

Ille tamen qualis rediit Salamina relicta, In little, atque Eurum, sollitus
seuire flagellis, Barbarus, Eolio nunqua^ hoc incarcere passos, Ipsum
compedibus qui vinxerat Ennosigaeu^? Nempevna naue.

The next was that of Augustus Caesar and Anthony. Marcus Anthonius brought all
the forces of the East, Augustus those of the West, and in this Anthony lost
the Empire. The last was that of Lepanto, fought in the Bay of Corintho,
wherein Don John of Austria, General for the Christians, gave the Turks a
great overthrow.

(2) This bea^t is found in the Northern parts of America; when she is
pursued, she takes up her young upon the hollow of her back, and with her
broad bushie tail couers them as in a tent, and so flies with them.

(3) The Chyurca is bred in the Southern parts of America; she has certain
lappets of skin under her belly, which she opens and shuts at her liking; and
in the same she receives and harbors her young ones, and so bears them till
they grow up. Scalig. Exer^. 206. They term it Obassom in Virginia. Maffeus
calls it Cerigon lib. 2. page 73.

(4) The Crocodile has such hard Scales all over his body (saving underneath
his belly) that no Sword or Spear, can hurt him, nor small shot, hardly slain
with a Falkonet. Scal.

(5) There be Tortoyses in India, whose shells weigh three hundred pound
weight. They cover houses with them in some places of the Indies. Plin. lib. 6.
Scal. Excercit. 196. In the same place Scaliger relates a story of a
Traveler, who being benighted in the I Will of Trapobana, weary and seeking some
convenient place to take up his lodging in upon the bare Earth for that night,
and espying hard by a thing like an old Tomb all Moss-begrowne about the sides
of it, and supposing it indeed to be such as it seemed, he lay down upon it
for to rest all night, and slept soundly. But in the morning perceiving
himself borne far out of his way, and from the place where he lay down, he
began to marvel very much, looking about as a man affeard of an Earthquake;
till at last he spies the pernicious head of his supposed Tomb, where he had
mistaken his lodging, and perceived it to be a great Tortoyse. Scalig.
Excercitations, 196. They use the lesser Tortoyse shells in stead of Shields.

(6) The Rhynoceros has his body all over armed with impenitrable Scales, or
rather shields, of y^llow color, spotted all through with purple spots: diverse
have mistaken him for the Unicorn; for the Rhynoceros has two hor^es, one
upon his nose, the other on his brow. Scal. Exercitations 204.

(7) The El^phants be at this day used in the wars, as formerly; they set
Soldiers upon them in small Turrets, with some small pieces of Ordnance; his
skin will bear the thrust of any weapon, and push of Pike; the Indian Kings
ride upon them. There be of them (...) foot high; the Ethiopians are less
then those of India, but those of India less then those of Saint Laurence.
Scal. Excercitation, 204. Plin. lib. 8. Linsc.

(8) The Armadillo is a little beast of the West Indies, all covered over with
hard shields. Lerius.

(9) Attilius Regulus, General of the Romans in Africa, assailed one of these
Serpents, near the River Bragada, of one hundred and twenty foot long;
whereon he was forced to spend his Darts and Arrows, and to use all his
Brakes, and Slings; and Engines of Artillery, as if he had given the assault to
some strong Town of war: and the proof of this was to be seen by the
marks in his skin and chawes, which till the war of Numantia, remained in
a Temple of Rome. Plin. l. 8. cap. 14.

(10) Pliny would persuade us, that if the Hyenna compass or circle in any
thing, Man or Beast, they shall not be able to stir from the place. lib. 8.
cap. 30.

(11) The Torpedo sends forth a benumming humor up the Line, the Rod, and even
to the Fishers hand, and over his whole body sometimes, so that diverse have
fallen down therewith into the Rivers; and in stead of catching Fish, have
caught their death. Aristot. de Animal. lib. 9. cap. 37. There is a River in
India, in the Island of Zeilam, called Arotan, very full of Fish, but not to be
eaten: for if one do but take one of the Fish in his hand, he is presently
seized with a Feauor; letting the Fish go, freed from it. Scal. Excerc. 218. 6.

(12) The Cuttle when she is sought and laid for by the Fisher, vents out of
her mouth a certain black Inkie humor, wherewith she dies the waves, so that
she ^scapeth unseen. Plin. l. 9. c. 29.

(13) The Zibra is a certain beast in Africa (most common in Congo) like a
Mule, her body rowed with rows of several colors: they be not used,
because they hold an opinion, that some of their hairs are venomous. Hist. of
Congo.

(14) The Porcupine is a kind of Hedgehog, but greater, and has this
particular, that by contracting her skin together when she list, she will dart
forth her sharp pricks which grow upon her back in manner of Arrows, at those
which pursue her. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 35.

(15) Dictamum, an Herb only growing right in Candy; the Dear are wont to
seek out the same to feed upon when they be shot, or wounded. Arist. l. 9. c.
6.

(16) The use of Celandine was first found out to help the eyes by Swallows.
Ibid.

(17) The Bears having lived in their den a good part of Winter only by
sleep, and sucking their nails; when they go abroad, the first thing they
do is to search out the Herb Aron, or Wake Robbin, to open their Guts
withal, obstructed with long fasting. Plutarchs Morals: and Plin. l. 8 c. 36.
and Arist. de animalibus, l. 9. c. 6.

(18) The Hippopotame finding his body too full of humors, goes to certain
broken Reeds, and thereon presses certain Veins of his legs, and when he
has bled sufficiently, he lutes up the orifice again with mud. Plutarch and
Plin. lib. 4. cap. 26.

(19) The Tortoyse being to fight with the Serpent, prepares her self with
Sweet Marierom. Arist. Animalib. And the Toad having fought with the Spider,
uses Plantaine as her relief. Plut. Plin.

(20) The Tunall Tree is a small Plant in Mex^co very common, out of whose
Leaves spring little Worm^s, so much famous for their costly Dye in Grain, but
especially for their rich Scarlet in grain, which have now the chiefest praise
and price, as sometime the Tirian Purple had in Rome, which was so tincted by
the blood of certain Fish, called Purples. Acosta. Hist. Ind. l. 4. and Plin.
l. 9.

(21) The Bezar Stone is found in the Maw of a Sheep or Goat with a small
piece of Wood, sometimes a Straw, Tag or Pin in the middle. It is observed,
that the beast which breeds them in Perue feeds much upon one Herb, which it
is thought they use as an Antidote against all others, poisons, and that the
Bezar is engendered in the Maw, by the juice of this Herb. Linsc. p. 134. and
Acosta. l. 4. c. 42. Monardes.

(22) The Unicorn no fabulous story by the judgment both of learned and
honest Authors: for though it be hardly, or peradventure not to be found at
this day, yet the testimony of good Authors that have seen them alive, and
their Horns yet so highly esteemed, whereof diverse are to be seen almost
whole and entire in the possession of great Princes, agreeing both in shape and
effects, with the ancient opinion conceived of them, makes it clear that such
there were. One the Senate of Venice sent to Solomon the Magnificent: another
Pope Clement sent to Francis the French King. P. Iouius Tome 1. lib. 18. p.
863. Scaliger speaks of diverse that he saw; one very fair one, whole, was at
Windsore Castle. But Vertomannus, who had the reputation of an honest Man,
says, he saw two of these beasts alive, which were sent out of Aethiopia to
the Sultan of Mecha.

(23) Zibeth vocatur odoramentum quoddam pingue crassum nigri saponis facie:
quod sudor animalis est cui felis est figura. Qui liquorem eius esse s^men
arbitra^tur ineptiunt. Strigmentu^ enim est, non humor exactus e loculis
genitalibus. Scal. 211.

(24) The trustiness and fidelity of Dogs is so much commended by good
Authors, that in the Book entitled, Sir Philips Sidneys Urania, it is
aduisde, that those which in this World covet to find a true Friend, should
make search among Dogs and Spaniels for him. Authority and praise sufficient,
if there were no more. But it is beside confirmde by a world of t^stimonies;
why should I therefore (amongst so many) mention Fabius his Dog, related by
Plutar^h and Pliny. I will crave thy patience (Gentle Reader) to insert one
late domestic Story, (...) this domestic Animal, which I have from Authors
of good credit, yet living in London, and which also heard the Murderer at his
death confess the fact: and thus it was. A Water-man taking in a Passenger at
Black-wall for London, late in the Evening, going betwixt Black-wall and
Greenewich, murders his Fair as he lay sleeping in the boat, and so in the
thick Reeds leaves him. The man thus slain had a Spaniell with him, which so
long stays by his dead Master, till hunger compeld him to swim over the water
to Greenewich (...) reli^fe; where having filled himself, he returns again to
his dead Master: and when hunger again pressed him, swims back as before for new
relief; so long holding this course, till he was observed by the then Keeper
of Greenewich House for Queen Elizabeth, who sent Oars to follow him, and so
by that means discovered the murdered body. Whereupon the Keeper of the House
took home the Dog, and held him ever after as a most diligent servant, the Dog
waiting still upon his new Master to the Court, and through the City, yet
never loosing him. But to conclude this Story; so it happened some certain
time after, that this poor beast following his new Master, spies out amongst a
multitude, the Murderer of his old Master, whom presently he flies upon, ready
to tear him in pieces. The man threatens to kill the Dog, if they take him not
up. Hereupon they take off the Dog, and tie him up. But the Dogs Master
(entertaining some scruple) caus^d the Dog to be loosed again, to see if
again he would find out the same man: which done, the Dog finds him out
straight amongst many others, and there again flies upon him in most v^hement
manner. Whereupon they suspected him to be the Murderer, carried him before
the Justice, where he presently confessed the fact, and died for the same.

A thousand examples of this kind every man can record out of his own
particular knowledge, therefore only two shall be annexed out of famous Julius
Scaliger, which se^me to me not less effectual and remarkable, then those
more ancient. The first is of a Country Fellow in the I Will of Corsica, who
tracing a Bear into the Mountains in a deep Snow, only accompanied with his
Dog, forgetting the danger through desire to meet with the Bear, follows so
far, that when he would have returned (all the paths being filled up with
Snow) he could not by any means discern his way home again, so that in fine
he is there frozen to death. Some two or three days after his friends find him
with his Dog lying at his feet: but when they come near to touch him, his Dog
flies at them, fights, tears, barks, bites them, puts them all to flight,
thinking they came to rob his Master; neither becomes he more gentle by the
coming in of his masters Brothers, from whom he had often received meat, but
continues in his pertinacie so long, till they were forced to shoot at him,
and to kill him.

The other is a French History of a Courtier, who being offended either with
the treachery of his friend, or else envying him, secretly killed him, and as
secretly buried him in a field not frequented. By chance the man thus slain
had a Dog with him, who being not far off, and seeing his Master thus put in
a hole, sat so long upon his Grave, till his affection overcome with hunger,
forced him to return back to the Court. The Chamber-fellowes of the party
thus slain give him meat: straight to the Grave again goes he, but hungry
returns as before, and so long holds he this course, till men began to
suspect the matter. Hereupon they follow him to the place, dig up the Grave,
find the Man, whom knowing they bury, taking the Dog home with them. After a
while this Murderer returns to the Court; the Dog spies him, flies upon him,
barks and bays at him, and will not be kept off him. Hereupon he grows
suspected; yea, the King himself takes notice, through the Dogs perseverance
in this manner of accusation. The King commands him to show the reason, why the
Dog dod this. The Man denies the fact, and stands upon his innocence: but
still the Dog barks, and as much as in him lies, seeks to disturb him in
his excusations. At last therefore the King decrees, to have the matter tried
by combat: Wherein the Dog ouer-came, and his Victory is pourtrayed in Gold
in one of the Kings dining-roomes; and ever as it decays, is by commandment
from the King repaired. Scalig. Exercitations 202. Section 6.

For Magnanimity, the Dog sent to Alexander by Porus the Indian King, is a
sufficient testimony; who when the King commanded Boares, Hearts, or Bears to
be set before him, never moved at them, as things unworthy of his courage. But
when he lets out a Lion to him, him the Dog tears in pieces: and then setting
him upon an Elephant, him also he brings to the ground. Quintus Curtius, and
Plinnius, liber. 8. cap. 40.

(25) Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 74. relates this Story of an Aspe that haunted much
to a wealthy Farmers House in Egypt, and was continually feed by him under
his Table. It chanced one time one of the Aspes young ones to sting and kill
one of the Farmers children, for which deed the old Aspe in justice flies at
her own, and kills it.

() The Egyptians who (after the manner of their vain superstition) gave
divine honors, and religious worship to diverse beasts, and likewise to
Serpents, and Monsters, kept within their Temples diverse of them, and had
Crocodiles so tame, that they would at their call come and receive meat at their
hands. Strabo Geography.

(26) This place has relation to the Story of Androdus the Dacian slave,
reported by Plutarch, and others, and of late repeated by Montaigne, and sung
by that famous Du Bartas, which because it is so well known, I forbear to
relate it.

(27) It is observed by some, that the Elephants do a kind of worship (falling
down on their knees) to the Moon.

(28) There appears in all his actions of revenge, a proportion between the
punishment and the offense; as for example, if a child chance to throw a stone
at him, which cannot hurt him, for this he will only heave him up gently with
his trunk to fear him, setting him down without other harm. If his Keeper
mingle his prouant with straw and chafe, and deceive him of half his
allowance, he thinks it enough of he can get loose to do as much to the
Keepers Porrege-pot, as it appears in Plutarch But if one do him a greater
injury, as to beat himself, or his Master, he repayes that with a cuffe or
two, or carries him to the water, and ducks him well over head and ears, and
then sets him down where he found him.

(29) Where shall a man see the office of a more faithful servant, then in
Porus Elephant? who when his Master's mortally wounded in the battle against
Alexander, and sainting through loss of blood, the beast perceiving him about
to fall, kneeles gently down to let his Lord descend with more ease. But when
the Soldiers run to disarme him, the beast draws courage from his wounds,
sets upon them afresh, beats them off him, and then strives to reseate his
Master again upon his back, never giving over to discharge the part of a
loyal servant till he fell down dead with wounds in the place. Q. Curtius, l.
8. The like of this happened of late years to the Kings of Pegue and Aua, who
having drawn millions of men to field to descide their quarrel, at last both
agreed to fight it out hand to hand themselves (like our Edmond and Canutus)
but in stead of Horse they fought on Elephants. The event was this; the King of
Aua was slain, and the King of Pegues Elephant. The Peguan mounts the beast of
his enemy: but he with sorrow of his Masters loss droopes: they strive to
comfort him with good words: but he refuses all comfort, weeping incessantly
all the term of days which they observe in that Country, to mourn for the
dead. Linsc.

(30) An example no less strange there happened in the City of Goa, the
perfect pattern of thankfulness. The Elephants there use, during their time
of Winter, to grow furious and mad, and then often they break loose from their
keepers, and do much mischi^fe. It chanced on a time that one of them breaking
out from his keeper, in this manner ran through, and through the streets,
overthrowing all things in his way: from thence he goes to the Market place,
from whence all the people fled to save their lives; amongst the rest one
Hearb-wife (who had used before to give the beast Lettuce, and such Herbs, as
he past by with his keeper) for haste forgets b^hind her, her little son, left
in a basket under her stall; this the Elephant spies, takes it up with his
trunk, and (remembering that it was the child of his Benefactor, when all the
people made aecount to have seen it dashed in pieces) he gently sets it up
upon the stall, as a place of more safety then underfoot: this done, goes on
in his mad humor, overthrowing all things as before. Linsc. page 137.

(31) There are innumerable examples both in ancient and modern Authors,
witnessing the Elephants almost equal desire and thirst of glory, even with
Man himself.

(32) Pliny lib. 28. cap. 8. relates many virtues of the Crocodile. The
Crocodiles Fat good for Gangrens. Scaligers Exercitations, 196.

(33) Iuorie is a Cordial much used in Physic.

(34) The Toad-stone good against inflations of venomous Beasts, and against
the Stone. Weckeyrus.

(35) The Cayman breeds in his stomach a stone good against the Quartaine.
Wekeyrus. There be a kind of Serpents, whose flesh is commended for Ulcers, Fat
for wounds, and their Slowth for help in Women's affairs. Parcelsus, Tome 5,
page 238. 239. 240. and 241.

(36) The Portingalls and Spaniards have reported, the stone got out of the
Tyburones head to be a divine thing against the Stone and Gra^ell. Weckeyr.

(37) The Lyncurions, a certain stone found in the Sand are thought to be the
congealed (...) of the Ownce. Plin. 8. cap. 30.

(38) For although bountiful Nature seems even to power her self out upon
these Nations in her greatest abundance of Fish and Foul, excellency of
Plants, fertility of soil, abounding not only with external, but internal
endowments: yet all these no better then curses to them through want of Art to
polish them, and divine grace to govern and ciuilize them: for their devises
in fishing and fowling gives ample testimony both of their wit and courage,
notwithstanding their detestable barbarousnesse in manners and conversation.
Joseph Acosta relates one of their fights with a Cayman or Crocodile, where the
naked Indian swimming under his belly, there stabd him to the heart, and killed
him. The like of their taking the Whale, whom he assailes after this manner:
he draws up close in his Canow toward the Whale sleeping, and suddenly
leapes forth upon her neck, wherewith incredible dexterity he strikes a sharp
stake into her nostrill, or vent; and when the Whale dives, he holds fast, and
goes down with it, and at his coming up, comes up likewise, and then strikes
he another stake into his other vent, which compells the beast to shoot
himself on shore. Their Balsaes or bundles of Bulrushes, upon which they use
to fish in the roughest Sea, sat on horseback upon them (like so many Neptunes)
are no less admirable. Joseph. Acost. Hist. Ind. l. 3. c. 15. and Monardes.
But (...) manner of fowling is yet more strange, where the Fowler, be it upon
Lake or River observes the wind, and having store of empty Gourds for the
purpose, lets them first drive with the wind amongst them, which they quickly
grow familier with, and suffer them to rub against their sides and breasts;
which when the Fowler espies, he puts on his head a Helmet of the same stuff,
with a close Vizor therein, with which he swimmes or wades to the Foul so
cunningly, that naught but his head appears, which still he rowles and waggs
to resemble the empty tottring Gourds, and so he plucks them by the legs
vnder-water, and finely conuaies them into his bag; the rest of the Flock
suspecting nothing, but supposing that they diue. Peter Martyrs Decades.

Opineo and Ratio Rerum: OR, A DISPVTE BETWIXT WEALTH AND Poverty, etc.
1
IN Winter time while Bor^as with blasts keen^,
Had stripped fair Flora of her liuerie;
And all the Forests of their beauteous green,
Wrapping all in gray frozen poverty,
My Muse and I pincht with this misery,
For want of fire, and means good house to keep,
We went to bed, to eure our cares with sleep.
2
Sleeping, I dreamed, that in a flintie way,
I trauel'd, all with Briers and Thorns beset,
Narrow, uneven, not tracted every day
To a great City, and on business great,
And in this journey with this vision met;
Whose circumstances as they fell me there,
I purpose here most briefly to declare*
3
Within this path I had not iournide long,
Before a knot of travelers I s^ide;
A feeble sort God wot, and nothing strong.
Whose names to spare the labor might betide
In vain demands (were writ on each man's side.
Both the commandresse, and her children two,
Friends, Servants, Horses, Wheels and Coach had so.
4
She that within the Wagon sat as chief,
Poverty.
Penia hight, her raiment torn and vile:
Pale wrinckled checkes she had, through hearty grief,
Upon her head a wreath of Camman^ile;
Wan were her lips, where mirth did seldom smile;
Two sad slow-moouing eyes, shut casements couerd,
Bout which dark-weeping clouds of woes still houerd.
5
Her children then that there beside her sat,
Obedience and Humility* Next them
Sat Servitude, her Page and Fellow-mate.
The Waggoner that did direct this frame,
Was holy Fear: two white Doves drew the same,
Fair Honesty and snowie Conscience:
Her Cart was Care; Wheels, Hope and Patience.
6 Digression to show the house of Poverty.
That her, or her sib si^ler I had seen
^ Upon a Moore, wonning no neighbor near,
In Cottage poor, and lonesome, I did ween
Icleeped ( a) (...), bare and thin of gear:
For but one Dish, one Table was there there;
One only Stool, where each did sit by turn;
And Crum^cks dung served them with fire to burn. (2) Obscurity.

7
For from her dugs did their whole Market come.
A Garden digd to bring an Oaten Cake;
One Christ all Fount, whose stream as it did run,
Seemed as good Music, as pure Wine to make.
One only Spade was here, one Sickle, Rake;
One only Knife, one Trencher, and one Pan;
In stead of Plate, a Cole-black Ebon Kan.
8
One wooden Spoone, one precious pewter Salt,
One Seaue, for Candles here were never seen.
And yet if greatness had not made her fault,
She would have lived content as Ceres Queen:
For Silence, Love, and Peace here borne did seem,
Where Nacke, and Ball, and simple Sim the son,
At Bed and Board like dear Friends all were one.
9
Security set open here the Gate:
For those that nothing have, can nothing fear.
Here Peace and Love close in the corner sat;
Content and Silence crowned with Poppie near*
A dish of Apples was their high days cheer:
This is a pith of a certain plant in the East Indies, which they eat to
quench the fires of Lust, those that would not have children.
Carussa cold, and Lettuce of light cost,
Which entertain sweet sleeps, and banish Lust.
10
But to return, Penia onward past
Toward Aretes Temple; so did I*
When straight there came a troop, whose winged have
Orethrew Penia rudely passing by;
For just they met where two ways cross did lie,
This to the Phane of Arete went on,
That unto Fortune and Argyrion.
11
This Gallant in a lofty Coach was plaste,
And Opulence was writ upon her breast,
Her face with quick and sparkling eyes were graced,
Smooth was her front, her cheeks with laughter pressed,
Her members poulpous, and her forehead blessed
With a proud Coronet, and in her hand
She likewise bore the Ensigns of command.
12
Her costly garments did more colors show
Then Iunoes foul, or thenth' Camelions thought,
Or those we see in Iris beauteous Bow;
All full of eyes her robes before were wrought
Her worldly circumspection to denote:
Her object Pleasure sat, and on each side
As her companions Iocus and Cupid.
13
Upon her Coach man's breast I written view
Oblivion of God, such was his name.
The Horses then that this her Chariot drew,
Rapine and Fraud were writ upon the same,
Her Chariot Ease, the Wheels that it sustain
Injustice had and Avarice insculpt,
Cruelty and Oppressionth' last inculpt.
14
Her Children and Attendants followed last,
And some on Coursers bravely mounted were,
And some on Palfreys fine and smoothly paest:
And Boasting, Curiosity and Fear,
Hardness of Heart, Disdain, Pride, Children were:
Her Tendants, Vain Delights and Luxuries,
Vulgar Applause, Opinions, Flatteries.
15
A thousand Leuits there I did behold;
Ten thousand Pleaders each where scatterd lay,
And each of these (a wonder to be told)
With Golden Hammers seemd to paue her way,
And as she past, devoutly did her pray
To think on them, her Lacqueys to for bread,
Fair Maias sons knit Garlands for her head.
16
Much troubled was Penia with her Patientia.
Wheel,
A little cracked, which while she sought to spell,
A bitter jar between them hapt the while:
For the poor Wretch in the mire no sooner fell,
But Opulence extremely began to swell
Like Dragon fraught with angry poison showing,
And in her head, her eyes, like Aet^ae glowing.
17
A thousand bitter terms she did bestow
On poor Penia, making the earth resound
With curses, which from her black mouth did flow;
And wi^h her oaths did seem the Heavens to wound:
And all this fire did from this fault redound,
Because (orethrowne by her) she stopped the way,
And seemd her journey to retard and stay.
18
She calls her twenty times base beggars brat;
N^y more, professes her, her slave to be,
Framde only for her use; and worse then that,
Accursed by Fate and all her progeny:
Then vaunts she her own birth and fortunes hie,
And that her constitution does surpass
Penia's more, then Dimond common Glass,
19
And that when first God framed this beauteous Ball,
He gave her as a blessing most divine,
Both in the earth, in sea, and through them all,
Each where with most resplendant beams to shine*
And that Penia was not known that time,
Till Eve by tasting the forbidden tree,
Bred her, the curse of her impiety.
20
In humble sort Penia did reply;
She was no slave, but free, with like price bought:
And, tho she vaunt not of Nobility.
If honest, not ignoble to be thought.
Beside their pedigree from one Sire brought,
One matter and like form, in like springs moving,
If minds be like, deserves but like approving.
21
But great impiety thou do commit,
Thinking my soul (quoth she) like Horses framed
To bear thy burdens, it is a vessel fit
To hold divine things (and how much less stained
With the worlds dregs more fit) why then is fortune named?
Blood, money, earth, as vantage? who have start
In betternes it is in their better part.
22
Touching my Birth, thou err'st no less in that;
For Adam knew me first in Paradise,
While he lived naked in his best estate;
Rich in the midst of mundaine pouerties.
I teach Humility unto the wise,
Obedience, and a thousand virtues more,
Had Adam kept me, he had still lived so:
23
But lest thou deem me too contemptiblie,
Conceive it thus. The World's Gods Instrument;
The Rich and Poor, Trobles and Bases be;
Where from the Base, tho deepest sounds be sent,
Yet yield the lesser strings much sweet content;
And gently touched, much harmony beget;
Much grief if broke, while to the Base they are set:
24
Oh God (quoth Opulence) thou Catife blind,
See not that I Am the glory of the day?
The beauty of the face, and joy of mind?
Where thou art, each thing languisheth away;
The flower does fade, and beauty does decay;
A Winter of chill woes nips every thing,
Of joy or pleasure is there never spring.
25
All laws of friendship do thou violate;
Through thee the Sy^e wishes his children dead.
The wife repines, the brothers grutch and hate,
And often through thee is sold the Husbands bed.
What Is more, through thee all mortal men are led
Into vile courses: Hence these mischiefs comes,
Frauds, Rapines, Murders, Thefts, Oppressions.
26
I give the studeous better means to know:
Through thee have perished many Noble wits.
I give the bounteous better means to show
Their virtue, in requiting benefits:
But on thy tongue (alas) there only sits
An empty thanks, through thee are those ingrate,
Whose better thoughts would else remunerate.
27
Excepting thee I think just no where is
The true Torpedo; whom tho none would find,
Yet while they angle for some better fish,
They meet with thee, whose hidden force so binds
Their members, and so manacles their minds,
That straight they seem transformd to wood and stone,
Like those that erst Medusa looked upon.
28
And as the Thunder soures the Milk or Wine,
So the best humors are by thee quite changed
Into sour Accide, purest sanguine:
But I amongst the immortal Gods am ranged
By mortal men: for by me griefe's estranged,
And melancholy banished from each heart;
I mittigate disease, deaths dolerous dart:
29
I power in men beauty and comeliness,
And with the spright of fortitude them fill.
It Is I that do with Art and Wisdom bless,
Refine the wit, and rectify the will;
Whose parts t'aduance, as thine to ruin still:
I raise them from the dunghill, and do place
Them many a time in Fortunes highest grace.
30
It Is I that pierce the center, thence to rend
Earths hidden treasures, to adorn the shrines.
It Is I that make the Walls, Towers, Spires transcend
Above the clouds, which unto after times,
Like fair characters may declare the minds
Of those that built them: But with thine remain
Of Wit or Worth, no past or present Fame;
31
It is for me the utmost Isles are found;
For me that Natures closets are made known,
To make my Courtly Palaces abound
With ornaments of Glass, Silk, Wood and Stone:
For me that Neptune does with burdens groan,
Whilst the good Huswiues of each happy State
Wed Kingdoms, and their wealths communicate,
32
With this discourse Peni^ deeply moved,
Returned this speech to Oppulence again.
If what thou say by others were opprou'd,
Then should thou need no trumpet to proclaim
Thine own worth, but thy self, nor mine to stain:
But false are thy selfe-praises, and untrue
Thy scandals, notwithstanding their fair show.
33
Strange Virtues of thy self thou would persuade,
That by thy means, men polisht are with Arts;
And that by thee men's minds are thankful made;
By thee endued with loyal loving hearts;
By thee made honest; and by thy good parts*
Enricht with honor, valor, health and wit,
Peace in this life, and heaven succeeding it.
34
A comment fair, if good words could prevail
(Without due circumstance) and bare belief:
But doubtless here thy credit needs must fail;
For evident it is thou (...) the thief,
That robs men's understandings; Author chief
Of wanton pleasures; Enemy to these
Sweet knowledges, that are not got with ease;
33
How many thankful persons can thou show
For benefits received, that may require
(Having got means, so often wished) and do,
If future use or service not inuit?
I could name thousands that expecting right
And merited reward, at last have gaind
Naught but disgrace, or death, where love was aimed.
34
How many youthful Heirs are to be found,
(Although their Syres have toyld hard many a day
And year for them, to add ground unto ground,
And Coin to Coin) that sit not down and pray,
Great Jupiter to take them soon away?
Or Wives that tears for dying Husbands shed,
That wish not pleasures new from wanton bed?
35
No man by thee the honester is made,
These qualities unto the soul adhere
Not things. We see the mighty men invade
The weaker, and them grind, devour and tear.
The poor are curbed by law, restraind by fear:
Presumpteous greatness acts far more ill,
Then impotencie urged by want, not will.
36
Thou may afford an honorable name:
But these bare shadows without substance be,
It Is only virtue that acquires clear fame:
Which he that wants, is like a fruitless tree,
Where nothing else but leaves and blossoms be;
Or like an Apple, whose exterior part
Perchance seems fair, but's rotten at the heart.
37
Least needst thou boast of Valor, Health, or Wit;
Excess corrupts the body, dims the mind:
A thousand Feauers, Gouts, and Dropsies sit
Waiting upon full platters, and we find
An active soul but seldom is confind
To full fed body, where the mists and showers
Of daily surfets, suffocates her po^res.
38
As touching peace, thou no such thing do give;
The sting for wealth extorted, fear to loose,
Anxietie wherein they howerly live,
Still doubtful where to leaue't, to these, or those;
Their souls (like beasts in Toils) so fast enclose,
That both in life and death to earth fast glew'd,
They make it doubtful that no peace ensued.
39
Now for my self to answer in excuse
Thy false objections, whereby thou would show,
That every mischief which the times produce,
Proce^des from me, that men dishonest grow
Hence only: I deny that this is so;
Then Fortune were a Goddess: but we see
Wealth makes not worth, nor want dishonestie.
40
I no man dull whom Nature did not frame
Of courser mould; as spur^es I rather scrue
To prick him on, by virtue to a^taine
Those Glories, VVisdome, honesty deserve,
And valor; and what Fortune does reserve
For her own children* and to him deny
To make him gain by worth and industry.
43
Indeed I build no Cities nor proud Towers
Of costly things, of Treasures vaunt not I:
I live in humble Cottages and Bowres
In peace, except I be disturbde of thee:
But thou art cheynd in loved captivity,
Most strongly gyude, and all that take thy part,
Not loosely by the legs, but by the heart.
44
No rest at all thou give, of peace no taste,
Which not in outward things, but in content
And right religion of the soul is plaste.
Thy peace bea^es every hour some detriment;
Each loss of Office, favor, suit, or rent,
Orethrowes it quite; to be in bravery
Out-shind perchance: a frown makes diverse die.
45
The vanity of which did whilome move
Those worthy Pagans, most of all to prize
That kind of peace, my humble state does prove;
And counting thee the bait of miseries,
Despisde thee so, that Spargit Aristippus mediis in Sirtibus aurum. Ausonius.
Aristippus, wise,
Threw all thy guyts in the sea; who sure did find,
That they disturbde his peace, and vexed his mind.
46
Xenocrates, and Anacreon the Philosopher having received five talents by gift
of Polycrates the Tirant, was so troubled by day in his mind, by casting and
meditating with himself how to bestow it, and so tormented for want of sleep
in the night, for the fear he had of thieves, that at five days end he came
to Polycrates, and restored him all his money; telling him, that he would not
thereafter ever sell the quiet content and security of poverty for a greater
sum of money. Stobaeus. Zenon, another Philosopher, having lost all his goods
by a tempest at Sea, saving a threadbare cloak that he kept about him,
greatly rejoiced, and thankt Fortune that she had taken away his goods, whereby
she had deliuerd his mind from captivity, and made it fit to receive those
excellent treasures of Philosophy, whereunto ever after he meant to betake
himself. Pluta^ck in his Treatise of the quietness of the Mind.
diverse other more;
Diogenes did wholly thee refuse,
Because he held thee unto peace a foe
And virtue And even God himself did choose
My rank, while he did mortal body use;
So did his friends and servants, both by word
And by example, all my praise record.
47
Scarce had Penia spoke these words of ours,
When Oppule^ce like some great River swo^ne
By Wint^rs tempests, and excessive showers,
Which bears down Corn and Meadows lately mo^ne,
And mighty Woods, in many ages grown)
Flew on Pen^a, and her passion swellin^
Ore Reasons bancks) was scarcely held from killing.
48
But half her cote there from her back she tore,
Which she did challenge to her self as due
By rights I knew not; and away thence bore,
As (...) of the praise to'er conquest due,
And with her train in haste away thence flew
So swift, that scarce mine eyes could ^rackt her pace,
Returning straight unto her native place.
49
Long after whom Pen^a did not stay,
But followed speedily to get redress
By some petition, or some other way,
With weeping cheer, and hearts great pensiveness.
I lo^ging much to understand no less
The end, then entrance to this tragedy,
To old Invention.
Eyrema, Artfull VVi^ch I fl^e.
50
And her besought out of her powrefull skill,
To Oppulentia's Palace me to bear.
Which granted, up we flew, more high then hill,
Higher then th'avrie dwellers ever were,
From whence great Cities, but small Towns appear,
And Mountains, Mose hills. Here she made me vie^
Fair Belgi^*s rich Towns, and Seeples new.
51
But here she said Penia was not known;
Yet were she there, the liberality
And kind compassion should to her be shown,
And various ways for fruitful industry,
Would change her Nature. But from thence flew we
Over the vast sea, and the continent
Through strange lands, and to Stambolda is as much as Ciuitas Magna.
Stambolds City went
52
Near which she said this Opulentia boad,
And had for use and ostentation raysde
Ten thousand stately buildings. Then she showed
When on the sight we thoroughly had gazde,
Structures indeed deserving to be praysde,
For richness, beauty, pleasure; and by Art
(Unseen) co^ueyde me through each secret part.
53
There did she show a thousand works divine,
Wrought in white Paros, and red Porpherie,
In Golden Theba^, spotted Serpeutiue
Tables and Collumes thrown most curioss^e,
Whole rooms seel'd through with sable ^bonie,
And hung with Clothes, from Niles blessed Memphis brought,
Or those more fair, by Virgins fingers wrought.
54
Then showed she me the Beds in-laid with Gold,
And some with richer Stones embellished;
The Sheets pe^fum'd with Sweets from Ba^tham sold,
The Flores with costly Carpets ouer-spred,
Through which into the Wardrops me she led,
Where Silk and Cloth for differing seasons fit,
In monstrous shapes, be^ray'd her wandering wit.
55
From thence into her Cabbinet she went,
And showed of Ormuz Pearls the costly Chains,
The sparkling Diamonds from Ca^baya sent,
(...) pure Gold, dug from rich (...) veins,
Which Stella wearing, Iun^'s form reteynes.
Then showed she all her masks, her (...), her tyres,
Ruffes, garte^s, scarfes, plumes, lotions, pendants, wires.
56
Which having seen without the least offense,
Or notice taken of our being there,
We next observed her great magnificence,
Her state, attendants, and excessive cheer,
Her trains of servants ever ready near,
With humble reverence, with cap and knee,
And Kookes that still devising dishes be.
57
Her Cup-boards laden all with Red and White,
And all her vessels wholly of the same,
Laden with dainties, all that may delight;
Both Venson, Pheasant, Quail, and all else taken
In Earth and Sea: then Banquets brought from Spain^,
The pre^ious Perfumes that vast Neptune yields
She showed me, and the Sweetes of Indian fields.
58
Why should I hear the dainty Syndo^ touch,
Richly perfumed, and crispt with cost so trim,
That Romes preseruers were not worth so much?
Or the Gellies, under which with nimble fin,
In Muskie waves live little Fishes swim?
Why name I Wines, both Spanish full of fire,
Can^rie, Creet, French, Hydelberg, and Spyre?
59
Why should I note her Coaches, and Caro^ies?
Her easy Litter, easier Palamkeen?
The stately Saddles, curious Bits and Bosses,
With Steeds to which the same belonging been (...)
Some of Arabia next to Palestine,
Some Freezlanders, some Turquish, some of Spain,
Both Barbaris and Neap^litane?
60
Why note I thousands that their times mispend,
Only devising pleasures new for her?
Those that the Hawks, or those the Horses tend?
Or else the Dogs T^oy, Hector, Ringwod, Pirr?
Or those by Music that delight con^err,
By toys, by pastimes, and by flatteries;
By songs, by scenes, by ieasts and ^ooleries?
61
All these thus briefly noted as we could,
Unseen into the Gardens straight we go,
Where curious Labyrinths we next behold,
And Mermaids, from whose breasts fresh streams still flow;
And Flowers with colors more then Iris Bow;
Then Beasts, and Fowls, and Fruits each where she spies*
Brought from each land t'adorne this Paradise.
62
Where Arbors green of huge straight standing brothers,
With thick wou'n boughs, keep from the Suns clear rays,
And human eyes, the joys of amorous Lovers;
VVhero farre-fet Quiresters do sing the praise
Of powrefull Venus in their warbling Lays,
In vnder-groues, by Art so well designed,
That feet, nor eyes, forbidden passage find.
63
Much more there was, which then we ouerpast,
By reason of some noise raysde at the Gate,
To know the cause whereof, we went in have,
And ^ound (...) there in woeful state:
For while she here redress did impetrate,
Proud Oppulence tore off the the other piece
Of her poor cloak, and left her without fleece.
64
But not content with this, because she sought
And su'd redress, and justice at her door,
She kicked her down, treading her underfoot;
And while Pe^ia mercy did implore,
Fierce Oppulentia still incenst the more,
And crossing the known truths which she did say,
Did what she could to take her life away.
65
But whilst they strove thus, from a Saffron cloud
Came nimble Mercury with speedy wing,
Like Lightning that preuents the clamours loud,
But slow reporter of his swift coming,
Who brought this message from the Heavenly King;
And beckning silence both to great and small,
Deliuerd it with wonder of us all.
66
Mortal (quoth he) from Him, whose powrefull hands
Sustaines the fabric of the Worlds wide Frame;
From Him that Thunder and swift Fire commands,
Th'e^heriall Regions, and the darker Reign;
(...) Him that unto (...) calls again
Deprived habits, am I huher sent,
T'impart to thee his will and high intent.
67
To thee (quoth he) that seek'st to tyranize
Ore poor Pen^a, making Will seem Right,
And not so much to (...) thine avarice,
As thy revenge and proud disdainefull spite;
That take her goods, and treadst her vnder-feete,
(...) thy self alone in Heavens high grace,
And her thy slave, an abject poor and base.
68
Fond Mortal, I am sent to let thee know,
That thou (...) thy self, to think that Iou^
Does with his Children, as you Mortals do,
Which show most bountio still, where most you love;
For he the quite contrary does approve:
And knowing how abundance spoils your minds,
Content sometimes, for greatest wealth assigns.
69
And know, he sends Penia to the war
Empty of luggage against her mighty foes,
For her more safety; and all theirs that are
Found valiant to sustain these Cannon blows:
For who in wars (...) by the luggage go,
Are most part common soldiers? but the brave
That are to ^ight, naught but their Armours have.
70
His creatures are you both, and both are free,
Framed for his glory, with one price redeemed;
Both for your states even equal debtors be,
Although of you much otherwise esteemed:
For Heavens best blessings are (...) men misdeem'd.
But for her wrongs which here thou do impose,
Heaven writes their weight in everlasting woes.
71
Know therefore thou deceiuer, that have lulled
The World asleep with thine enchanting wiles,
And so from her (like Dallilab) have pulled
Her strength and wisdom by thy cunning guiles,
Leaving naught else but shame to her the whiles,
Confusion, weakness, blind security,
In pamperd pride, and beastly Luxury.
72
I must denounce that as thou were exild
Long since from stately Babylon, the Queen
Of Cities, and from the Chaldean field,
Where Cer^s all her plenties did vnteeme;
And from the fruitfuli land of Palestine,
Where nothing now of ancient glory rests;
Her soil turned sands, inhabitants turned beasts.
73
So shall thou for thy wickedness here wrought,
Especially for thine oppressions,
Because by thee Justice is bought and sold,
And the world tortured with thy strange transgressions;
Be banished hence, except the heavenly sessions
Prevent the time: but for Penia she
Shall to thy wrongs no more now subject be.
74
A Virgin, and a Royal Queen there is,
Beyond the Western Oceans ^urthest bound,
Who many a stately kingdom does possess,
Which does with all things good and fair abound,
With high felicity and honor cround;
Nothing but one she wants, the cheerful light:
For blind she is, and wrapped in clouds of night.
75
Many fair sisters has she, that obtain
The best of Natures gifts; Hesperia
And fair Valencia, proud Iberia's fame,
Peloponesus, rich Natolia,
Brave Persia, and silken robbed Media.
All which for ample dowries, and rich things,
Have been the Brides of C^sars and great Kings.
78
For some of these vaunt of their wool, some silk,
Others great portions have in Corn and Wine;
Some of them have fat Herds, Honny and Milk;
Some have the fruitful Olive, some rich Mine:
The meanest does with some fair portion shine:
But their wise Parent amply does requite
With all their gifts, our Virgins want of sight.
79
The lofty Ceaders of Mount Libanon;
The Oily woods in rocky Norway sold,
(Where nimble Herds in grounds much fatter run)
The Silks of China, Furs of Russia cold,
And VVines of Gaseoyne, her fair breasts do hold:
The Oils of Piemont, half the Drugs and Dies,
That the whole world contains, in her lap lies.
80
Unto this Queen must I Penia bear,
Who with some certain words which she must say,
And with her tongue her darkened eyes must clear,
Which good this Virgin amply will repay;
For which let every faithful Britain pray.
This said, the winged God snatched her thence, and vanished;
I wakt, and from my soul all sad thoughts banished.
Malum and finis Rerum: OR, SIN AND VERTVE.
1
MIne eyes are dim, my tongue with sorrow cleaves,
My hands they shake, my knees together smite,
My soul does faint, my flesh with horror freezeth,
My heart it pantes, my hairs they stand upright,
When I in hand do take my pen to write
The things which did to me in sleep appear,
Which needs I must disclose, tho much I fear.
2
When sil^nt Night had covered with her cloak
The face of Earth, and every thing sought rest,
Save harmefull beasts, which Nature does provoke
To prey on weaker things; my Soul oppressed
With heavy thoughts, which banished from my breast
All pleasing and delightful fantasies,
This Vision thus appeared before mine eyes.
3
A naked Damsel first appeared (whose skin
With bleeding wounds ennammeld, yet did show
The hidden beauties that had dwelt therein)
She fled from one that gave her many a blow
With seuen-fold Whip, whose cause and selves to know
Sore did I long, and with that thought oppressed,
The wronged Wight this speech to me adrest.
4
Mortal (quoth she) I see thou pittiest sore
My wrongs; but make the case thine own,
And ^rust not this fals^ Siren, cunning whore,
Who bred in Heaven, and thence to earth thrown down,
As to her prison, here attempts to crown
Her self on Earth, si^ce Heaven she cannot win,
And robs my name, that is Virtue, but is Sin.
5
Trust not her painted brow, her blandishment;
Her beauties but a vizor paisted on,
A cunning bait to catch th'improuident;
She Is under it an Ethiopian:
And tho she smoothes her wrincles all she can,
She Is filthy, cruel: Tygres far more kind;
They feed on foes, but she deuoures her friend.
6
Under her Silk and Purple bravery,
Impartial eyes shall find with perfect sight,
Her members spotted with rank leprosy;
Her fingers armed with Harpies claws for fight
And rapine; cloven beast-like both her feet;
A Dragons tail which venombd foynes (...)
At her fond lovers, in their dear embraces.
7
And tho in pomp she travel through the world,
And most adore her, and her glittring train;
Yet are both they, and she, feared and abhord,
By those, whose perfect sight desernes the same:
Therefore for thine instruction will I name
Briefly her equipage, that thou may see
Both what her self and her attendants be.
8
First, must I show her Chariot and attire,
Wherein she makes her progress with her train
From East to West, The Seat is foul Desire;
The Wheels whereon it moves, are ^ordid Gain,
Self- Love and Vnbehefe, and Pleasures vain;
Her Coachman Belzabub, or Abbaddon;
Her Mates, Megara, Alecto, Tisiphene.
9
Her Iades tha^ drew her on, Disdain they be,
Pride, Envy, Wrath, Revenge, Ambition,
And lastly, Fear and Curiosity:
Deceit and Lies her Lacqueys by her run,
Still ready for all errands. After whom
Come her Attendants, (...) and Dissidence,
Confusion and tormenting Conscience.
10
Follie's her page, which still keeps Reason tide:
Hypocrisie's her Chaplain, who still thriues,
While true Zeal pines. Her Beadles, Ease Lust; Pride,
These from her Gates Repentance far off drives,
From whence I Virtue poor these wounds derive.
Lastly, thou feast her brood that follows,
Her Issue, Famine, Sickness, War and Death.
11
This said, four Altars then she pointed me,
All smoking hot with Incence on the same:
The first to Ambition and to Cruelty;
Ignorance and Idolatry retain
The second place; the third of these did flame
To Auarize and to Oppression: last
To Luxury and Just the fourth was placed.
The Altar to AMBITION and CRV^LTIE.
12
And while these things she spoke, me thought appeared
A horrid train of fierce and bloody Wights:
Flame colored Robes they wore, with Crimson sme^rd;
Their dreadful looks even yet my heart affrights.
Quoth she, all these joyed once in dismal ^ights,
And to their ends to tract a bloody way,
Which thus to sin her first oblations pay.
13
But to avoid prolixitie (quoth she)
And to make up a just account with time,
Thy patience and mine own lost liberty
I wish thee note, it is no intent of mine
Each several story here for to design
And prosecute, but only such as be
By chance most ^buious unto mine eye.
14
Why should I point thee out accursed Caine?
Orth' Hayrie Hunter with his sinew bow?
Or those on whom just Joseph did complain?
That frantic faithless King why should I show?
Or (1) He that made the childrens blood stream through
Iudeas streets? whyth' son of (2) Gedeon?
Or that same (...) cruel Absalon?
15
Behold Bu^iris, Egypts cruel King,
That fed with humain flesh his Horses full.
Three cruel (3) (...) him following.
(4) Numulisinthis then the Thracian Trull:
Then Phalleris with his dreadful brazen Bull.
Lo (5) Pontus King, and (6) Occhus false of oath,
Black Haniball, and (7) Iuguri^ here be both.
16
Next these, observe the Purple Persian there
With Royal tire, (8) (...) is his name;
How strange a sacrifice the wretch does bear,
To offer cruelties unhallowed flame.
With him (9) Astiages, and Zerxes came*
This millions slew, to atcheiue his proud desire;
That cookt the children for their woeful Sire.
17
Lo, Tulli^, King Ser^ius graceless heir,
Who weary of her long-liu'd Syres delay,
Slew him, perhaps t'anticipate a year,
Perhaps a month, perhaps not a full day:
But not con^ent to take his life away,
Most ignominiously she causde her Horse;
That drew her Chariot, trample on his corpse:
18
She showed me then two (11) Romans and two Greeks,
That with their happy regal states displeasde,
Halde by Ambition into strange dislikes,
Made the world sick, and in their time diseasde
Charen with two much labor, yet appeasde,
Nor satisfied a jot their vain desires,
Tho shedding seas of blood to quench those (...),
19
Then (as they came in sight) she did me show
Sylla, with purple face and fiery eyes,
The plague of Pontus, and Romes overthrow,
By first inducing those sad tragodies.
And M^rrius feared of friends and enemies.
Then (12) Cai^s vile, that wished the world to slay;
And (13) he that slew's Mother Agrippina.
20
Another (14) ^rew she showed me the^ that seemed
To be ^ome Kingly Romans by their weed,
But tyrants were, or monsters righter deemed,
Begot of Tigars brood, or Dragons seed,
So many innocents they causde to bleed;
Of whom some offered Arms, some Feet, Legs, thighs,
Some Ears, some Noses, others Tongues and eyes.
21
And (15) one of these she showed me among the rest
A Ro^aine Prince. (if true my Author tell)
Offering a heart with (...) five impressed,
Which Jesus made, if (...) they did spell:
But surely in the Tyrants heart was Hell,
With dying life, and living death who vexed
Those worthy seules to virtue so conext.
22
Next these came one in (26) Polish weed attired,
Whom Rats and Mice had bare anatomizde:
Then of my fair his story I required,
Who said, 'twas one that sometimes Royalizde
In P^lish Throne; by Poison that surprizde
His Uncles lives, whose flesh by Heavens just doom
Turned into Rats, the Caitife to consume.
23
Next him came one that sacrifizde to th'Ghost
Of's angry Sire, the cruel (17) Amurath*
Then he that offered up that woeful Host,
Of Noble Grecian blood, fierce (18) Mahumeth.
Next him Valachia's Prince that put to death
So many thousand subjects several ways,
As did great Tyrant Mahumet amaze.
24
In the last rank of these she showed me more,
Three cruel Princes foul with Patricide:
A Turk* a (misnam'd) Christian, and a Moore.
The first, most cruel (20) ^elim, full of pride,
Who in a cup his aged Sires death did hide:
Friends, Brothers, Nephews killed. and the whole world fired,
Like Phaeton; and last by fire expired.
25
The second (21) Adolphe, Duke of Guelders hight,
Who from his seat his aged Parent drew,
And him imprisoned in most loathsome plight,
Thinking to tirehim out by means mis-due,
Whom into like extremes Heaven justly threw:
And as from's Sire he banished pace and rest,
So he a captive lived and did distressed.
26
The third of these was (2^) Amidas, the Prince
Of Tunis, who against his Si^e did rise,
Tho being chiefly crusted for defense,
During his absence, against his enemies:
Absent he takes his Crown, present his Eyes.
But as his Regal Sire he robbed of sight,
Just Heaven by sickness did himself benight.
27
After all these she showed me other three,
Of whom the first an English habit wore:
Wan were his Cheeks, black Locks, a down cast eye,
And Camels back; his name I sought her sore
To kno^ but she denyde, bad ask no more.
A thousand slaves there followed after him
With bloody bowls, where heads and hearts did swim
28
Next after whom a warlike Gaul there came,
Which in his hand a bloody brand did wave:
The robes he wore were scarlet did in grain,
And he himself like color seemd to have,
Who in so many millions blood did laue.
And as he wet all France with bloody showers,
So heaven at length his blood from each part powers
29
The third and last of all, whose native ill
And vice transcends the vice of all the rest,
As far as Atlas does the humblest Hill,
Or Sylons carry Tower, Galwayes small beast:
With whom worst Kings compared, seem good and blessed;
The (23) Russian Tyrant, Russia's shame, whose breath
Did wither all things, in whose name was death.
30
His pleasures were not like to other men's;
Sweet sounds the sternest hearts sad'st souls rejoice:
But Music never pleased his hellish sense.
He never laughed but at some dying voice;
Tears, sighs, sobs, groans to him were heavenly joys,
Who very seldom rellisht well his meat,
But when with blood and death he seasoned it.
31
If any ravished virgin did lament,
Or honored Lady forced unto his will,
Or seemed their friends or parents discontent,
Toth' stewesthey went; or (not content to kill)
He hung them ore their parents table, till
Their friends (with their dead savor welnigh slain)
By tears and bribes got leave to bury them.
32
When people from the Temples used to come,
He used to loose his Bears at them in spor^*
Delighting much to see them seal the throng;
With which bad pastime many perished for it.
No mercy did his anger ere consort,
Which (...) Kindreds; but, encreast to rage,
Entombed whole Cities, sparing sex nor age.
33
His ministers of mirth, his dearest friends,
His Wives, his Whores, his Children were not sure;
The most of these he brought t'vntimely ends;
The instruments even of his lusts impure;
The Hangmen from this Hangman's not secure:
The Bears and Tyg^rs in their own Whelps joy*
He worse then they, his own Son did destroy.
34
The wondrous writing on Balthashar^ wall
Seems small, compared with what to him was sent,
To whom from Heaven a letter down did fall
In Marble-writ, whose sculpture sure was meant
To him that lived, and did impenitent.
And as he fatal was while he had breath,
So did his ste^ch in death give others death.
2. The Altar to IGNORANCE and IDOLATRY.
35
These and their ceremonies scarce were past,
When in there came another hideous crew,
Which to the second Altar went in have,
And on the same their several Incense threw:
Most of them differing both in speech, in hue,
In face and habit, being several Nations,
And some in new, and some in antic fashions.
36
Then here my kind Interpreter I praid
T'enstruct me of this second company:
Who kindly granted my request, and said,
All these brought Incense to Idolatry
From every Coast and Region far and nigh,
Both old and new. But since so many live,
She meant of both but short accounts to give*
37
She showed me first upon this Altar placed,
The Idols worshipped by each several Nation,
Whereby Iehouahs worship is defaced,
And Stocks and Stones cut after differing fashion,
Men, Beasts, Fish, Foul^ by vain imagination
Are deified; yea, Satan visibly,
Not plealde alone with types inuisibly*
38
She named (24) the Egyptians, leaders of the rest,
Seeking for I^is and (...) lost,
And for their sacred Bull but late disseast,
Lamenting sore, meaning to be at cost
With His Obsequies: for even those things that most
Harmed them, they worshipped; the Aspe, the Dragons fell;
Both Birds and Beasts within their Phanes did dwell.
39
The Iehuewmon, and the (25) Crocodile they fed,
And feeding, with great humblenes adored;
And Beetles (blinded Beetles they indeed,
That so the death of Dogs and Cats deplored)
(Whose strange zeal that from (26) Onions aid implored)
Me thought now having found Osiris ran,
And sacrifiz'd thereto a (26) red hair'd man.
40
The Romans here sought out their rural Pan,
Jove, Saturn, Hercules, Mars, Liber, Play,
Mercury, and two-fronted Lanus them;
Pallas and Juno, Ve^us and Flora,
With their blessed Mother Berecinthya,
Chance, Vesta, Victory, and Pr^ayus,
With thousands such, to number friuolus.
41
She showde me then the old (27) Ethi^pions
Which Hammon sought, and those oraculous trees;
(a) Diana then served by th* Ephesians,
And Eckrons, (28) Baalzebub, God of Flies;
(29) Sydonians, busy with the mysteries
Of their dear Sheep god, Astert: (30) Tirians
Bowing to Apollo; and to (...)* Syrians.
42
Then those adored the Sun, the fond (31) Phoenicians,
Here in great numbers sought their loved (32) stone
(So much enricht, and served by several Nations)
Which was Piramedall formed like a con^.
And here the men of (33) Carras made great moan
To Luna, to whose Temple those overcome
By their cursed wives, with offerings used to run.
43
Next these came such whom amorous fire^ did move
By paires to seek the shades, and burbling streams,
And sacred beauties of the (34) (...) Grove
Where Cypress boughs forbid th'ennamourd beams
Of glorious Phoebus, in his hottest gleames
To kiss their Mother-e^rth, or to discover
The secret joy* of any melting lover,
44
The (35) Persians here adored their holy Fire:
The Laodiceans to Minerua paid
(According as her cruel Rites require)
Yearly oblation of a spotless Maid.
Diverse there were likewise, that offerings laid
To Dago^ th* Siren of the Phylistines.
But here from these she past to nearer times.
45
And showed me first the vain (36) Tartarians,
Offering unto their felten Dei^ie
Mares* milk and Flesh, Next them the (37) Chy^ians,
And () (...), people of great policy,
Yet in Religion full of vanity,
And who (as'ts easiest always to do evil
Through Ignorance) give worship to the Devil.
46
Next these came (38) Peguans as wise as they,
That Incenc't Idol. Devils of strange shape;
As does Camba^a to, and Bengala.
The (39) (...) here fought out their Ape,
And those of (...), and along to the Cape
Comorin, of Narsinga, Callicut,
That how to an Apes Tooth, and do worship to it.
47
Then showed she diverse did Idolatrize
Toth, Sun and Moon, the Moors of Angola,
And Congo; some to Serpents, some to Trees.
Canibals of (...), Zanfara,
Then showed she me the Witches of Medra,
Which worshipe Devils, and do offer them
Loved sacrifice of humain bodies slain,
48
She past not byth' tawny (40) Tenustitans,
That millions to their Vitzlipu^zly slew:
Seconded by th'as fond Peruuians,
Who did their (...) all bedew
With blood of slaughtred men. But let me view
Bra^illians serving A^gnan and's (41) Maracca:
(...) offering theirs Blood and Tobacca.
49
The next that unto me she did display,
Of Turkey pilgrims seemd a (...),
Passi^g the Desar^s of Arabia,
Who seemd as if to Meccha now they came,
Their Prophets grave (and the house of (...))
These at this A^tar sought mongir other things
His Tomb thereon to pay their offerings.
50
Next these came some that ^rought a world of trash,
(...), Rel^k; hol^ Crucifixes, Coffers,
Gold, Jewels, (...) and pu^e Ciptian brass,
Vow, Prayers, Tears, to wood and stone, vain offers
To gods that canno: help, the wrongs worms proffers:
A dull (...) that senseless (...) adores,
More gross then theirs that active sprights implores.
51
After all these I fortuned to (...)
An Idol among the rest of fearful form:
Like humain sace it had, but ne'cr an (...),
To see; upon the brow a mighty, horn*
Elephants ears, yet use did none return:
An eare-wide mouth, with Boar like fangs beset,
Andth' P^rples tongue, as sharp as needles where.
52
A Ianus face it had, a morions hew,
Two wings, and many colored plumes she wore,
The upper parts did Giants members show,
And arms, whose finger^ Griffens tallents bore,
But P^gmies legs it had, so small therefore,
That much ado they had to make it stand,
For still it tumbled down on every hand.
53
Those that did worship this, brought waters sweet,
Thinking to wash it fair: but all in vain,
In vain they strove to make their Ethiope white,
Pure waters were polluted by the same;
I craved my Fair to let me know their name:
But she unwilling was to grant me this,
Only she called their Idol Dokesis, Opine^.
Dokesis.
54
All these past on, amongst them diverse were
Whom I had seen, and diverse other to
I never knew: whom this my Virgin-faire
For brevity omitted me to show:
But all with humble reverence did go
Toth' second Altar, and did lowly lowre,
While they thereon did their libations power.
3. The Altar of AVARICE and OPRESSIO^.
55
Which done, they straightway vanished out of sight,
And the third rank appeared of Suppliants then;
All which were such whom Gold did most delight,
And gain atchie^'d byth' harms of other men.
She showed me diverse Princes mixed with them,
Although for brevity she only named
Some few, whom this base vulgar vice distayn'd.
56
She showed me Pharoe and's extorted wealth,
Extracted from the p^ore oppressed Jew:
And Lidian Crasus with his loved polfe:
(a) And Ptolomy whom Cypress sometime knew.
Then the (42) ^icillian (...) did she show,
And the (43) Neapolitane of later time,
That causde his subjects for to keep his Swine.
57
And after them she let me next behold
A stately train of petty Princes then,
And Lordlings fair ^ttir'd in Silk and Gold,
Which save their Robes* did Polish fashion seem;
I should have sworn I most of them had seen:
But I confess that I no such do know,
And this confession to mine errors owe.
58
With stately pace me thought these (...) Peers
And fierce regard, went up to sacrifize
Chargers of Sweat, and pearly Peasan^s Tears,
(So often transformed by Magic Auatice
Into those orient ones of smaller price)
They offered shows of Bark and Ackorne bread,
And sculles of men, which hard hearts famished.
59
A thousand Lawyers here did sacrisize.
Who offered up Demutres, and long delays,
(...), Stops, Injunctions, References,
And Prohibitions, that the cause betraies
Of the poor Client, and the Kernel lays
At their own doors, restoring these the shell,
Of whom had Tophet the will, the world were well.
60
She showde me then another gowned crew,
And Cipresse Garlands did their brows impale;
They seemed like mourners by their sable hew,
Yet massy che^ts they seemed to t^g and hale;
Upon their shoulders bore they bills of sa^e,
Morgages, Nouerints, rich Jewels, Stones;
But all their offerings were of dead men's bones.
4. The Altar to LUST and LVXVRIE.
61
To the last Altar then (whereon were plac'^
To Bacchus and to Venus Deitius,
Two Images, with curious cunning graced)
Came the fourth rank thereto to sacrifize,
Which did with Songs and Musich iouialize,
And rosy Chaplets did their ^aires entwine,
Their colors youthful wear, White, Red and Green.
62
There (...)
She showed me, and that Iustfull Pa^ipha.
The wife of (...) did not (...);
Nor youthful (...), and fair Mellena;
Nor Troyalus, and wanton Cressida,
(...), Iays, Flora, and Manilius
She showed, and (...), and Demetrius.
63
Po^peia there she showed, and Clodius;
She showed me (44) Sy^eus and Messaline.
Then Cleopatra and Anthonius,
And many others of much later time,
And nearer home: all which to Vinus shri^e,
Besides Sighs, Sonnets, Tears, and Libian Gold,
Offered a Milke-white Goat, twice eight years old.
64
She noted then (45) three singled from the rest,
Whose countenance showed their sad souls discontent;
Lovers they seemed; yet seemed their minds ^ossest
With deeper woes, then Cupids languishment:
These three from three pure souls those jewels rent;
Which gained, with loss of lives they did repay,
And Crowns, which here on Venus shrine they lay:
65
Ten thousand more there were, whose stories she
For brevity abridged; yet three or four
She noted, patterns of strange Luxury,
Pe^sians and Chaldeans, but past ore
All of them, save Balthaser, who did power
Full Challices to (...) holy Flame,
As erst he did amongst his cups being slain.
66
There named she Geta The Emperor, whose me^t
After no common guise to's table came,
But ranckt by letters of the Alphabet.
There named she Esope the Tragedian,
Who offered up a dish unseen till than,
All the sweet singing Bir^a that Rom^ did hold,
To grace his Feast, at dearest prises sold.
67
She left not out Dennis Hetaclemt;
Iouian, and Septimius Seuerus,
Who did with drinking, both were not forgot;
Nor yet that Sorcerer Tiberius:
All which to (...) most imperious
Did offer Flaggons, and with w^eathes of Vine,
Adornd the Temples of his honored shrine.
68
The Heliogabalus.
Priest of (...) then she showed me there,
All naked, in his chariot drawn along,
By naked women (as he did appear
Sometime in Rome amidst the lustful throng)
Where Gammeds and Sirens sweetly sung)
And a rare dish of minst meat offered
Of Pe^liens tongues, and Cocks-combs sinely (...).
69
She showed me then the Emperor Maximine,
A Thrac^an Shepherd by original,
Who did by all the stairs of Fortune climb
Unto the throne and seat Imperial.)
(But as she rai^de him, so she wrought his fall)
A full crammed Glutton so (...) fed with cheer,
That two strong men were plac's his paunch to bear,
70
Diverse there were of later times, that seemed
Amongst the rest* she noted only two,
The first, at first, great (...) I deemed;
But better viewd by ^ picture, straight I know;
He softly pac't, but sore did puff and blow:
He drank to Bachus and with all his heart
Presented Venus with his secret part.
71
Next him came Muleasses, that (...)'d
His dishes with so rare and costly Swee^es,
That one three little birds there were consumed
An hundredth Crowns* Next these came diverse Knights
And Princely Dames assisting at these Rit^s,
And millions of each bank, (...) she
Cut off, through th'entrance of (...) company.
72
Much was I moved with what I erst had (...),
My heart it vented sighe^, mine eyes (...),
Recording things which so long past had ^een,
But now alas renewed my gr^efes and fears,
Seeing a world of Clergic men by the ears,
Striving and struggling who should first begin
To kill the greatest Hecatombs to sin.
73
Foul work they made, and many a bloody stream
Forth from their broken head did trickle down:
Sore tugged they at a triple Diadem,
And for the same was many a cloven crown,
Their Croysiers cracked, and Miters overthrown:
Such stir there was, as any man might well*
Think only bred in Babylon or Hell.
74
In most disordred sort along they went,
Amongst themselves each striving first to be.
With single sacrifizes not content,
Each of them did to every Altar fly
With equal zeal, and like Humiliue;
Out stripping far (if all she told me true)
The vildest Pagan^ either old or new.
75
Then quoth my Fair, Convert then thine eyes, and find
In these the complete ill of all the rest,
And vice accomplish in so high a kind,
That Nero here would Cruelty detest,
Maximine think his Avarice were blost,
Mad Anthonine would Luxury deride,
Messalme would hate lust, Po^pea pride.
76
Lo first comes he that drew the putrid Corse
Of's predecessor from his Marble Vrne,
And in a Synod (void of all remorse)
First, placed him in Saint Peter's Chair in scorn,
Did him with Robes pontifical adorn;
Degrades him; then from's hands three fingers cuts;
Lastly, with his corpse pure Tyburs waves polutes.
Platina, de formoso, in vita Stephani sexti.
He that desires satisfaction for these ensuing Stories, may be truly informed
of their truth from these Authors; Platina de vitis pontificum, Onuphrius,
Petrarche, Guiccardine, eminent men in their times, and all employed in great
places under Popes.

77
Then John the twelfth, a monster vile behold,
To hunting more adicted then to prayer
(When tend it for venerian tilts he could:)
The Lateran he made a brothell fair;
Saint Peter's golden Challices the ware.
He, Healths to Pluto drunk; and for his pain,
By him i'th'act of lust impure was slain.
78
I would not load thy membrie too sore,
(Quoth she) among many will I name but two
Damd Sorcerers, that Leagues accursed swore,
And did in woods and secret places bow,
And sacrifice th'infernali powers unto,
Contracting most dear bargains, to obtain
A short, disquiet, aye repented reign.
79
The first lo there is Platina speaks of this to the full. in vi^a Siluester
secundi.
Siluester by name,
Whose bargain was, that he on earth should stay
So long, till to Jerusalem he came,
A further journey then he meant to stray.
But going to the Church, so called, to pray,
His Feind^ appears: the Churches name he craves:
Which known, he droopes dies. Thus falfe Feinds deceiues.
80
That other Benedict the ninth we call,
So far indeed from what his name imports,
That to obtain the cursed Romain Pall,
And that with women he might freely sport,
Sealed covenants written with his own blood for*t.
And whilst he once his wicked homage made,
His Master killed him, and his own debts paid.
81
There goes another no less liberal,
Another Benedict, a blessed one:
Of Priestly gifts and grace spiritual,
A man of equal note with those best known,
Who ravished Nuns and Virgins, pitied none:
A damned Atheist blind with ^ust and pride,
The soul to be immortal he denide.
82
That Hildebrand lo here, that Hellish brand,
The sower of tedition, murder, strife,
Before whose Gate an Emperor did stand
Barefoore three days, attending with his wife;
Yet still he sought to rid him of his life:
Not pleased, although his Crown upon his knee
He offered him, with base seruilitie.
83
Then showed she him that did Pope John benight,
Imprisond, and in prison causde him pine.
Then he that crowned the Emperor with his feet,
That dogged incaelestiall Calestine.
Then Alexander Pope far less divine
Then Pagan Alexander, Persia's god,
Who vnder's feet Great Caesar's never trod.
84
Next these, a Wretch that murtherd two Popes goes.
Calixtus then that Gregory displac't,
Making him pass in manner dolerous
Through Rome, where erst he had been highly graced;
Upon a Cammell lean, and badly pac't,
Trapt with raw Goats hides, then to prisne confind him,
Where with Petre an charity he pyn'd him.
85
Lo Balthazar that Balthazar excelled,
Poisoning his Predecessor, to acquire
Saint Peter's Chair; whoth'holy Relics sell'd,
To feed the fuel of his Paphian fire;
For rapes of Nuns, and forty virtues higher,
And Atheism, was at Constance last deposde,
And in strong Manheyms walls he did enclosde.
86
Next him observe Ae^eas Siluius,
That made old Rome a new stage of delight;
Learned, but (...) and luxurious.
Next whom comes This Peter Barbo was so great an enemy of Learning, and so
great a lover of Ignorance: that he did usually vpbraide the learned with the
name of Heretics; and st^cktly prohibited any to name the word Accademy; and
forbad the Romans to suffer their children to be taught any further, then to
write and read. out of Platina and others; cited by that excellent Duplessis.
Peter Barbo into sight,
Whose soul lived here in a Cimmerian night.
And (tho his rich stones dimd the Moon) died poor,
Consuming all on's Bastard and his Whore.
87
There others go, whom lust and beauty hent
To highest place. Then Agrippa de vanitate seientiar^m, cap. 6^ de lenoniu
Sixtus lo (quoth she)
That Brothels built t'encrease Saint (...) rent,
And with his friends dispenc't for Sodomie
Three months the year, June, August, July:
And he that sometime did This was one whose name the Author for some respect
conceales, who feasted all the Nobility of Auignion with one dish, and this it
was: In the belly of an Ox was placed the body of a Dear in whose body again
was placed by most (...) Geometrick skill, all sorts of most (...) Foul,
moving by devises and Engines several ways in such sort, that they might be
just roasted with the Beef, to the great admiration of the beholders* Platina.
lib de honesta voluptate.
Auignion feast
Most prodigally, yet but one dish dressed.
88
Then Guiccardine l. 6. and Machiauell de principe, cap 18.
Borgia behold well nigh the last,
Whose avarice I do not mean to touch,
(Slight vice for virtues oft-times here has past)
But devilish Arts and lust in him were such,
That to corriue with sons, he thought not much
In's daughters bed: so mixed he many a cup
Of death for's friends, and last himself did sup.
89
Then after these she let me see that Julius,
That Peter's Keys in Tyburs waves did throw;
And Paul's kee^e Sword then took in hand most furious,
When he before Mirandula did go;
Wherewith he made whole streams of blood to flow.
Then Leo last, an Atheist worst of all
Who did the Gospel but a Fable call.
90
These Clergy men brought vessels full of blood,
And poisoned bowls, they offered cruelty:
Then Teeth, Bones, Hair, old Relics, rotten VVood.
And Idols more their Nile to Idolatry.
To Avarice a world of souls. To Luxury,
Delitious Cates, Wine, Silk and costly Stones*
To Venus then, ten thousand little ones.
91
Here-with me thought the Altars fiercely blazed,
The flame^ the^ erst as^rnded much more high,
The smoke ten thousand pitchy turr^ts raisde,
And so transcended boue the Starry sky,
Piercing the nostrils of Jove's Majesty:
VVhereat a^azde, my hairs upright they run,
(...) grew dim, and tongue grew stiff and dumb.
92
For straight me thought the earth began to quake,
The water murmurd, and the air did sigh,
The leauy Groves seemed sadder sounds to make
The O^en groned, and Horses snorted high:
All rebels to their Masters, ^eeling nigh
This end of things; and all in heart request
Great God to right their wrongs, and give the^ (...).
93
The Sun and Moon then straight me thought grew dim,
The Stars from heaven they fell, and lost their light;
And all the world seemd now returned again
To her first Chaos, and eternal night.
Then were my fears and hopes, in doubtful ^ight,
When straight me thought this voice came fr^ above;
Is this the fruit of Heavens long care and love?
94
The Earth cries out, that man her gifts abuses.
The Sea (whose bending back ^e (...) for ga^ne)
That bloody streams he in her waves infuseth,
And does co^rupt her spawne with bodies slain.
The Air that it is polluted does complain.
The Fire cries ou^, he does so often enrage it,
That Cities melt, and Floods can not assuage it.
95
The Towre-bearer, and proud courageous (...)
Cry out, he forces them against their will,
T'assaile with a^med fides, and barbest crest
The lives of men to murder and to kill.
The Lions rore, that erst were taught to fill
Themselves on Men; whom hunger only forces
To feed on those, Jove's fatal brand endorceth.
96
The weeping Woods of hapless Arabye,
The sweetes which for delight and health he framed,
Even these complain, and do for vengeance cry,
Because so often on Idol shrines they flamed,
And by his lusts impure have been defamed.
The powrefull Herbs, which flying breath recall,
Made by themselves Deaths Agents in their fall.
97
The Beasts, Foul, Fish and Fruit of various kind,
Ordained for health, for pleasure, and for use,
The hidden treasures to the earth assigned;
All these likewise do witness his abuse,
With which he truth and justice does traduce;
With which he surfe^s, while his br^thren ^ine,
And in his heart denies the power divine.
98
The Saints lament that Heaven he still reprocheth,
The Angels grieve at his ing^atitude.
The Devils cry out, that he on them encroeheth,
And now begins to teach them to be leaud?
Therefore Jehovah does in (...) conclude,
(...) all is accomplish^, was decreed before,
The World shall end, and Time shall be no more.
99
Here-with the fires the etheriall tracts retains
The hidden sparkles, both in Wood and (...),
The Sulphur lurking in earths secret veyne^
Burst forth (me thought) and all conucend in one,
Men, Beasts, Trees, Houses for to feed upon:
This fiery Sergeant in an hour did (...)
Of many hundred years the (...) to i will.
100
Then gaspt earths marble jaws; her hungry (...)
It opned wide, tho now no more to take,
But to restore the surfets of her youth:
Each Goal a free deliverance to make;
The Sea restorde her Dead, each Stream and Lake,
And all the earth with new* borne limbs it trembled,
While souls and bodies themselves re-assembled,
101
The Kings and Princes they did sore lament,
VVishing the earth would open and swallow them.
The gallant Dames that lived incontinent,
For whose dear sakes so many erst was slain,
With horror here confounded, and with shame;
They wayled, they wept, they wished to change their stat^
With meanest slaves, or beasts they fed on late.
102
But all in vain they wished what cannot be:
The Trumpet sounds, and they must all appear:
They see the angry Judge sitting on high;
Beneath them Hell, the object of their fear:
No pleaders need they neither witness here,
Three Books of Conscience, Passion, Life lies open,
Then cease the good to fear, the bad to hope.
103
The sen^ence past, the blessed souls rejoice:
The wicked gnasht their teeth, against Heaven blaspheming;
The Devils howld, and made a fearful noise,
And all the poison of their malice teeming
On (...) mortals (hopeless of redeeming)
In burning carrs, and chaine^ toward Hell them hayld,
From wh^ce, me thought, these words mine eare^ assaild.
104 Vox gehenna.
Oh cursed you, that why lest ye erst had time,
No councels betterd, nor examples moved,
To keep the statutes, and the laws divine,
But still your blinded sense your banes approved;
Tho Christ for sinners suffered whom he loved:
We but for one offense are hither driven,
You're lost for want of faith, whose sins were given.
105
With flaming forkes therefore we will toss and turn ye,
In Stigian streams to Crystal will we freeze ye;
In Phleg^ton then will we thaw, then burn ye;
Our comfort is, we are sure we cannot leese ye.
Death grazeth on ye, but he ever flies ye.
Here shall ye freeze with fear, and burn with anguish,
And pine with famine, and in dark fires languish.
106
You Tigers which did thirst for bloody streams,
And tears of others, here shall drink your own.
You Moles, whose eyes were dazde with Golden beams,
Ye shall have store, great measure shall be shown,
With Ladles down your throtes it shall be thrown.
You lustful Goats, that ioyd in amorou^ gracos,
You shall be glutted here with our embraces.
107
You angry Dogs, here shall you (...) your fill.
You ravenous Wolves, here shall ye eat your dung.
You envious Dragons to, that did to kill,
That hated still the good, the wise and strong,
Your selves unapt for any thing but wrong,
Here shall ye feed on Aspecks; and your head
With Snakie tresses shall be couerd.
108 Poena sensus.
You Eyes that heretosore could not endure
To look upon the ^ores of Lazarus,
But highly feasted were with things impure,
With costly Pictures, and lascivious,
With Gown^s, with Gauds, with fashions rare and vicious,
With Maskes, with Shows; here shall ye nothing see
But Serpents, flying Fir^s, and ugly We.
109
You, you whose noses still ^o close were pent,
In passing by the poor and needy wight,
For whom from Ganges Odours rich were sent,
And nothing was thought costly, that was meet,
To cover Natures faults, or to delight.
You, you that Chimneys were for Indian smoke,
With pitchy Clouds and Brimstone shall ye choke.
110
You ears that erst were deaf unto the poor,
Whom flatteries, or gain, or charming sound
Of Music only pleased, you shall no more
Hear names of Honor, Grace, of Wit profound,
Valor or Beauty; here all things resound,
And echo horror, groans of wretched Ghosts,
Oaths, Blasphemies, and Yells of us your Hosts.
111
You, you for whom the Virgins fingers spunne
The silks of Naples, and proud Genoa,
For whom were brought soft Sables from the Done,
And costly Ermines from Rhezania;
Who pined the poor that you might feast and play.
You, you whose curious touch no Down could please,
Here burning beds of Iron is your ease.
112
You curious mouths that naught but sweets could taste,
Whose great excess did grutch the poor a share,
Which on your paunches millions carst did wast,
And had so many thousands still to care,
Only to bring you dishes, strange and rare,
Here Ostrich-like shall swallow in your rage,
Toads, (...), or Stones, your hungers to assuage.
113 Poena damni.
Then damned souls, conceive what you have lost,
How fair a City, what a Mansion,
Provided for ye at another cost;
Enricht with b^auty and perf^ction,
Where (...) cares, disease, or want is none,
But all with glory, and with wisdom shine,
Sustained and cherisht by that love divine.
114
On earth while erst you lived, you deemd the loss
Of Pa^ents favor was no little pain;
The loss of Kingdoms an exceeding cross;
But most to loose the light, and to remain
In dungeon dark: This loss does all contain
I he loss of God, whose b^undlesse power divine
Does not your plagues in times or terms consine.
115
Although ye could like Esau melt to tears;
Restore like Judas your accursed gain;
Like Ahab mourn in sack cloth (many years)
Although you here could chatter like the Crane,
Send forth as shrill shrikes as the Pelican:
Tho ye could weep whole Seas for every sin,
They Are all but lost, no mercy can ye w^nn
116
But here me thought I felt a sudden joy
Run through my flesh, and wing my ravished spright,
Feeling my self exempt from this anoy,
Full of celestial thoughts, and rare delight,
Amongst the Quires of heavenly Singers sweet.
With which high joys, I think, my soul had escaped
From forth her prison, if I had not wak^.
(1) Herod surnamed the Great (tho valiant, cruel) put to death Mariamne his
wife (a woman both chaste and beautiful;) then his own sons Alexander and
Aristobulus, the children of Bethlem, his salse son Antipater, the most of
his friends: and lastly (lest he should want tears at his end) gave order for
the killing of a great number, shut up in the Hippodrome. Joseph. Antiq.

(2) Abimelech, the base son of Gedeon slew threescore and nine of his
brethren to usurp. Josephus, page 117.

(3) Ptolomeus Philopater slew father, mother, and wife. Ptolomeus Phiscon
married his own sister Cleopatra, sometime the wife of their brother, the King
deceased, whom after he cast off, and married her Daughter, his Niece; and
fearing the people should set up his eldest son against him, he kills him.
Whereupon they pull (...) his images; which he, interpreting as done in favor
of his sister, kills also his (...) that he had by her, sending his hands and
feet in a chest as a present to her the day of his birth. Iustine, lib. 38.
Ptolomeus Ceraunos, the brother of Lisimachus King of Macedon, having rescued
Queen Arsinoe, hi^ own sister, from Antigonus, who slew her husband, and
besieged her in the City Cassandria, affecting the Kingdom, made suit to his
sister for marriage (having no other means to get the possession of her, and
her children;) but his intentions being suspected by her, he swears by the
Altars and the Gods, that he meant to make her son King. Overcome, she yields,
marries him, inuites him to her City; which he having seized, presently causes
her children to be slain, even in the lap of their sorrowful mother, and
exiles her self. Justin. lib. 24.

(4) Numulesinthis caused the parents feed upon their children. Valerius
Maximus, lib. 9. cap. 2.

(5) Mithridates slew seventy thousand Roman Merchants in one day in time of
peace. Plutarch.

(6) Occhus, called Darius, having bound himself by oath not to kill any of
the conspiracy of the Magi by Sword, Poison, Famine, or any force, devised a
more cruel way for them, and (as he thought) without infringing his oath: he
fills a great deep room with Ashes up to the top, and over the same upon a
rafter places these men, giving them good cheer, wherewith being brought into
a dead sleep, they fall into this pit-sall. Val. Max. Ctesias (says Ochus)
used his brother Secundianus so: but this Ochus was long after Darius, the
son of Histaspis, that suppressed the Magi.

(7) Iugurth, the son of Masthanaball, the Base son of Masinissa, was brought
up by his Uncle Micipsa, the lawful son of the said Masinissa, King of
Numidia, who at his death made him coheyre with his own sons, Adherball and
Hiemp^all, hoping by that means to tie him by merit, which was already bound
by Blood and Kindred, to be a stay and defend^r of his children in their
minority: but Iugurth more cruel then the very Lions (which acknowledge
benefits) after his Uncles death kills Hiempsal, wars upon Adherball, and at
length makes him also away: but enioyes the Kingdom not long, the people of
Rome punishing his great impieties both with loss of Kingdom and life. Salust.

(8) Cambises having sent Prexaspes (one of his dearest and most trusty
Friends) from Memphis into Persia, to make away his brother Smerdis. At his
return again, after the execution, demands what they say, and what opinion
they had of him in Persia. Prexaspes replies; All well, only they thought he
loved Wine more then stood with his health. With these words the Tyrant
enraged, causes Prexaspes son to stand as a mark for him to shoot at, and
at the first shot cloue his heart, as before he said he would do) to teach
Prexaspes (who friendly admonisht him of his excess) that he was not drunk.
Whereupon Croesus the Lidian admonishes him; he offers to shoot at him to. He
made war so long in Ethiopia, till his men through famine (...) up one
another, tything themselves by lots. Another part of his Army sent to destroy
the Temple of Ammon were all lost, and overwhelmed with Sand, none returning to
bring news what Mummey their fellows (...). Herodotus in his Thalia, page
234, 235, and 236. Seneca says, he caused all the peoples noses of Syria to
be cut off. (...). de Ira. 3. c. 20

(9) Astiages being premonisht in a dream of the translation of his Kingdom
to the Persians, by means of Cyrus his young Nephew, gave command to Herpagus,
one of his friends, to make away the Child. But Herpagus abhorring so great
cruelty, used means to preserve him a long time secretly; til at last the
King coming to knowledge of his life and safty, ^aused Herpagus for neglecting
hi^ command, to eat the flesh of his own son at a supper. Herodotus Clyo.
page 84.

(11) Caesar, Pompey, Alexander, Pirrhus, whose only sin of Ambition was the
death of many millions, nothing being able to satisfy an insatible mind: one
diggs for another world, another seeks it in the Deserts of India: all of them
like wild and savage beasts, enemies of humain society, being broke loose, run
about killing and destroying others, till they loose themselves.

(12) Caius was said to be grieved, because in his time there fell no
Earthquakes, Famines, nor Pestilences, to destroy the world. He wished the
people of Rome had but one head, that he might strike it off at one blow.
Seneca de Ira.

(13) Nero caus^d his Mother Agrippina to be put to death, having first
attempted it diverse ways in vain. Tacitus

(14) These were the Persecutors of the Church: Nero, Domitian, Marcus
Anthonius Verus, Se^erus, Maximine, Decius, Valerian, Au^elian, Dioclesian, and
Maximilian. Eusebiu^ and the Centuries.

(15) In Legend. Aur. it is said, that holy Ignatius being persuaded to
renounce Christ, made answer, That he could not, his Name was written upon his
Heart. Whereupon the Tyrant caused him to be opened, and found the word JESUS
written therein in Golden Letters.

(16) King Poppeyle having slain his two Uncles most cruelly, is persecuted of
Mice and Rats by the hand of God, and he and his Queen forced to fly into a
Tower, situated in the water: but thither they followed him, and at last
devoured him and her, no means being able to hinder Gods decree. These Rats
seemd to come forth from the Tombs and very Graves of his dead Uncles. This
man's usual Oath was still, That if I do such, or such a thing, may the Rats
eat me: and so at length they did. The place is called Rats-Tower to this day.
Hist. Poloniae.

(17) Amurath sacrifized at on^ time six hundred Soldiers (that yielded upon
faith and honest conditions) to the Ghost of his dead father. Calcondillius in
Hist. de Imperii Graeci lapsu in Lerius.

(18) Mahumet having won Constantinople, gave himself to Feasts and Banquets;
in which for greater pomp he put to cruel deaths the most of the Grecian
Nobility: he cut off the head of Trene, his fairest and best beloved Parramour
with his own hand, as the only remedy for his intemperate love. There
happened to him a strange warning for his cruelty: for having caused five
hundred Cap^iues to be slain, and their bodies dismembered, and thrown about)
there came an Ox rooting and lowing, and with his Horns gathered together the
pi^ces of a Venecians body there amongst the rest: which being told to Mahumet,
he again commands the same body to be dispersed. But the Ox again diligently
seeks out the same pieces, and lays them together: wherewith Mahumet being
much moved, caused the dead to be buried, and gives the Ox an allowance
during life. Lerius out of Chalcondilus.

(19) Wladus, Prince of Moldauia, had a great Vale in his Country full of
Gibbets, Wheels, and other engines, whereupon there hung thirty or forty
thousand of his own subjects put to death by him in three years: With which
fearful spectacle Mahumet the great Tyrant being amazed, became after more
gentle, spying the greatness of his own faults in another, which he could not
see before in himsslfe. Knowles.

(20) Selym, the youngest of Baiazets sons, by the favor of the Ianizar^es
aspired to the Empire, disceptred his old Father Bajazet, and caused him to be
poisoned; slew his Brothers and Ne^; put the most of his dearest Friends and
Servants to death: and lastly, after his victories in the East, and the
conquest of Egypt, intending great wars against the Christians, is by the
hand of God stricken with a Canker, or Wildfire in his reins that eat him
up. Paulus Iouius, tome 1. l. 14, and tome 2. l. 19.

(21) This Adolph weary of expecting his Fathers death, took the Duk^dome
from him, led him five Dutch mile barefoot in a cold night, and imprisoned him
in a dark and deep Dungeo^ eight months in most lamentable manner: but being
at length compeld to bring him forth, and to give an account thereof to the
Duke of Burgoyne, he only objects, that his Father had been Duke 44 years,
therefore now high time for him to come to his Birthright. The Duke of
Burgoyne at last orders the young man (being his Kinsman) to stand as Duke, and
only one small City to remain to his Father, with some six hundred
Florences the year during life. But Adolph flatly refused to grant him this
small exhibition, but would hau^ him exiled the Country; protesting, that
rather then he would condescend to those terms, he would throw his Father into
a well; and himself after. Soon after the Duke of Burgoyne takes him
Prisoner, where he was despightfully handled all his life, and his F^ther
dying, disinherited him, making the Duke of Burgoyne his Heir; After whose
death young Adolph is taken out of prison by the Ganthoyse, and is slain at
the siege of Tourney. Phil. Comminees. l. 4. c. 1.

(22) Amidas being left Governor of Tunis by his father Muleasses (whilst he
sought aid amongst the Christian Princes against Barbarussa) seizes the
Kingdom for himself, and at his fathers return puts out his eyes, to disable
him for government, and forces him to end his days in misery as a banished
man: he lost his own eyes to with diseases, and enjoyed his Kingdom not long.
Knowles.

(23) John Basilides late Emperor of Russia did infini^ely exceed all the
Tyrants and monsters of Nature that ever were. His rapines, his lusts, his
murther^ cannot be numbered. It was usual with him for one man's offense to
extirpe whole Families and Cities, and many times without any occasion. When
the wars ceast, and that he wanted captives to exercise himself upon, then
did he kill and massacre his Friends, his Lords, his Counselors, his Citizens;
burning, hanging, dr^wning thousands of guiltless and innocent people. He
would look on and see his Guard def^owre thousands of his women Captives, and
then cut them in pieces. Ambassadors were not safe with him; no more were his
Friends and Companions: if any man won of him in play, he would fall into
passion, and sometimes cut off their Noses and Ears. If for fear they
suffered him to win, then he would straight cause them to be beaten as dull
and sluggish Dolts. Now if any sought (by refusing to play) to avoid these two
extremes, those he would gre^uously handle, and perchance put to death, as
contemners of his Majesty. Upon some reproachful speeches (given by an honest
Matron) unto one of his whores, he took a purpose to murder all the women of.
Muscho, and had done it, before the instant request of his own women. Of
diverse Cities that he pnnished, he put all the inhabitants down through
certain holes, made through the Ice, into the rivers, and so drowned them. The
warnings he had from heaven were notable. Upon a Christmas day, which was fair
and clear, came a sudden lightning from heaven, that burnt his stately Palace
of Sloboda, with much treasure and rich stuff in the same. Soon after, near
the town of Nale, there fell a strange thing; three men and three women going
forth to gather sticks in the adjoining wood, late toward evening, there came
this voice into their ears (without any known Author) Fly Muschouians; with
which amazed, they would have fled toward the Town, when in the instant a
mighty marble stone fell down from the heavens (sent with a great clap of
thunder) into the Snow, and seemed to be settled there in such manner, as if
not thrown by violence, but placed there by an artificial handiworke. In this
Stone were written diverse lines in a strange and unknown character. The three
men were slain at the fall of the stone; the women with great amazement ran
home, and showed what had happened. The news comes to Basilides; he repaires
to the place, demands of the Metropolitan what the words did import: he in
great perplexity replies; he knows not. Calling then certain captives (which
had a great opinion of learning) he requires of them the exposition of this
inscription: they fearing to be silent, told him, that these signs did
pertain to himself, and did concern his People and Empire. Hereupon he
causes his Guard to break the Stone all in pieces, and in stead of penitence
goes home, and prepares for the Polonian war. He died very lamentably of an
Ulcer in his privy parts, so loathsome and stinking, that the smell of it
poisoned diverse. He had upon his deathbed some trances, wherein it seems he
had some taste of the infernal ^orments. His life and death are written at
large by Paulus Oderbornius, a German Divine, in three Books, dedicate to
Henry Julius, Duke of Brunswick. His body was not from the day of his death to
be found in any place, but was supposed to be conveyed away by the Devil, not
content with his soul only. Ibidem. He lived in Queen Elizabeth's time.

(24) The Egyptians did worship some things generally, as of beasts, their Apis
or Ox, the Dog the Cat: of Foul, the Hawke and the Ibis: of Fish, the
Lepidotus and the Oxirinchus: beside these, they had particular worships. They
of Arsinoe to the Crocodile. They of the City of Hercules did worship the
Ichnewmon. The Cinopolitani a Dog. The Licopolitani a Wolf. The Leontopolitani
a Lion. The Mendesii worshipped a Goat. The Athribitae a blind Mouse. They of
Abidon worshipped Osiris (whom Herodotus page the 150, calls* Bacchus. They of
Hermonthis Jupiter, and an Ox, and Orus, which Herodotus calls Apollo, page
199) and others other things. Strabo Geography, lib. 17. The Bubasti honored
Diana. The Citizens of Busiris, Isis (which the Greeks call Demeter, that is
Ceres. The City of Say worshipped Minerua. The Helipolitanes the Sun. They of
Buris, Latona. The Papremians, Mars. Herodotus Euterpe, page 158.

(25) Strabo says, he saw a Crocodile in a Lake in the Shire of Arsinoe, near
to the Temple, upon which the Priests tended with great religion and fed him,
one holding open his chaps, and an other pouring in certain Rost-meates and
sweet Wine, and that having filled his belly, he retired straight into the Lake,
till he were called again by some new Guest, coming with new Oblations. Ex
Strabone, lib. 17.

(26) Porrum and cepe nefas violare ac frangere morsu. et Paulo post.

Carnibus humanis vesci licet. Iuuen. Satyra 15. linea. 9.

(27) This Deity of Jupiter Hammon was worshipped in the likeness of a Ram.
Herodotus Euterpe, page 151. Here it was that Alexander was premonisht of his
death, with the circumstances both of time, place, and the manner, as after
they befell. Quintus Curtius lib. 4. and in Alexanders own Epistle to
Arestotle, and Just. l. 11. It seems their Jupiter was something mutable and
humerous for his shape, as men are now adays for their fashions: for Herodotus
describes him like a Ram: and Quintus Curtius, lib. 4. says; Id quod pro Deo
colitur non eandem effigiem habebat quam vulgo diis accommodauerunt artifices.
Sed, vmbilico maxim similis est habitus, smaragdo etiemmis coagmentatus.

(a) Dianae templum Chersiphron fabricatus est. Sed cum Herostratus quidam id
incend^o consumpsisset aliud prestantius construxerunt mulierum ornamentis.
Strabo, Geogr. lib. 14.

(28) Baalzebub was worshipped in the likeness of a Fly. Purch.

(29) The Sydonians worshipped Juno in the likeness of a Sheep.

(30) Quintus Curtius in oppugnatione. Alexandri.

(31) The Phoenicians had a stately Temple dedicated to the Sun, of which
Anthonine, Emperor of Rome, was in his private fortunes the High Priest, and
therefore surnamed Heliogabalus, or Priest of the Sun. Herodian, lib. 5.

(32) This Temple had in it a stone, which had thereon the figure of the Sun.
Ibid.

(33) The men of Carras that overcame their wives, used to sacrifice to god
Lunus in the Temple of the Moon: but if their wives had the better, they
offered unto Luna to appease her displeasure. Herodian, lib. 3.

(34) This place was some five mile from Antioch, a Grove of mighty Cypresses,
ten miles in compass, where stood the Temple and Oracle of Apollo Daphneus.
Here Julian the Apostate desiring answer, the Devil would not speak^, because
the bones of Babillus the Martyr lay so near him. Socrates, lib. 3. cap. 16.
In this place of delight, and Paradise of profane pleasure, the Antiochian
youths, and amorous Gallants used to pay their vows to the Nymph Daphne: the
burbling streams, calm winds, and flowre-be spotted earth, conspiring with
the opacitie and retirednes of the place, to make the Votaries of Diana,
worship Daphne. Strabo. Geogr. page 510. lib. 15.

(35) The Persians did principally honor the Fire, counting it a God: they
worshipped the Sun and Moon, Venus, the Winds and the water, into which it was
not lawful to spit, to piss, or to, cast any dead thing, Strabo, lib. 15.
Herodotus. lib. 1. page 90. lib. 3. page 226.

(36) The Tartarians beyond Volga, that belong to the Great Cham; and the Crym
Tartars which inhabit on this side Volga (which Herodotus calls Scythia, and
them Scythes;) though these profess Mahumet, yet have they in their houses
Idols and Puppets of Fel^, which they offer to* Doctor Fletcher and W. de
Rubruquis in Hacluyt.

(37) The Chynoys have Idols in their houses, and Images if the devil with
Serpentine locks, and as ill-fauoured looks as he has hear; a tripple Crown
upon his head, great teeth standing out from his mouth, and an ugly face upon
his belly: him for fear they worship, saying, that God is good, and will do
no man harm. They paint the Devil in their ships, and in any storm him they
invoke, sometime working by lots, sometime by writing, which way he never
fails to answer them, as appears in the Discourse of Chinay. Chap. 15. where
the Spanish Friars (to their no small terr^r) heard him talking to the Chynois
in the same Ship.

() The Iapons have a strange kind of shrift, the Devil once a year playing
the Confessor: he puts his Penitent into a pair of Weigh-Scales, hung up upon
a high Spire or Piremed, from whence if he confess not truly, he breaks his
neck. Acosta. lib. 5. cap. 25.

(38) The Devil is highly worshipped in Pegue, to whom they erect a stately
Altar, adorned with variety of Flowers and Meats to fee and feed him, that
he should not hurt them. Hist. India. page 321.

(39) Cidambaran is the Mother-Citie of these Pagan Rites. Here in the Temple
of Perimall they worship an Ape called Haynemant: the tooth of this Ape was
kept for a great rellick in Zeylan, till the Portugals, Ann. 15* 54, ransacking
the Island, took this away amongst many better things. Linschot says, the
Indian Kings sent presently to the Viceroy, and offered seven hundred thousand
Ducats for it: but he burnt it before their Ambassadors eyes, and threw the
ashes into the Sea. Notwithstanding, the Banian of Cambaia persuaded the Indian
Kings, that he by miracle had preserved it, having been inuistbly present, and
that he had changed the said tooth, putting another very like it in stead
thereof. So this was again received as the true one, and believed by their
mopping devotion. Linfc. page 81. The Mallabars are all extreme Idosaters to
the Devil, and have all their Temples full of his pictures, and Idols most
fearful to behold. They have a certain Coin called Pagodes, stamped with
his Picture. They offer themselves to voluntary death in honor of their
Idols, thinking it meritorius so to perish. Linsc. page 82. and 69.

(40) The Mexicans or Tenustitans had in the midst of Mexico, a stately Temple,
the stones of the walls all wrought in artificial knots of Snakes (so like is
that old Serpent still to himself.) Here they sacrifised to their Idol Devils
men without number, taken in the wars, whose flesh they did (after the
ceremonies ended) make merry with, The Spaniards beheld from Metazumaes Palace
seventy of their own men thus sacrifised, amongst whom, one after his heart
was drawn out; cried aloude, Knights, they have slain me. Within the
penetralls of this Temple, and as it were, their Sanctum Sanctorum, the
Spaniards found the walls daubd with human blood two inches thick. About the
Courts of this Temple upon certain ranks of trees ran many ranks of poles
from one to another, whereon their hung all the Scalpes of those which had been
sacrifized. This Temple was consumed by fire from Heaven, which seemed to burst
forth from the very walls and stones; so that no water could quench it.
Vitziliputzli was their chief Idol. Joseph. Acosta. l. 5. cap. 13. and 22.
and lib. 7. cap. 23. The Peruuians were no less cruel, sacrifizing children
to their Idols, of whom Verachocha was chief. Acosta. l. 5. cap. 19.

(41) This Maracca is a kind of Gourd, the meat finely picked out, then dried
and filled with Stones or Millet it makes a great noise, this is their Music
they Dance by, this is their Oracle, from whence their Aignan (the Devil)
consults with them: to this they offer offerings of Meat. At certain set
times they use to meet to perform their dancing ceremonies, in which they sing
certain Songs, and cry, Sabbath, Sabbath; lifting up their hands on high like
the Israelites, and as they were commanded. Deuteronomie 12. 6, 7. Yet for all
this observance, their good Master the Devil did use to beat them, kill them
by hundreds, when he thought his worship was neglected. The pictures of their
Fights, Dances, Entertainements, Ceremonies, Burials, is with an ample
Discourse thereon to be seen in Lerius his Hist. of Brasile, to whom I commend
those that desire to know their fashions; and to Ieronimus Be^zo, his Noua noui
orbis Historia.

(a) Ptolomey King of Cypress having heapt up great wealth by base means,
overcome by his Enemy, flies to the Sea, there intending to bury himself and
his treasure together (in Neptunes watery, but inviolable Sepulchers) having for
that end bored all his ships through in the keele: but taking compassion that
so much wealth should be lost, he altars his purpose, and carries back again
to land, the future reward of his own destruction, Valerius Maximus, lib. 9.
cap. 5.

(42) Dennis, the elder Tyrant of Syracusa, was a marvelous oppressor of his
people; whom when he had brought so low, that he could draw no more from them,
he devises (upon a great Dearth that had continued by the space of two or three
years) to persuade the people to contribute toward the building of a new
Temple to the Goddess Ceres, to appease her displeasure, and for that end
draws all the women's Chains and jewels of the Country from them, which
amounted to diverse millions, and yet no Temple built for all that. After a
while (the earth yielding her due increase, and the women (after their wonted
manner) desiring their accustomed adornments, but fearing least the old Fox
should again play them the like trick, they petitioned, that it might be
lawful for them to wear their rings and jewels again, as they had formerly
done; which after some niceness was granted them, upon condition that every
one of them should first offer up to the Goddess Ceres, the price and value of
such jewels as they intended to wear; the old Tyrant making by this one
stratag^m a double profit.

(43) Ferdinand King of Naples, that died at Charles the eight his entrance
into Italy, compeld his subjects to feed his Swine. He would buy up all the
Oil and Grain in the Country before it were ripe, and sell it again very
dear at unreasonable prices. Whatsoever was fair and good in the Kingdom he
would extort it by one means or other, and sold all things both Temporal and
Ecclesiastical to his best Chapmen. He sold the Bishopric of Taranto for
twelve thousand Ducats to a Jew for his son, who he said was a Christian. He
gave Abbeys to Falkoners, with charge to keep him a certain number of Hawks
at their own charge. P. Co^minees, l. 7. c. 11. Guicc. 1.

(44) This Syleus was the most beautiful young Gentleman of all Rome, whom
Massaline no less sollemnely, then publicly married, even in the life of her
Husband Claudius the Emperor, who being advertised of her disorders, had
scarcely the stomach to put them to death, if his servants had not for his
credit urged the same. Tacitus Annals lib, 11. cap. 9. 10. 11.

(45) These three were Tarquine the proud, who lost his Kingdom (as Liuie
relates) for the rape of Lucrece: And Roderick, last King of the Goths in
Spain, who by occasion of the Rape of County Iulians daughter (which
thereupon fled and brought in the Moors and Arabians) lost both his Kingdom
and life, being overthrown (notwithstanding his unmatchable valor) in a
Battle of eight days long, Ann. 750. near to Xeres, upon the River of
Bedalack. History of Spain: The third was Floris (fifth of that name) Prince
of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, who imprisoned a Knight of his Court, one
Gerard van Nelson, and cut off his brothers head: but being better informed of
the equity of his cause, after a years imprisonment, gives him liberty, with
offers of diverse favors, and a certain cast-Concubine of his in marriage:
which the Knight refusing with these speeches; That he was not so base to put
his Feet in his old shoes: and the Earl therewith offended, replied, But you
shall. Which words the Knight forgetting, shortly after marries a fair Lady.
Whereupon (the Earl still mindful of his former displeasure) took occasion
to send the Gentleman from home upon an Embassage, and himself in the mean
time goes to the Knights house, and rauishes his Lady. Which the Knight
understanding at his return, in revenge laid an ambush for the Earl, and slew
him. History of the Netherlands, page 67.

FINIS.

