THE HISTORY OF EDWARD THE FOVRTH, KING OF ENGLAND.

BY WM. HABINGTON Esquire.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for William Cook, and are to be sold at his
shop, near Furnivals-Inne Gate in Holburne. 1640.

TO THE KINGS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
Sir,
AN Humbler Dedication, would seem to lessen the memory of that great Prince,
whose History I here lay down at your feet. Your Majesty is heir to those
Crowns, his happy courage regained from the long and violent possession, of a
most Potent Family: What can then by any Title appertain to him, but must be
injustice to offer to another? His life presents your eye with rugged times,
yet smoothed by a prevailing Fortune, and a just cause. Faction begot many
tempests: but Soveraigntie found a happy calm, in the destruction (since no
gentler way had authority) of mighty opposers.

When we, your subjects, look back upon that age, how ought we to
congratulate the present? Wherein, free even from the noise of war, we have
hitherto by the excellent Wisdom of your Majesty's government, lived safe and
envied. The Almighty grant all your people knowledge of their own felicity,
and their minds so disposed, that their blessings may feel no interruption.
May your Majesty long continue in peace, the comfort and honor of these
times, and the best example for the future. But if you shall be forced to draw
your sword; may your enemies submit and tastpart of your mercy: if not; perish
in your Victories. This is the prayer of your Majesty's

Most Humble, most Loyal, and most Obedient Subject. WM. HABINGTON.

THE HISTORY OF EDWARD THE FOVRTH KING OF ENGLAND.
RICHARD Duke of York overthrown by his own rashness, and the happy
conduct of Queen Margaret, at the battle of Wakefield: left the justice of
his Title, with a more prosperous fortune to his Son Edward. His head during
life, busied with expectations of Soveraigntie, after death, was mocked with a
paper Crown, and fixed on a pole was set on the walls of York. For the Queen,
to make his pretentions to the Kingdom the common scorn, forgot that
compassion she owed human calamity; and in a phantasticke cruelty exposed it
thus to the barbarous mirth of the be holders. With him dyed his younger son
Edmond Earl of Rutland, then but twelve years old, coming too soon with his
tutor to the school^ of War; and learning at first the sharpest lesson from
the Lord Clifford, who most inhumanely ^tab'd him prostrate at his feet,
entreating but for life.

In the very Haven, after a long and tempestuous voyage, thus perished the Duke
of York; as if it had been in the fate of all the Richards, who were either in
fact o^ title Kings of England, to end by violent deaths. Richard the first
and second preceding him: His son Richard the Tyrant, and Richard Duke of
York his Nephew, following him in the like disaster, though several ways,
and upon different quarrels.

This great overthrow was suddenly rumor'd through the whole Kingdom; and
stretched up to the highest, to advance the reputation of the Queens
felicity. And soon it arrived at Gloucester, where Edward Earl of March lay
with some small forces, expecting directions from his Father: By whose death
perceiving himself in so foul weather to sit alone at the helm, he began
more warily to steer his course: and considering how dangerous leisure is to
increase the apprehension of misfortune, removed to Shrewesbury. By the way his
army swelled up to three and twenty thousand fighting men: which might appear
strange if we weigh the necessary unexperience of his youth, being then but
eighteen years of age, and the slender retinue that usually weights on
infelicitie. But now he was the head of the great body of that faction, which
his Father at the expense of so long trouble, had purchased to his side; and
them, the Queens nature implacable to mercy, made resolute only to hope for
safety by running into the common danger. Moreover all the men of power who
inhabited between Gloucester and Shrowsbury, had dependancie on him as heir to
Mortimer; or held in chief of his mighty confederate, the Earl of Warwick.

With this sudden and unexpected access of forces he entertained a confidence
to be able to revenge his fathers injury; and obtain that greatness as yet
had been in vain attempted. He therefore looked about, where he might on the
best advantage make experience of his fortune. Fortune appearing easy to be
courted, as if enamord on his youth; having been seldom observed but froward
to age, in any design that depends chiefly upon courage.

And occasion was immediately offered: certain discovery being made of a great
power raised by the adverse party, with purpose to surprise him in the
amazement of the late misfortune. The Army consisted of Welsh and Irish,
according to the several Nations of the two Commanders, Jasper Earl of
Pembrooke, and Jaems Earl of Ormond: Pembrooke half brother to Henry the
sixth, as son to Queen Catherin, dowager to Henry the fif^, by Owen Teuther:
and Ormond a most faithful servant to the house of Lanchaster, by whose gift
in England he enjoyed the Earldom of Wiltshire.

Against these two the Earl of March led back his Forces, and in a large
plain near Mortimers cross on Candlemas day in the morning, gave them
battle. Before the fight, the Sun (as by many Authors it is averd) appeared
to the Earl in the resemblance of three Suns, and suddenly united into one:
the truth of which I will not dispute, But certainly the pretension of such
apparitions strangely prevails with the superstitious multitude, and has
been both the practice and advantage of the most expert Commanders. Yet how
this omen could be expounded happy to his de sign, I understand not, unless
we seek the interpretation from the event: for that indeed gave him the
victory, and brought the glory of the two adverse Generals over to his side;
so that the three Suns which with equal brightness appeared in the morning,
before evening shined alone in him, For the two Earls and the whole Army were
put to flight, with the slaughter of three thousand eight hundred on the place:
many Welsh, and some English of name were taken prisoners, and afterward at
Hereford beheaded: among whom an extraordinary fortune has made Owen Teuther
most the discourse of Posterity. For the good luck of an amiable person,
wrought him into the affection and soon after advanced him to the marriage of
Catherin daughter of France, and Widow to the most glorious Prince our Nation
ever gained honor by. Yet all that this so envied splendour in a wife got him,
was, to render his life obnoxious to imprisonment and faction, and his death
more eminention a scaffold.

This victory raised Edwards imaginations high; so that now he resolved to
spend his fortune no longer on small enterprises, And least the spirit of his
Army should begin to languish, having no enemy near to find him in
employment; he resolved to search for one about London: whether he had
intelligence the Queen with her triumphant forces directed her march: moreover
it concerned the policy of his affairs, to retain the possession of the
capital City of the Kingdom, which continued firm to his devotion; and in
which the Lords of his faction had custody of King Henry's person, left to
their faith, when the Duke of York went his last fatal expedition.

But in the way at Chipping Norton he met the Earl of Warwick, having lately
fought and lost the field to the Queen at St. Albans. In which, beside the
honor of the day and slaughter of two thousand of her enemies, she recovered
the person of her husband. So that Warwick brought with him only a relation
of his late overthrow; but with such a courage as disdained misfortune, and
coveted nothing more than by the trial of a new day to persuade, or else to
force back victory to his side.

And oftentimes a small loss to an Army like opening a vein to a body, does
rather correct than any way impair the health: whereas too much prosperity,
like the worst surfeit, suddenly becomes incureable. And so the two late
obtained conquests wrought in the enemy, only insolency and disorder. For
the Queen, wanton with success, vainly imagined a security from future
competition: and either wanted power to restrain her soldiers, or licenced
them to a free spoil: by which unruly violence she untyed the affection of the
Commons, who by their quiet and profit, measure the virtues of Princes And
indeed they had title to their often complaints against the Northern troops;
who soon as they had past Trent, as if there they had parted with all
obedience to discipline, made use of all kinds of license, that might serve
their avarice or pleasure. And having by the way left no Towns, and in them no
place, how Sacred soever unspoyled: after the flight of Warwick they designed
for London, hoping to find it abundantly stored for prey, and utterly unable
for defense.

But the Citizens perceiving hostility in their approach, shut their gates and
armed for resistance: And with such valor and good order behaved themselves,
that the rude assailants were with loss repulst, and the Queen persuaded to
retire Northward, knowing the disorder of her men had begot her in the place
where she then lay encamped, nothing but ill aspects and worse wishes: she
therefore dislodged from St. Albans; and every day as she marched toward the
North, new relations came of the greatness and resolution of the Earl of
Marches power; who with the Earl of Warwick was on his journey to London.

And doubtless the report of his approach confirmed the City in her courage
to resist the late assault: which otherwise would without question have
complied with the fortune of the more powerful. For presently after the
departure of the Queen, the Earl of March made his triumphant entry, and was
received with such acclamations; as an over-joyed people could express, who
only hoped for safety by the fortune of his side. To increase the glory of
this entry concurd, beside his title to the Crown, his late victory at
Mortimers Cross, the memory of a most glorious Father, and great authority of
his Confederate Warwick; the beauty of Marches person, than which that age
beheld not any more excellent. Neither is the outward form a small
circumstance to induce the multitude or reverence; since as deformity in a
Prince, has oftentimes occasioned contempt even to deprivation: so on the
contrary has an amiable shape strengthend very weak pretentions, and in
Antoninus Heliogabalus was sufficient title to an Empire, even in a military
election.

But the Earl of Warwick, (whose mind was still in labor, and felt
continually most violent throws; till it had brought forth a settled
soveraignety to the house of York) contented not himself with this general
applause; knowing how the least change of Fortune would create new affections.
He therefore resolved so to fasten the City to his designs, that any
alteration in Edward should be ruin to them: and thereupon caused a general
muster of all his forces in St. John's fields: where when he found an
universal confluence of all men, answerable to his expectation; he cast his
Army into a Ring; and with a loud voice, made to be read, the agreement
which the last Parliament had accorded between Henry the sixth, and Richard
Duke of York. By which Henry (out of compassion to a long possession) was
permitted to enjoy the Crown during his natural life, the remainder to
Richard and his heirs, in whom it was then apparently proved that the title to
the Kingdom did remain. In which agreement was likewise manifested that Henry
should make immediate forfeiture, when soever either he or any of his party
should attempt to disa^all this Act. This read, and commented on with the best
efficacy of Language, to express the foul breach on King Henry's side, in
the destruction of Richard Duke of York: Question ws proposed to them, whether
they would longer continue in obedience to Henry's usurpation, who so impiously
had violated his Faith? To which with an universal loud consent of voices
they cried out, No, No. Then were they demanded, whether they would admit
Edward; whose title to the Crown was so apparent, and whose sufferance had
been so great in a perfidious violent entry, and a long injurious possession
of the Kingdom by the family of Lancaster? To which with acclamations of
assent was answered Yea, Yea.

Thus by the Soldier and the people was Edwards title approved, and he
admitted King. And happily did this ceremony then appear needful; in regard
the same voices had vowed obedience to another. Otherwise whosoever shall
allege that the suffrage of the multitude is necessary to confirm a Prince,
destroys the right of succession, and in that the Monarchy, which so long and
triumphantly has ruled this Nation. And to understand the incertainety and
injustice of all popular election, History instructs us that no Tyrant yet in
England by what indirect practice soever he attaind, or cruelty maintaind the
government; but entered in by a seeming approbation of the Commonwealth, and
settled his state by confirmation of the People. For I know not by what
universal distemper of humors it happens, that generally when the head of this
Kingdom has been sick, the whole body was diseased: so far, that
usurpation has been ligitimated, and tyranny applauded. Which misfortune
must have necessarily been occasioned through Potencie of the prevailing
faction; and fear which possessed all honest minds: who though they neither
wanted knowledge to see the injury, nor desire to redress it; yet private
interest made them too cowardly to undertake the remedy.

But in Edwards first in trance on the Kingdom the popular suffrage (which in
the inauguration of Christian Princes is of ancient custom esteemed a
convenient ceremony) met with a just title. For he by his Grandmother,
daughter and heir of Mortuner son and heir to Philippa, only child of
Lionell Duke of Clarence; third son to Edward the third King of England: of
necessity must have (where women are admitted to inherit) better claim to the
Crown than Henry the sixth: though in the fourth descent from Edward the third
by John of Gaunt, being but his fourth son. For however Casuists may dispute,
or civil Lawyers argue. The being removed one degree further, can no way
prejudice succession: Whereby the younger brother may come to be preferred
before the elder brothers son, if by chance the elder dye during his Fathers
life. An injustice so against reason and custom, that whosoever yet attempted
it, was reputed to violate the laws of Nature.

From St. John's fields, the principal of the army, and Common Council of the
City, brought news of this Election to Edward Earl of March remaining at
Baynards Castle. Who soon as he understood the intention of their address
(with such modesty as some Clergy man may have used at his consecration; who
by simonaicall practice has obtaind a Bishopric) refused that a while, which
most ambitiously he covered. But soon the animation of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Earl of Warwick, the Bishops of London and Exeter, and diverse
others of eminence prevailed, and he at their request took on him the Royalty.

That night he rested, the next morning with as much ceremony and state, as
the shortness and unquietness of the time could license, in solemn
procession he went to Paul's; whence after Te Deum sung, and oblation made, he
rod to Westminster: there seated in the most perspicuous place of the great
Hall, with the Scepter of St. Edward the Confessor in his hand, himself made
declaration of his double title to the Crown First, by descent, as heir to
the third son of Edward the third; the Line of whose eldest son Edward the
black Prince extinguished in the deposition and par^icide of Richard the second
procured by Henry of Bullingbrooke, first King of the house of Lancaster,
Edward the thirds second son dying without issue. Secondly, by authority of
Parliament, which upon examination of the Duke of Yorkes title, conferred the
possession of the Kingdom immediately on him or his heirs, when Henry the
sixth should make forfeiture of it, by death, resignation, or breach of that
Accord sworn there so solemnly by them. And that this accord was broken, the
slaughter of the Duke oppressed with unequal numbers on King Henry's party at
the battle of Wakefield, did sadly manifest. Nevertheless he protested
himself ready to forgo the justice of his claim, ratherthan to enter upon it
without their free vote.

At which unanimously the Assembly cried King Edward, King Edward: Joyful that
their voices might confirm him King, who had daign'd them so humble a
complement, as to profess that he would not receive the title without their
suffrage. The formalitie of this second Election thus past, he went in
Procession to the Abbie: whence after much solemnity and homage of all the
Nobility there present; he returned by water to the Bishop of Londons Palace,
and was immediately proclaimed King, throughout the City by the name of Edward
the Fourth.

The first fortnight of his Reign was died, I will not say stained, with the
blood of Walter Walker a Grocer, who keeping shop at the sign of the Crown in
Cheapeside, said he would make his son heir to the Crown: a bold jest broke
in an evil time: yet do I not side with them in opinion, who tax the King of
severity in this execution; unless I could clear this man from being
particularly factious for the house of Lancaster; or know that these words were
uttered in innocent mirth, without any scorn to King Edwards Title. And
however perhaps the extraordinary punishment of such saucie language, was not
then unnecessary to beget authority, and make men cautious to dispute the
descent of Princes, when the question was so nice, and arguments not improbable
on either side.

But here in her very first courtesy, Fortune raisd King Edward higher than the
endeavors of a long ambition had done his Father. For now was he consecrated
King, in the Imperial City of this Realm, adornd with every circumstance of
Soveraigntie: and all his enterpises hitherto so flattered with success, that
he could promise nothing but prosperity to his hopes. Yet was the ground
whereon he built uncertain; and his state, brought into comparison with his
Competitor, frail and obnoxious to ruin.

For Henry had equal dignity with the advantage of a long Reign: an
uninterrupted descent in Majesty for threescore years; a soveraigntie
acknowledged abroad by all Christian Princes, and obeyed at home by all
Engilshmen without dispute: a title according to the Law Salique indubitable;
and which had been confirmed at the first entry of his Grandfather Henry the
fourth into the Kingdom, not only by resignation of Richard the second; by
general acknowledgement of all the Nobility, and by authority of Parliament:
but even by approbation, nay particular negotiation of Edmond Duke of York,
Edward Duke of Aumerle; Richard Earl of Cambridge, Grandfather, Great Uncle,
and Great Grandfather to the late anointed King, Edward the Fourth. Only a
feeble judgment, and a long evil fortune rendered Henry the sixth inferior: to
counterpoise which Queen Margaret and the Lords of her side were daring and
vigilant, omitting on stratagem or endeavor that might add to the honor, or
safety of their designs.

Whereupon sly continued still in the North, and oblieging that people every
day more to her devotion, labourd to prepare such an army, as might upon the
worst of fortune, be able enough for defense. And soon she found how much her
own and the authority of the great Lords of her side prevailed: having raised
threescore thousand fighting men, and they all resolved with expense of their
blood to buy back that Majesty, which the house of Lancaster by evil fate
had lost. An army if armed and ordered well, able to oppose the mightiest
enemy, or undertake the boldest enterprise. On sight of which the Queen
entertained a confidence easily to scatter the Forces of the new Mushrome King,
who in a night seemed to have sprung up to Majesty. Especially when she
understood how with unequal power he marched Northward, A clime not unlikely
to prove as distastrous to him, as to his Father.

For King Edward, soon as the voice of the people had saluted him Prince,
resolved with hazard of his new gained Soveraigntie, to extirpate his great
opposer. For while the side of Lancaster was supported with the devotion of so
large a portion of the Kingdom, as yet adhear'd to Henry; he could be King,
but at the courtesy of his Faction: and the body of the Land must of necessity
grow monstrous, being charged with two heads, each of which looked diverse ways.
He therefore while his men had yet the memory of their late good fortune;
fresh in their courage, marched toward the Queen, and chose rather, as worthier
his spirit, to provoke than expect an enemy.

Of his arrival at Pomfret Castle when it was understood, and that part of his
army led by the Lord Fitzwalter had possessed it self of Ferribrig, a passage
over the River Air of great import: All they of Lancaster began carefully to
look to their affairs. King Henry, the Queen, and Prince (who were by their
several weaknesses unfit for action) retired to York, there to attend the
event of businesses. The Army being committed to the charge of the Duke of
Sommerset, the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford.

Among these it was resolved that Ferribrig, in regard of the consequence of
the place, was at any hazard to be recovered; and the enterprise left to the
undertaking of Clifford: who early the next morning, least delay might betray
his design to the enemy, with a competent number made thither: and with such
diligence and ^ecrecie he Marched, that before there was the least suspicion of
an assault, the uncircumspect guard was entered upon and defeated. With which
tum^lt the Lord Fitzwalter, and the Bastard of Salisbury; suspecting a mutanie
among their own Soldiers, role hastily from their beds, and coming down
encounterd a remorselesse enemy, who denied all quarter, and on the place slew
them.

The loss of this so commodious passage and slaughter of such eminent persons
came first to the ear of the Earl of Warwick: who somewhat too much
transported with the evil fate of their first attempt posted in all haste to
King Edward: in whose presence he killed his horse, and said. Sir God have mercy
on their souls, who for love of you in the beginning of your enterprise, have
lost their lives; yet let him fly who will fly: by this cross (kissing the
hilts of his sword) I will stand by him, who will stand by me, fall back, fall
edge.

Wordt certainly, though mingled with a high resolution, strangely distemperd:
and representing so much of danger, as might have troubled the courage of the
Army. And howsoever partial history in mentioning the actions of great men,
will not allow them to participate with the vulgar in the weaknesses incident
to humane nature, yet every greatest Spirit has his allay of imbecillitie. The
most knowing Scholar has found a period, beyond which his curious search
could not move: the wisest Politician has discovered where he erred, and
blushed at the mistake: and the boldest soldier at some time has soon^ the
Coward tremble in him. We may b^i^ht end^v^rs raise nature somewhat above her
^r^ilti^: but never triumph: over her till death.

And certainly Warwick was too much ^^^^^ at this accident: but soon he
settled ^^^^selfe, and by his stout compo^ment (...)fied th^s ^ainting army.
But King Edward, whose youth was beau^ified with valor and wisdom, eve^ to
wonder, ^o b^^tly entertaind this sad reporti^ and to oppose against any fear,
which might shake the Soldier; caused immediate Proclamati do^ to be made;
That it was lawful for any man whom the present loss, or fear of ^in^^e
danger discouragd, safely to depart: that whosoever should perform the duty
of a Soldier and fight manfully, should have a certain and a most large
reward: On the contrary to any man^ who should continue in the Army, and
hereafter fly away; the severest punishment, and liberty for any one to kill
such a coward, with promise of double pay.

No man accepted the offer of so contem'd a safety: and indeed the body of his
Army consisted of Southern men, whose ^light had perhaps been as unsafe as
the present danger. Moreover the example of the valiant persuaded the rest, who
blusht^o appear single ^^ their fears: whereby not being known they grew
afterward to have equal title, with the most daring to a glorious victory.

The King seeing the Spirit of his Army; so bold, and so devoted to his
service; thought the loss of time might endanger the loss of his design: and
thereupon resolved with that first convenience to bring his Fortune to the
trial of a battle. The Lord Fauconbrige and Sir Walter ^^^^^, in regard the
Duke of Norfolk was then disabled by sickness, had the leading of the
va^^tguard* who finding the passage of Forribrig ^mpossible on the su^^^n ^o
^^taine, three miles by hand, at ^^stl^ f^^d pa^^ ^^^ P^^^^^^ ^^d son af^^^
about ^^^ding^ ^^^ d^^cove^^^ the Lord Cliff^^d, whom. they suddenly ^ye^^^^^^
and ^^compast; in vain ^^boring to retir^ to the maine battle. But he
perceiving no way to lead from his Enemies but through death ^^ with ^i^ small
Forces even to the envy of them who overc^me, till shot with an a^^ow through
the ^^^o^te he perished. The Lord John N^^^^^ So^^^^ in the Earl of West^^^land
with al^^^^ shall th^se ^^^^ forth h^^^ troops fell there with their la^^d^^
the Lord Cliff^rd, Who in too mild ^ manner paid the^ the great debt he owed,
the murder ^^^ the young Earl of R^t^a^d.

Next day being ^alme Sunday, early in the mor^^^^ both Armies came in sight: A
fatal meeting, which like the union of the soul with the body, ^^ver pa^^^
^^^^ by death. The field was between Caxton and T^^t^n, from the latter of:
which thi^ battle afterward took name. On full Survey of King H^nc^^s host so
dreadful in advantage of ^^^^be^: Reclamation was* made in King Edward ^^^pe
^^^^ ^^ quarter should be given nor prisoner taken* A ^^cessary cruelty not to
be avoy^^^ but with danger of his own ruin: In regard otherwise the common
Soldier might in hope of ^^^yle of the ransom of an enemy, be wanting to
his duty.

It was about the hour of nine, when the Armies drew near: threescore
thousand for Lancaster, for York scarce forty thousand: only the presence and
courage of King Edward made an equality. The Lord Eauconbrige to whom the Van
was committed, and who was most able for the place, when the fight was ready to
begin, charged his Archers, soon as they had shot, to fall three strides back
and make a stand* whereby they might avoid the arrows of the Enemy: which
stratagem happened as was expected; for the Northern men with a sudden fury
answered the on set, and having emptied their quivers hasted to hand blows:
But the Arrows which they had discharged, having never reached them against
whom they were shot, turned now to their annoiance and trouble, so far that the
splinters of them sticking in the ground p^irst and gauld their feet, and
forced them to a confused stop. In this trouble the Southern men shot another
flight, and the vvind conspiring with their cunning blevv a tempest of hail
and snow into their faces: by which the Vantguard of King Henry led by the
Earl of Northumberland and Andrew Trollop gave back.

Yet did not the maine battle tremble with this motion: but as if the enemy
had gained no advantage, continued with, the first constancy. Ten hours
victory hung in suspense: equal courage on both sides; equal hopes in the
good, equal despai^es in the bad success* vvch occasioned so much cruelty in
the fight. But at length (the field staind with blood, and the earth groaning
with the burden of so many heaps of dead and dying bodies) the Northern men
began to hope for safety only in flight* Neither did they ^eeld to the
prevailing Fortune of the Enemy, until their courages were dismayed with
sight of so many eminent persons slain before their eyes. For the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, the Lords Beaumont D'acres, Gray and Wells with
diverse others of greatest reputation for Nobility and courage had already
fallen; and in their slaughter taught the survivers what to expect. The Dukes of
Sommerset and Exeter, seeing all things desperate; the greater part of the
Army slain, the rest broken and flying: poasted to York, to carry the fatal
news of this overthrow to the unfortunate King: whose virtue yet had a
patience greater than his ruin.

In no battle was ever powered forth so much English Blood: for in this and the
two precedent days were slain, six and thirty thousand, seven hundred
seventy six persons: all of one nation, many near in alliance, some in Blood;
fatally divided by faction: yet all animated with the same zeal to maintain
their Princes right* which being so difficult to resolve, doubtless made the
quarrel on either side, how ruinous soever to their famelies; not unsafe to
their Consciences. And it is worthy observation, that in this so long and
cruel conflict between the two houses; never any stranger of name was present
at our battles: as if we had disdaind to conquer or perish by other weapons
than our own.

Kind Henry perceiving how desperate his hopes were in England, with the poor
remains of his party, secured himself by flight into Scotland: And with such
have, that before King Edward got to York (where he hoped to have surprised
him dismayed with the late discomsiture) nothing was there left but the City
humbly devoted to the dispose of the Conqueror. But on the walls yet remaind
the heads of Richard Duke of York and his friends; an ignominious spectacle,
unluckily there standing to in^ence him to cruelty. For on sight of so
barbarous an injury* he gave present command that Thomas Earl of De^^a^^i^^
should be beheaded with three others taken in the former battle: that these new
heads might r^leeve them who had stood centinell so long; and that his father
and friends might not want that busy part of the body to be enclosed with them
in the grave. An action too much savouring of the ancient Heathen: the souls
of Christians no way requiring their murders to be revengd, or their injuries
appeared with such an offering.

After this dire oblation, he sent part of his Forces to clear the coast
toward Scotland, from the dregs of war: where to terrify that people prone
to innovation in King Henry's quarrel, some examples of severitie were made.
In the interime he with as glorious triumph and large joy as victory could
beget, which begot no less to him than absolute Soveraignety, marched toward
London. By the inhabitants whereof, who were deeply interessed in his Fortune,
he was with all the solemnity of a secure gladness entertaind. To the triumph
of his entrance, soon succeeded that of his Coronation, performed with usual
ceremonies, but most unusual congratulations.

Immediately, that no circumstance of Soveraintie might be wanting, a Parliament
was Summond: By which his title might be reconfirm'd* his partakers rewarded,
his enemies punished. And though private respects were his chief business,
desiring to disa^^ll all acts made heretofore in prejudice to the house of
York and its adherents: yet the outward pretention was the safety and quiet of
the Realm. For he publicly professed his only care to be, that such wholesome
laws might be enacted; as might redress disorders crept into the state, by
free license given to rapin in the former troubles. By which appearance of
solicitude for quieting the republique, he gained authority among the wise, and
created a belief in all, that his government in peace would be as fortunate,
as his success in war. Having by his wisdom and providence thus won
opinion upon the generality* he bestowed his graces on particular persons, whom
blood in merit rendered dear to him. His brothers George and Richard he created
Dukes, the elder of Clarence, the younger of Gloucester. John Lord Nevill the
Earl of Warwickes brother, he made Vicount Mountague, Henry Bourchier brother
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Earl of Essex: and William Lord Fauconbrige
Earl of Kent. He erected diverse others to the Title of Barons, and honored
many with Knighthood. The conclusion of this great assembly was punishment: for
John Earl of Oxford, Aubery Vere his son, Sir John Tiddenham Knight, William
Tirrell and Walter Mountgomery Esquires, were without an^were convict of^
reason and behended. A rough proceeding which favord something too much of the
Conqueror.

B^sinesses thus happily settled at home, to check the ^udaciousnesse of our
transmarin neighbors (who had throwrie injuries on our Nation weakened by
discord) the Earls of Esse^ and Kent with the Lord Audley were sent with ten
thousand soldiers to scowre the narrow Seas: who first landing in Britain
took the Town of Conquest: and afterward in the Isl^ of R^^, pill^g'd that
little Country, and with victory returned. By which en^erprise, though of n^
signal consequence to his affairs, yet King Edward gave the French to
understand ho^^ unfa^^^ it was to ^^^^tate the English governed by ^^^ active
Prince^ who might perhaps (...) in person app^^^e abroad, for the recovery of
^^^ose Provinces, nothing but ^^^^ diss^^sion should have los^o As likewise to
t^^rifie all (...) states from adhering to King Henry, who both in c^^rage and
fortune was ^o ^a^^e inferio^^.

And no^^ was the prosperity of Edward ^n so full splendour, and so dark a
cloud hung over the house of Lancaster that Henry Duke of Somm^rset and Sir
Ralph Percie for ^^^^e the ^^ine^ of that family, they had ^^ long endeavored
to support. To King Edward the submission of two so eminent persons appeared
vvelcome as a victory and they by his favor were presently restored to full
possession both of honor and ^^tar^: the same grace promised to any, who
migh^^^ example should persuade.

Yet did not the indefatigable Queen loose any thing from her sprit on
endeavors: H^qlate so sad discomfiture, and revolt now of her chief
adherents, able perhaps to (...) for^^^^, not her. And having upon full
reckoning, perceived that she must account of no power at home, she made her
addresses to all Princes abroad, whom allianee, reason of state, or compassion
of so great a disaster, might move to her assistance. But, as it is in the fate
of all women who usurp on their husbands, she had been ^o happy in manage
of his prosperity and Tow^ w^somuch more ^^capable to ^^gole against christ
for^^^ and (...) in felicity^ G^^^ undertakings being (...) (...) succesfull in
(...), whose government (...), as (...) (...) it is (...), (...) (...) (...)
self in (...) (...) been disorderly and (...) But certainly how erroneous
hovvever (...) (...) she ^^^ now defective only in th^^ (...), (...) is not
ruled by ours, but by a high (...).

For wi^^ the King of Scotland (with (...) is in the nearest place of safety,
she l^^^^^er h^^^^^nd) to confirm a secure friendship, she contracted a near
alliance: by promising the young. Prince her son in marriage to his lister.
And that this marriage might not seem a gift but a bargain; she ^^^ght the
(Lady by (...) of Barwicke into the Scot^ ^ands; ^^^ strongest Fort (...)
English (...) in the North. But the (...) (...) ever ^^^^^^er son their (...)
and for^^ to ^op^^gha^e what otherwise they would with (...) (...) persuaded to
receive.

With Jews the Eleventh the French King, she prevailed little, though near to
him (...) confanguinity: for the discontent of his Nobility, held him
incontinuall suspicion. Otherwise she had title to promise her self large
supplies from so potent and politic a Prince, whose interest it must no
reas^^ have been, by fomenting discord at home, to hinder us from any attempt
abroad. After ^uch (...), she obtained that he declared himself ^^^ King
Henry: By prohibiting all favorers of the house of York access into the
French dominions; and opening them to all those of the party of Lancaster. A
negative kind of help, which rather showed there yet was Sanctuary left for
Henry's unhappie friends, than any considerable aid to be expected.

Phillip Duke of Burgundy, though a mighty Prince, and near allied to
Lancaster (whose wives mother was Philippa, daughter to John of Gaunt) by age,
and a passionate love to quiet, was become altogether unactive. Neither had
Charles Earl of Charolois, his son, though of a daring Spirit and an
affecter of business, leisure to look over into our Island: being engaged to
domestic troubles, and suspicious of the designs of the French King.

With Charolois, the Duke of Britain held a strong confederacy: and both of
them intelligence with the discontented Lords of France. The war which was
afterward so known by the name of the Weale-Publique being at that time among
them privately in contrivance: so that all these neighboring Princes, to whom
the affairs of England might seem considerable, were wholly taken up with
attention to their own.

The Emperor Frederick the third was more remote: and so cautious from entering
into the quarrels of other men; that by any Art and even with loss he would
decline his own. Moreover he justly stood in continual fear of the growing
Fortune of the Turk: who having lately subverted the Eastern, threatened now
ruin to the Western Empire: and questionless had not the great God of Armies
miraculously given a stop to his victories; Christendom had now been only
several Provinces slaved to his tyranny. For pride and emulation had then
turned our Arms upon our selves, and left our bodies naked to the scourge of
the common enemy.

Spain was far off, divided between a Christian and Mohammedan government,
each laboring the extirpation of the other, so that they had liberty to be
Actors in no Tragoedie but their own. And indeed no conflict is so fierce and
irreconciliable; as when Religion animates to war, and makes it piety to be
cruel.

To her Father therefore, who enjoyed the specious title of King of Sicily,
Naples, and Jerusalem, but possession of none of them, the afflicted Queen
was forced to make a sad retreat. A poor contemptible Lord, living now to see
his son in Law, once the greatest Monarch of the Christian world, a Prince as
merely titular as himself. As if it had been the Fate of these two, that the
one could say, he might have been, the other that once he was a King.

Leaving therefore foreign states intentive to their own designs: with her
son, whom to move compassion she had carried up and down: the Queen
returned to Scotland: by her long but unsuccesfull labor, having gathered
together five hundred French: a number so small and so unworthy the name of an
Army, that it was but a competent retinue for so great a Princess. With these
nevertheless she sayld to Timmouth, whence she was repulst by the inhabitants
soon as she landed; and forced again to put to Sea. But there (for where may
the unfortunate meet with friendship?) she found the winds her enemies, whose
unruly force drove her at length disorderly to Barwicke.

Here some thin regiments of Scots resorted to her; in company of whom she
entered Northumberland: her husband (...) in the Fro^^, that the name and
presence of King (...) (...) invite the people to their ancient service; and
(...) Authority to the designe^ B^^ soon th^^e (...) her error; for hope, not
compassion (...) (...) danger* and the Commonalty fate still, (...) by rising
they understood themselves only (...) to sha^^ in the Kings misfortune. For
having upon a just a^c^ou^^ discoverd how war^^ i^ only necessary to the most
desperate, and that in the (...) it leaves them to nothing but b^gg^ry and
^^^^^shment they were (...) (...) the love of (...) and every man betook^
himself to industry* And for the Nobility* the King had ^^on the^^ ^^th^t by
the reputation of his fortune* or te^r^^ of his courage; so that ^^m^ma^ ^o
(...) to change subjection. Only H^^^^y Duke of Sommerset, and Sir Ralph
Percie, who ^ot long before had forsook King H^n^y in his tempest, no^^ upon a
false hope of fairer weather: st^^^ (...) (...) (...). For it is a ridiculous
^^^^ing in Historians to ascribe the action of great men ^^r^etually to
policy; since i^resolution prevails equally ^^^^^ them as with the vulgar.
And why might ^^^^ desperation be g^t submission in these ^^^^ bo^^ing Edward;
and a vain appearance of a re^ur^e of fortune to King Henti^s (...), (...)
(...) to this lastrevolt.

Upon this so weak (...) (...) (...) (...) Margaret, perceiving (...)
friendship (...) husbands native Country, destroyed it as if an enemie's* And
^anting forc^ to r^ach the prosperity of her Competitor, ^^ll ^^^elly (...)
the Common people, (...) ^itherto been only subject to his Fortune* b^a^ing
i^wa^dly a (...) passionate love to the famely of Lancaster. But this
o^^rageous carriage of the Army, changed absolutely their affections to the
Queen: Who was questionless by necessity compelled to things unlawful,
whereby to prevent the disbanding of her Forces, which were only paid, and
kept together by a licencious spoil.

To oppose against this attempt, which only betrayed the weakness of the
Enemy; King Edward sent down the Lord Mountague* himself staying behind to
raise an Army, befitting the greatness of his name, and present quarrel.
Giving likewise order that his Navy should guard the Seas, to hinder any
succors to the Queen from foreign confederates. But this was an unnecessary
caution t^ no state abroad being so desperate, as to imbarque itself i^ the
broken seat of her Fortune.

Mountague at Land had a braver occasion to show his courage: who having in the
Bishopric of Dur^sme gathered convenient Forces, marched directly against King
Henry. By the way the Lords Hungerford, and Rosse, and Sir Ralph Percie
presented themselves to hinder his farther course: but perceiving the good
order and courage of his Army, all fled but the valiant Percie* Who disdaining
to reprive his life beyond his honor, or to show the least weakness beneath
his name or Spirit fought it out with his (...); till overp^est with number; he
and his were all cut to pieces.

Encouraged with his success Mountague attempts, without expectation of any
farther succor or direction, to finish the present war^e: and immediately
marches to a plain near the River Dowell in Hexam-shire, where King Henry's
Army lay encampt. The Camp he suddenly assaults in the night; and had taken
it without any loss, had not the enemy beyond reason gathered themselves into
some order and valiantly opposed. But no courage could withstand the Fortune
and spirit of Mountague, for the Queens Camp at length was lost, and in it
taken the Duke of Sommerset, the Lords Hungerford, Rosse, Moulins and Hussie,
with Wentworth and Finderne Knights: Sommerset on the place lost his head: the
rest sent to Newcastle to suffer there the same punishment. But King Henry and
the Queen escaped at the first on set: whose Tragoedy drew not yet nere the
last Act.

King Edward whose Fortune fought for him, even in his absence, encountered the
news of this victory in his march toward Durisme: so that finding the presence
of his person and Army needless he returned toward York: Giving command to
Warwick to take in all the Forts and Castles which yet in the North held out.
On the way he was certified of the apprehension of King Henry's person, who was
surprised as he endeavord by shifting from place to place to have recovered
Scotland. With the joy of which report King Edward returned to London, whether
as yet he never came but glorious in the accession of some new Triumph.

The son of Sir Edward Talbot of Lanca-shire, apprehended King Henry as he
sat at dinner at Waddington Hall, and forgetting all respect due to so great a
Prince, like a common malefactor with his legs tied under the horse belly,
guarded him up toward London. By the way the Earl of Warwick met him, who
adding indignities to his affliction, with the general reproaches of the
people (the acclamations they give to the unfortunate) led him prisoner to the
Tower. The only companions of his present calamity, were Doctor Manning Deane
of Windsore, and Doctor Bedle: both of so divine a calling, as showed no
misfortune could separate him from his Piety.

The miserable Queen seeing the desolation of her greatness, her husband
imprisoned, all her great partakers fled or slaughtered, made again her
retreat into France: and with her son (whose preservation flattered her with
some hope that one day he might rebuild the now ruined house of Lancaster) fled
to her fathers Court. A most wretched Sanctuary to her fears: where she had
only leisure by long sufferance to prepare her mind for future misery.

But this her dejection raised Edward up to an unsuspicious Soveraigntie: so
that now he began to set strong the disjoynted body of his Kingdom. And
knowing liberality the only ligament that ties affection to a Prince, he
resolved by attaindor of his enemies to enable himself to reward the services
of his friends. And though he pretended the gate of mercy ever to stand open
to the submission of the Lancastrians, yet few or none accepted the favor:
either distrustful of his reallitie, or feeding their hopes with imagination
that the tide of Fortune would not still flow with so impetuous a torrent.

But King Edward disdaining a faction so contemptible in their ruin, should
disdain his clemency; proceeded to punishment. The Earldom of Pembrooke, an
honor heretofore enjoyed by Jasper Teuther half brother to Henry the sixth,
he bestowed on Sir William Herbert a Knight of Wales, both for descent and
power most eminent, and to whose aid a great part of the present felicity was
owing. To the Lord Mountague, whose person and service he equally loved, he
gave the opulent possessions belonging to the family of the Percies.

But the most open hand cannot satisfy the expectation of great deservers: who
set so high a price upon their merits, that they leave their Princes no power
of reward. The greatest benefit being received in the degree of a debt, not a
gift. And certainly Mountague and his brother Warwick had by too much merit
even disobleig'd the King: what honor soever they were in future to have,
being so little able to cancel the obligation, it could scarce defray the
interest. And in that way was this title and inheritance accepted, which gave
the King occasion to distaste whom otherwise he would with passion have
embraced. Whereupon reflecting on the danger of adding power to them, who
wanted only will to do mischief, and knowing how easily innovation might be
resolved on, when nothing but the conscience was to be persuaded: he began
seriously to wish the mightiness of that family (he owed the crown to) in
some degree lessend. Yet that he might no way appear unthankefull to so great
deserts, he thought fit to weaken their strength, and yet to add to the
spender of their title. Whereupon he willingly admitted the friends of Percie
to interced for restitution both of honor and revenue, and soon granted it:
Rewarding Mountague with the more specious style of Marquess. But this
state-tricke was by the brothers easily understood, and accepted with the same
brow they would have entertaind an injury.

Which the King dissembled; and to build his estimation high in the air of
popular applause, endeavord by all the Arts of humble greatness to endeare
himself into the opinion of the multitude. His presence was easy to any man's
love or curiosity, his aspect clear and smiling, his language free and
familiar. And to the Ladies who have also their share in the motion of states,
he applied a general courtship: which used by a Prince and of so amiable a
personage; made them, usually the Idols of others, Idolaters of him. Among his
Nobility he was so supple in gesture, and liberal in affability; that he
appeard King, not in his assumption of state, but in their application of duty.
This to win outward applause: while to settle an inward sense of his wisdom,
he looked into abuses of Officers, and reformed them. Neither was there any
oppression or mistake in government, but what he releiv'd or corrected. And
that it might appear how zealously ^ee sought due administration of justice,
he in person sat three days together on his Bench at Westminster Hall: which
though it little advanced the uncorcupted execution of the laws, yet it served
happily for example, and created, what he then most courted, opinion.

Thus he grew upon his people at home, while abroad the neighboring states
began to decline the danger of his future enmity: who ever measure the power
of Princes by that sway and affection they have among their subjects. Charles
Earl of Charolois (a widdower but without heir male) heir to a large and
opulent territory (the seventeene Provinces with the Duchy and County of
Burgundy, and the greatest part of Picardie, being subject to Duke Philip his
Father) first made his address. Who bearing an implacable hatred to Lewis of
France, desired to gain so potent a neighbor to his party: and that he might
secure the friendship against all vacillation, he by his Ambassadors entreated
a marriage with the Lady Margaret, the Kings sister. A motion heard in England
with much acceptance, and which every circumstance well weighed, brought both
honor and security. But it was thought by some intimate with the Earl in his
most inward counsels, that really he never intended this marriage: having from
his mother, niece to John of Oaunt Duke of Lancaster derived an irreconcilable
malice against the house of York. And that this negotiation aimed only to
temporize with England, in case the Duke of Britain and the French Kings
brother should desert him and make their peace with Lewis; against whom these
three were then in confederacy: but this I believe an overcunning in
conjecture; since marriage among Princes, as it seldom confirms a sound
friendship, so does it never extirpate an ancient hatred: the proof of our and
all times showing how false a love is created by alliance. But the thoughts of
Princes are so unknown to Posterity, that they are beyond the ^or^ti^^e of the
present time. I will not therefore dispute what the Earls inward designs
were; but certainly both according to reason of state and the ^v^o^^ (which is
the best light Historians can discern by) as it was pretended so was it
intended.

The marriage of his sister, thus far advanced, he began to advise with
Counsel concerning his own. A strong alliance abroad was soon resolved most
necessary both for the dignity and safety of his Crown: and among all the
Princesses that time gloried in, the Lady Bona was thought worthyest his bed.
In respect of the excellency of her beauty, greatness of birth (as being
daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy) and the mighty marriage of her other sister
with Lewis the Eleventh of France. This last consideration being a maine
inducement: as by which all fear might be taken away of a tempest from that
coast, whence Queen Margaret seemed to prepare a storm.

To this negotiation the Earl of Warwick was deputed as the fittest person,
both for his great faith to the King, and authority in the Kingdom. Who no
sooner arrived at the French Court, where the young Lady then resided, in
company of her sister; but was withal triumph entertained, and his motion
heard with joy and acceptance.

The ambition of the French Queen to have her sister married to so great a
Prince prevailing against many politic respects, which might else have
overswayd King Lewis. And soon after for an absolute conclusion of all
businesses. Mounsiur D'ampmartin was designed Ambassador for England. These two
Kings equally soliciting the perfection of this marriage. Edward that he
might without fear of more danger enjoy the glory of a late recovered
Kingdom. Lewis, that freed from the danger of an English invader, he might
give a period to his busy projects at home, by laying the devil of civil
war, raised by a tumultuous Nobility.

But while policy acted several parts abroad; love on the sudden changed
the whole Scene at home. For the Young King after hunting coming to visit
the Duches of Bedford at her Manor of Grafton near S^ony. Stratford, was
solicited by a fair petitioner the Duchesses daughter, widow of Sir John
Gray, ^^^^e on King Henry's part at the battle of S^. Albans. The King could
not but yield to any request made by ^^ conquering a beauty, and presently
himself glue as earnest in soliciting her* but in a more unlawful suite. But
she armed her ^oule with a modesty able to break the hottest battery of lust:
and though on every side assaulted by the engines of temptation, she repulst
her enemy so nobly; that he offered party upon honorable terms* For when the
King perceived her adorned with a chastity strong enough to resist him* who
had scarce ever been but victorious in those attempts, he grew enamored on the
beauty of her mind, and resolved her virtue was dowre enough to marry her to
the highest Throne. Reason of state argued sharply against a marriage so
unequal to Majesty, by alleging the peril of irritating so potent a
neighbor as King Lewis, and so dangerous a subject as Warwick, as likewise the
inconvenience of raising a widow to his bed, who could bring nothing with her
but her poverty, and an unprovided issue: Who if not advanced by him would be
a scorn to his children, if advanced a ruinous charge to his Exchequer, and an
envy both to the Princes of his blood, and the Nobility of his Kingdom. But
Love like a cunning Sophister easily refell'd all pollitique arguments, and
persuaded reason her self almost to be of his side.

For he repeated to the King his own prerogative, which being so large; why
should he then be denied the liberty of a free choice, which is allowed the
meanest subject? Why might not he woo with his own eyes, and make election
where his fancy best delighted? As for the Lady her self he found her in the
treasures of her mind most abundant, and in the perfections of her body
excellent to please him, who, and not the state, was to marry. For her birth,
she was by the father Noble in descent at home, by her mother of the house of
Luxenbourge, a family with which the greatest Princes of Christendom had near
alliance. As for marrying a subject and the widow of his enemy: the later
argued more charity, and the former could not but tie the affection of his
people, when they saw their Prince disdained not affinity with them. For a
president to authorize these his intended Nuptials, he had Edward the Black
Prince his great Uncle, great indeed if not the greatest, among all the
Princes of his name. And for the threatened danger from King Lewis or the Earl
of Warwick: from France he could never expect how near so ever the alliance
had been but an unfaithful amity: and should this his marriage thrust
Warwick upon rebellious attempts, the rebel would but fondly run upon his
own ruin: since it could not stand with the Majesty of a King, to hold his
Crown by so base a tenure, as to have his actions awed by a subject. These and
such like arguments, which love is cunning upon all occasions to enforce,
prevailed so far that though the old Duches of York his mother most violently
opposed, by throwing the highest calumnies upon the Lady Gray, and alleging a
precontract with the Lady Lucy, yet one morning secretly did he marry her. For
the disparity of birth or Fortune is no impediment; and for the precontract:
upon examination the Lady Lucy her self acquitted the King, only laying to his
cha^g the guilt of a most winning courtship* And though afterward during the
usurpation of Richard the third, in open Parliament was alleged against the
lawfulness of King Edwards marriage* strange potions and amorous charms by
which the Lady Elizabeth Gray bewitched him to her love, and likewise another
precontract with the Lady Edeanor Dutler daughter to the Earl of Shrewsbury
and widow to the Lord of Sudlye: I cannot but believe all those scandals by
some of the tyrants wicked instruments, suggested into the minds of that
assembly. For had there been a just exception against this marriage neither
George Duke of Clarence, nor the Earl of Warwick, in their frequent calumnies
against the King being in open rebellion, had left it unmention'd.

But no sooner had King Edward obeyed his ^ancie in taking her to his bed, and
in that ^asted the forbidden fruit (forbidden I mean by politic respects)
but he saw himself naked, of friends at home and abroad, to oppose against
any new arising difficulty. But as yet by the braverie of his carriage did he
a^de an honor to the ^ct* Courage and Love, either denying him^ to foresee or
to regard the danger. Though as soon as the marriage was de^^^ged, he
presently I discerned another face of men. Mo^^^^i^r (...) in the Extraordinary
for France, full of indignation, returned and the Nobility in general look^
discontented, or else but forced a smile* The so^ hig^ advancement of this one
Lady and her children, lately beneath so many in fortune, begetting an
universal envy in the rest. But when the Earl of Warwick understood how
mighty an affront by this was given to his employment; he entertained none but
disdainefull thoughts against his Prince* And expressed so bold a discontent*
that Lewis of France, who was quick to perceive, and careful to ^omentany
displeasure, which might tend to the disturbance of another Kingdom, began to
enter into private communication with him. For ever after this common injury,
so they called the error of love in the King, the Earl held a dangerous
intelligence in France, which after occasioned so many confusions to our
Kingdom* Nevertheless upon his return he dissembled ^ll discontent, and in
every circumstance of respect applied himself to appla^de the marriage, and in
particular the excellent pe^sonage of the Queen* The King int^rpreted the
intentions of the man according to the appearance, unwilling perhaps to rack
his own nature so far till it had confessed that his carriage might dissemble
danger. And in the mean time to raise his wives kindred as near as possibly
to his own greatness, he search^ out all means for their advancement* The
Lord Richard Widdevill her Father he created Earl of Rivers, and High
Constable of England, with an annual Fee of 200* pound out of the Exchequer,
whom shortly after he made Lord Treasure^* Her brother Anthony he created Lord
Scales, the daughter and heir^ to which title, by the Kings* ear^est
solicitation, he not long before had wedded. And her son Thoma^ he raised
to the honor of Marquess D^rset, for whom he procured in marriage the heir
of the Lord Bonvile and Harrington. By his own free gift enobling them with
titles, and by the industry of his mediation enabling them with possessions, to
make those titles no scorn to the owners.

Every unmarried Lord imagined the bestowing of these two great heirs on the
Queens kindred, an injury to his own hopes: And Warwick thought every great
office conferred upon another, misplaced. For his many Services begot so great
an insolency, that he scarce allowed the King a share in the distribution of
his own: Hereupon his thoughts grew dangerous, and only opportunity was
wanting to thrust him into action. He considered the vastness of his
possessions, the greatness of his authority among the Commons, and the
general dependancies of the men of war upon him; and hence concluded, it was
as easy for him to uncreate as to create a King* But he found the general
humor of the kingdom not yet fully ripe for mischief: the vulgar enamored on
the much courtesy of their Prince; the Lords nearest to him in blood and
likeliest to incline to his Faction dear likewise to the King; and all of the
house of Lancaster who by probability would at first invitement take fire in
any combustion of the state, exiled and poor. Sedition therefore for the
present was but an embrion in his brain, which after when time had delivered,
became so vast and bloody a monster. Nevertheless he was not unmindfull of
his design, cherishing unkind thoughts in any whom he saw distasted at the
King, and casting forth speeches which might lessen the honor of his public
and private actions* with which discourses, as with slow poisons he infected
many limbs of the general body. Then upon pretention of infirmity, and
prescription of P^isitions for the change of air, with license from the King
he retired to his Castle at Warwick. Where his observation was, what Lords
great in power or treasure resorted to him, and with what countenance, whether
they undervalued the weakness of the Kings judgment, or hated the
advancement of the Queen and her kindred: whether they were troubled at any
private repulse or open affront, or generally at the public business: or
whether they repented not the so violent oppression of the family of Lancaster:
Any discontent making for his purpose, which either pointed at the errors of
the King, pride of the Queen and her kindred, or the misgovernment of the
state. Upon the affections of the meaner sort begain'd by a profu^e
hospitality* ^^ open kitchen and buttery persuading more with them than any
duty to justice: Upon the good will of the better sort he won, by bowing his
entertainment down to an endearing familiarity, saluting every man courteously
by his name, and engaging them by trivial benefits. And with all sorts by his
great service to the Crown, and a carriage Noble both in war and peace.

The King, though he wanted that virtue of ^owards, suspicion; began
nevertheless to have the Earl in some jealousy: his unusual retiredness
from the Court, and so expencefull purchasing the voice of the people, argued
both distaste against his Prince, and a hope to maintain any unlawful
enterpise by Faction. But either in policy he dissembled his distrust, nor
having yet any firm ground to build a just accusation, or in good nature would
ecclips the Earls greatness, by which himself enjoyed a benefit little less
tha^ the Crown. But that the storm threatened from France, for incensing King
Lewis in the di^^ou^^t marriage of the Lady ^ona* might be diverted* he made
strong confederacies round about him. With Henry King of Castle, and John King
of Ar^agon, that Spain* however far remo^e, might b^e near in friendship, he
entered into leag^^: and upon the conclusion of it, granted license for the
transportation of certain Cotswold sheep thither, a grant that is complained
of still, as a mighty enriching to the Spanish, and as great an empoverishing
to the English Merchant. With Scotland he made a truc^ for fifteen years,
that he invading France, or invaded by the French, might be secure however not
to have that Nation, according to their custom upon all advantages enemies at
his back. His Ambassadors in the Low Countries, urged the Duke of Burg^ndie to
^^^ accomplishment of the marriage between his son the Earl of Charolois,
and the Lady Margaret the Kings sister. And so happy success had thi^
n^gotiation, that though for some years it had hung ^n suspense, it was now
absolutely agreede on, and the Bastard of Burgundy sent over with full
instructions and power to give the Trea^ie a final conclusion. For whatsoever
dissimulation the Earl of Charolois used at first* he now int^^^^^ th^s
marriage seriously: In regard he found himself lie open to the ma^ice of King
Lewis* a most dangerous Neighbor, who by policy or (...) had broken all
those great confederacies the Earl had before in France. Wherefore ^here was
now no ^afe^y but in ar^ing himself by a ^^^^^^ amity with the English, a
Nation forward and fierce to attempt any thing upon the French, and in their
attempts scarce ever but prosperous. Neither was the courage of the Kings
youth, and his continual good success in war a small inducement:
considering it gave a certain hope, that he upon any invitation of honor or
profit might be persuaded to cross the Seas, and undertake the ancient
national quarrel. And for the danger of any alteration in the government, there
was then no ground for suspicion: the King honored and loved by his people,
the adverse faction of no power, and the Earl of Warwick having never yet
declared himself but most passionately affected to the house of York.
Wherefore in reason of sta^e being no impediment, the marriage was soon ageeed
on, and upon the agreement, many triumphs glorious but martial, according to
the nature of that time, so devoted to Arms.

But to interrupt the jollity of these Triumphs, an express came from the
Low Countries, with the news of the death of Duke Phillip: Presently the
Bastard returned, and our Council stood at a gaze, being in some suspense what
alteration the business might receive, the Earl now absolute in possession of
his Fathers dominions. But that scruple was soon taken away, by an Ambassador
sent to hasten the full performance of the marriage. Whereupon the Lady was
carried over with all the ceremonies of greatness, and at Burges married to
Duke Charles: that Nation which then exceeded all the World in bravery and
riot, exceeding even it self, at this tiumph, in the wantonness of a
superfluous pomp. In those Countries she lived some while his wife, though
ever barren with as much love from him, as he could spare from his ambitious
wars, but she continued long his widow in much reputation among the Natives
and good esteem with neighboring Princes. Two things rendered her much the
discourse of those times. An extraordinary love and care in the education of
the posterity of her husband, and an extreme malice against Henry the seventh.
To supplant whom, because there wanted true, she countenanced the suppositious
Princes of the house of York; and by continual practices revenged in part,
the injury of that disrespect, he ever cast upon her family.

This so potent alliance, and his confederacies with foreign states, made
King Edward imagine himself in great security, when indeed he was most
unsafe. For during these treaties abroad and triumphs at home; the Earl of
Warwick quickened so far his designs, that now there appeared a dangerous
life in them. The body of his Faction was grown mighty but monstrous, being
compacted of several natures. For into conspiracy of this great enterprise he
had drawn off the Clergy, and the Laity, and most of them of affections most
opposite. The Archbishop of York was the principal mover, because he moved
upon the soul; and made treason an act of Religion* The easy multitude who
build their faith upon the man, not the Doctrine; thinking it meritorious to
rebel, in regard his function seemed to give authority to the action. With the
Archbishop the Marquess Mountague consented, but secretly: either cunningly
dissembling mischief, or else wishing well to both sides being in himself
divided between a natural love to a brother, and an alleigance to a Prince:
or perhaps projecting to make his benefit, out of which party soever should
prevail. With these agreed many eminent persons of King Edwards Court; whom
either desire of war, having never lived but in the troubled stream of
discord, or want of expected recompense, renderd discontent.

All the partakers in the calamity of the house of Lancaster, most passionately
at first overture embraced this motion: as men, whom desperation had prepared
fit for the mostruinous attempt. And who, having found nothing but evil
fortune at home, and contempt abroad, were instructed in a patience ready with
joy to suffer a not inglorious death. Among whom Henry Holland Duke of Exceter
was a sad example; who after his ruin with the fall of Henry the sixth was
reduced to so miserable a condition, that all ragged and bare footed he begged
for his meat in the Low Countries, the absolute Prince whereof and he, married
two sisters, the daughters of Richard Duke of York. With this so unfortunate
Lord, all the rest who shared with him in misery, ran violently into this
war. But the wonder of the world then was at the powerful sorcerie of those
persuasions, which bewitched the Duke of Clarence, the Kings brother to this
conspiracy: but he was young and purblind in foreseeing the event of things
Profuse in expense beyond his revenue, and almost beyond the Kings power to
supply: grudging the favors conferred upon the Queen and her kindred: Valuing
his birth too high, as who forgot the brother of a King is but a subject:
forward upon any terms to make himself greater; easily lending ear to
dangerous whispers, and as rashly giving consent. These preparatives made this
young Prince fit to take any mischief, which the Earl of Warwick ministered
most plentifully. And first to apply to the narrowness of his present fortune,
a humor most troublesome at the instant; he gave him in marriage the Lady
Isabell his daughter, and ooheire to the rich Earldom of Warwick. In hatred
against the Queen he concurd and in discontent against the Kings so slender
rewards: but in promising greatness to Clarences ambition, he exceeded even
proportion; though not probability: considering the Earls unlimitted power.
But first to make the friendship strong by a near alliance, they saild over
for the consummation of this marriage to Callice, of which town the Earl of
Warwick was Captain, and in which the young Lady then remained with her
mother. Soon was this ceremony past, and soon did the Earl invite his
Sonne-in-Law from the softness of the nuptial dalliance, as who had contrived
this marriage for business, not for pleasure: and designed the first issue of
their embraces to be a monster, and the most unnatural one; War between
brothers.

He acquainted therefore his Sonne-in-Law by what line he had sounded the depth
of the peoples affection to the present King; and what a tempest he was able to
raise when ever he should resolve for motion. He told him how in the North
15000. men had been in Arms, pretending revenge upon the governors of Saint
Leonards Hospital in York, for converting the Alemony they received from the
Country every year in Corn to their own use, by which they both defrauded
the poor, and the charitable intention of the owners: Whereas indeed the armed
multitude moved first by his council only, awaiting his presence, with
resolution to run any hazard of his command. And though the Marquess
Mountague, raised Forces in King Edwards name, by which he quieted the
commotion, and beheaded Robert Huldron their chief Captine: yet were the
people ready upon the first Summons to reassemble, and the Marquess (who by
such appearance of fidelity had won upon the easy faith of the dull King)
prepared to bring his forces and join in any enterprise he should appoint. He
showed farther how by this his brothers dissimulation, his intelligence held
perfect in the Kings Council; and all the resolutions of state might be
without difficulty prevented, since no sooner made but discovered.

The Duke, who before held the Earls courage and authority with the people in
great estimation, now began to wonder at the so cunning manage of this great
business. Neither could he suspect the success, the Earl having so ordered
things, that he left little or nothing to ^ortune. Whereupon he gave his
judgment entirely up to his Fathers in law discretion; with whom he returned
into England, openly professing and justifying his resolution to rebellion. The
vanity of ambition sealing up his eyes so far, that he could not perceive the
unnaturalness of his revolt, and the certain hazard of ruin, in warring
against a Prince so great both in arms and Fortune.

Against their return the Archbishop of York had wrought so diligently to
ripen mischief; that the multitude dispersed before were again in the field,
b^t under Leaders of a far more eminent name. For Henry Son to the Lord
Fitz Hugh, and Henry Nevill son to the Lord Latimer (the one Nephew, the
other Cosen german to Warwick) had the conduct of these Forces: both gentlemen
great in blood and spirit, but in regard of their unexperienced youth,
submiting themselves to the directions of Sir John Conyers, a Commander bold in
courage and sober in advice. Their march was not now directed against any petty
Town in the North as before, but toward London the head of the Kingdom; and
the cause of their taking Arms, not upon any trivial injury or opression, but
out of desire of public justice, by throwing down a licencious Usurper; and
re-investing in the Sovereignty King Henry, their lawful Monarch, so
injuriously detained prisoner in the Tower. This pretention carried with it
much of bravery; pleased the humor of most of the Northern men, passionately
still affected to the line of Lancaster, and took generally with the
Commonalty a beast as prone to unseasonable pity, as to inhumane cruelty; and
ever defirous to change government, because naturally it can endure none.

The noise of these Arms waked King Edward: for he now perceived his title to
the Crown, (for which he imagined he had had so clear a sentence) brought
again to trial, and the sword judge. He cast his eye about him, and found
every where the way open to his jealousy; and none to security: All those
Lords, from whom he might expect supply, being neer^ to Warwick in friendship
or allianee, and the Marquess Mountague, in whose service he had ever found
most trust and fortune, even brother to his enemy. How could he therefore
believe, but notwithstanding all their outward professious of loyalty,
privately they might favor Rebellion? As for the Queens kindred, (of whose
faith in regard of their own interest, he remained secure) he could draw
little confidence: Their greatness so young, that: it had yet taken no deep
root in opinion, and their Forces only weak beams shot from the Sun of
the Kings own power. But no consideration in this trouble begot so much scorn
and rage in him, as the revol^ of Clarence, whose giddie ambition made him
rather choose to become a Word to rough and insolent guardian, than to share
with his brother a King in the treasures of Fortune. The forces of the Rebels
he weighed more by the reputation of their leader Warwick, than by the
number; though even that grew every day more formidable.

To prepare against these dangerous motions in his English Rebels, he speedily
sent to the Earl of Pembrooke commission ^o raise what Welsh Forces he could:
having in this general suspicion of his disloyal, subjects; most confidence
in the valor of the Welsh; and their natural hatred against the English name.
He required the Earl to give battle by the way, while himself gathered as
great an Army as the present danger, and cause in controversy required. The
Earl joyful of the command, puts suddenly into the field with his valiant
brother Sir Richard Herbert, having under their conduct seven thousand men. To
them soon joined eight hundred bow men, led by the Lord Stafford of
Southwicke, not long before created. Earl of Devonshire. With these Forces he
resoly'd to hinder the Rebels in their journey, and having notice by e^piall^
^^^^ they took their way by Northumpton, against their he led the whole body
of his Army* Having given order to Sir Richard Herbert with two thousand
soldiers to wheel about, and charge the en^mle in the Rere.

Sir John Coniers was ^^^ vigilan^ to be su^p^^^'d, and so carefully had
strengthened the Rerewar^ that the Welsh ^^ ere ^epuh^ with loss, and forced by
flight to safery. Whereupon he retired to his brother: while Coniers upon new
instroctions, or else f^arefull least Pembrooke in the way might gain some
advantage, dwerted from his direct course to London, and m^^ch^ to Warwick;
where the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick had leviod a mighty Host
P^m^rooke waits close up on their journey, expecting the opportunity ^^^^^^ to
cut off some part of the enemy disorderd; o^ to give battle to the whole
Army. But while constant in this pursuit o^ ^l^^y, he showed all the parts
of a great Commander, a small division between him and the Lord Stufford
ruined the whole a^tempt. For incasnping a^ Banbury question grew concerning an
Inn, to which Stafford pretended as having used long to the house: but in
which Pembrooke in regard of his pre-eminence as General, and commodiousnesse
of the place, was resolvid ^o lodge* This so ^^i^iall dista^^ (if there were no
farther trea^^^^ in i^) grew so high that Stafford withdrew himself, and his
English Arch^^s, leaving the W^^^^ in A^^^^ and number far inferior to the
enemy* which defect nevertheless was supplied by their great courage.

From when the Re^^ells who soon had notice of this unhappie discord) gave the
Earls Camp next morning a Camisado: the Welsh entertained the charge so
stou^ly that they ^ooke Sir Henry Nevill the Leader; but (what savor'd too much
of barbarism) most cruelly slew him in cold blood. By which Act they raised so
feirce an appetite o^ revenge in the enemy, that the next day they gave the
Earl battle, and the fight was long and cruel. Neither ^ad the victory
fallen so absolutely to the Northern men, but that John Clopton re^ainer to
the Earl of Warwick, appearing upon the top of a neighboring hill, with five
hundred ragged and disordred men, under Warwickes standard; and the Northern
men at their approach crying out a Warwick* a Warwicke^ made the Welsh believe
all the Rebel Forces were there, and that it would be but foolish desperation
to fight it out against an enemy fresh and so far superior in number:
whereupon they ^^ed.

In the battle and the flight five thousand of the Welsh were sl^ine, and
among the few prisoners the Earl of Pembrooke and Sir Richard Herbert were
taken: whose heads soon after were sacrificed upon the Scaffold, to the Ghost
of Nevill. Their valor and brave direction begetting an universal sorrow to
the Kings party in their deaths: and even an envy in the conquering Enemy.
Neither did the Lord S^afford the author of this overthrow escape condign
punishment: for by diligent inquiry found in Devons^ire, without process at
Bridgewater he lost his head. Having so inconsiderately managed his business,
that he betrayed King Edwards Army, upon a false apprehension of an affront:
and yet provided not thereby to w^nne favor so far with the enemy, as by
their Arms to protect himself from the Kings just indignation.

This victory added yet a bolder courage to the attempt of Warwick; but into
the Northern multitude it infused a madness, not to be cured by any council
or direction. For immediately some companies of them retired into Northampton
shire; where associating to them certain of the most desperate inhabitants, no
mischief was left unacted. The name they gave their Commander, (if such a
disordered rabble, could obey any) was Robin Riddisdale, and their first
assault on Gra^ton, a seat belonging to King Edwards Father-in-Law the Earl
Rivers. The place their wild rage soon possessed, and among the other spoils
violently taken there, were the Earl himself, and Sir John Widdevill his
younger Son. These they prosently led to Northampton, and there beheaded
without any form of Law: that deformed body having no ear open to any
discourse, but to that of blood and fury. An envied life and cruel death was
the Sum of all those favors conferred by Fortune on this Lord, esteemed so
happy in his own marriage with Jaquet, widow of John Duke of Bedford, and
daughter to Peter of Luxenburgh* Count St. Paul, and in his daughters with the
present King. For as the assent to these strange heights are ever malign'd, so
the desent is ruinous and fatal: Not any one of seven sons which this Lord
was Father ^o, leaving behind him issue to perpe^uate the ^ame: some of them
likewise extinguishing violently. A misery either seldom happening, o^ not
observed in meane^ families.

This great d^l^ate, and these in^olencies ^o beyond the sufferance of a
Prince, together with the Earl of Warwickes openly professing himself head to
this vaste body of Rebels, struck an astonishment in the Kings Army; and I
will not say fear, but strange diffidence in the King himself. Which inclined
him to listen to the safer though less noble advice of them, who persuaded him
to end all dissension with the Earl by treaty. For in this so universal
disease of the Kingdom, there was some sound men, both of the Clergy and
Nobility yet left, whom faction did not interesse in mischief; and who out of
experience of past miseries, were willing to prevent future. By their mediation
(though the Armies by this time were so near encampt, that they could hardly
part without battle) were every hour made new overtures of peace, and on both
sides not un willingly received. The Earl of Warwick (whose pretense was that
of all Rebels, The good of the Kingdom) entertained these Treaties with a
humil^ty beneath his nature, and late advantages; neither appeared stubborn to
bend down to the lowest submission, so provision might be made for the
public benefit. Yet never in all these apparences of a calm, did he neglect
to prepare himself against the roughest storm of war: knowing the best way
to be reco^cil'd upon safe terms to an enemy, is, not to be necessitated to
peace.

But the King of a wa^en nature, apt to receive any impress^ons best pleased
his present humor; would not trouble his quiet to believe there might be
fallacy in Warwicke^ pretensions. Whereupon imagining that had received
perfection which was then but in ^^itation; ^hee neglected the order of war,
and began in his Camp to taste the pleasures of Court. Which evil discipline
observed by the Earl; he takes the advantage, suddenly sets on the Kings
field, kills* the watch, and in the dead of night at Wollny within four miles
of Warwick, surpriseth his person, buried in a careless sleep. So that, he
no sooner waked, but found how false his dream had been, which flattered him
with peace.

This so unhappie negligence betray the King to an insulting enemy, who up
brayded his prisoner, in the most insolent terms, with ingratitude to his
great merits; and boasted it was now both in his power and resolution to plain
that mountain he had raised, and raise the humbled valley of King Henry's
fortunes, up to the throne he once possessed. And presently sent away the King
prisoner to Middleham Castle in Yorke-shire, there to be kept by his brother
busy Archbishop of that Sea: Not daring to retain him longer, least his Army
might unite, and hazard the recovery of their Prince.

In this middle and unsafe course of managing his great fortune, questionless
the Earl committed a maine oversight. For either by a free delivery with some
conditions advantageous for himself and friends (and what conditions would the
King then not have signed?) he should have cast a perpetual obligation upon
him; or else by destroying him have secured his design from after hazard:
knowing that no prison could hold a Prince, which would not open to corruption
or battery; and no brother could have a faith so strong which would not be in
danger, to be weakened either by threats or promises. But perhaps this way of
policy was only beaten by that time; and the proud Earl took a glory to
keep the whole Kingdom at his devotion, and the two Competitors his Captives;
for both of them his Fortune had imprisoned.

But King Edward grew soon weary of the restraint as whom a long practice in
the liberty of pleasure had not endued with such a tamenesse as armed King
Henry. He therefore presently casts his eye about to find some way so redeem
his person from captivity, and his honor from so dark an error as by
negligence to have been surprised. And having upon pretense of necessary
exercise for health, obtained license to hunt in the adjoining Park, he so
contrived with Sir William Stanley and Sir Thomas Burgh, that unexpected they
came to his rescue with a number and resolution far superior to those who
guarded him. With them he escapes to York and so to Lancaster, where the Lord
Hastings Lord Chamberlain had gathered some Forces. With this increase of
followers he marched directly to London, his Company growing by the way to such
a body, as might not unworthily be termed a Army.

Into the City he was received with accustomed triumph, the affection of the
inhabitants ever devoted to his prosperity. The occasion of which extraordinary
zeal was certainly either a delight to continue him their Prince, whom their
voices first inaugurated King; or a hope by his re-establishment to recover
those vaste sums of money, his necessities heretofore had borrowed in the
City: or else a general affection borne him by the Merchants wives; who
having (according to the uxorious humor of our Nation) a command over their
husbands; urged them on to side with that Prince, the beauty of whose
personage, not the justice of whose title, moved them.

But the Earl of Warwick, soon as he had intelligence of the escape, and the
fortune which attended it, was distracted with a thousand several
imaginations. He had just reason to suspect his brother the Archbishops faith,
as corrupted by the Kings persuasions: as likewise the weight of his own
reputation in the Kingdom, grown lighter, by so evil managing so good a
fortune. He condemned the folly of his too much confidence, in having disbanded
his Army; and knew the difficulty, if not the impossibility, suddenly to
reinforce it. But this was the inward part of him: outwardly he descended
nothing from the height of his greatness and resolution. And to secure his
former design he directed his letters to all the Lords of his Faction, and
advise them to reasemble for the common safety.

The solicitation of those good men, who heretofore had labourd peace,
continued still: and so effectually endeavord, that in fine they brought both
parties to agree upon an enterview in Westminster Hall. There was enterchange
of oaths for safety on both sides and nothing but a perfect r^union of
friendship generally expected.

But no sooner was the Earl of Warwick (who came accompanied by the Duke of
Clarence) wished to express his desires, but he fell into a bold expostulation
of injuries. And his language sweld to such intemperance, so far beyond the
limits of that modesty becomes a subjects mouth: that the King full of
indignation departed the Hall, and immediately took his journey to Canterbury:
on the other side the Earl, wild in his anger, poasted to Lincoln: both
making preparation for a second enterview, when the sword should both dispute
and decide the controversy. Who ever persuaded these two great spirits to this
meeting, erred grosely in judgment, how zealous soever they were in their
intention. For who could possibly imagine but the thunder of war should
necessarily follow that storm, which the recapitulation of injuries must
beget? since expostulations, (unless there be some apparent mistake or that
the one party by evil fortune be bowed to to an over-low submission) may well
give a growth to rancor never extirpate it. But experience all enterviws
co^demnes till by Commisioners (who with more patience can argue) all
dissentions are reconciled. And most of all against any between a Prince and
his subject: since a subject hardly contains his language from insolency,
when by the disproportionable greatness of his fortune he is admitted upon
even terms to contest with his Sovereign: and a Prince goes down more than
one step from Majesty, when he is forced to descend so low, as to hold parley
with a Rebel.

The King understanding that the greatest part of the Earls Forces were under
the conduct of Sir Robert Wells, and that by his good discipline they were
become expert Soldiers, and had done some service against Sir Thomas Burgh:
sent for Richard Lord Wells his Father; that having possession of him, he might
either withdraw the Son from Warwick, or at least take off the edge from his
violent proceedings. The Lord Wells in obedience to the Kings command with his
brother in Law Sir Thomas Dimock addressed his journey toward the Court, but
having by the way secret notice of the Kings high displeasure; and how unsafe
his approach would be, secured himself in Sanctuary. But the King resolved
upon any terms to get him, granted a general pardon, and received him with
promise of all fair usage. Upon which he came forth, and only at his approach
to the Kings presence, was advised by letters to recall his son from
rebellion, and himself to bear a loyal heart. These letters dispatched with
as much authority as a father could challenge, he remaind in a kind of
twilight between favor and ruin, till the messengers return. Who bringing
back no answer from the Son in obedience to his fathers command, but rather
a justification of his enterprise: so far incenst the King, that he presently
caused the Lord Wells and Dimock to be beheaded. An act barbarous and
unfaithful! For what just grounds soever the King might have to build
suspicion on, that Wells did not effectually persuade his son, or that
inwardly he wished better to the affairs of Warwick, yet ought he not to have
violated his word. And it is a most poor excuse, to say a sudden rage was
guilty of this mischief.

The report of this execution clouded generally the reputation of the King, but
in Sir Robert Wells it begot nothing but fury and revenge. And indeed rage so
far blinded his judgment, that contrary to all persuasion and sober direction,
not attending Warwickes coming who every day was expected; he drew out his
Forces, and charged the Kings Army. Who received him with equal courage, and
(while hope of vengeance transported him too far) enclosed him, and with
threescore and seven more, took him prisoner. Upon the place and in the
flight were slain of the enemy ten thousand, on the Kings side only
thirteen hundred. They who escapt, to make their flight the swifter, cast away
their coats, which gave to this battle the name of Loose-coate field. The
prisoners immediately were executed, Sir Robert Wells having only in his short
delay of death the longer liberty to express his hatred against the King and
his perfidious cruelty.

This overthrow forced Warwick to new resolution; for his maine Forces by the
precipitation of the Commander destroyed, he foresaw that suddenly he could not
recover an Army, able to give the King battle, and how open to be surprised
the least interim would render him. Whereupon leisurely (for his great Spirit
disdained any thing that resembled flight) he retired to Exetor, whence having
dismissed the remainder of those troops attended him, he went to Dart-mouth.
There with many Ladies and a large retinue he took ship, and directly sayld to
Callice. While the King no way labored either by land or sea, to impeach their
journie; either content with the former half victory (for nothing could have
made it perfect, but the surprisall or destruction of Warwick) or holding so
little intelligence even in a conquered enemies Camp* that he knew nothing of
his present design: The Earl having tried as strange a vicissitude of
fortune, as in so short a space, was ever observed in story; by the benefit of
a prosperous gaile soon was brought before Callice Where being Captain of the
Town he expected entrance, but the Cannon was presented him; and no
Commisseration of the Duches of Clarences being in travail, could obtain so
much as admittance to her present necessity, only the poor relief of some
few flaggons of wine, was sent her. Mourifieur de Vaucleere a Knight of
Gascoiny Leivete^^nt of the Town, thus confidently refused his Captain,
professing that however he owed his present Command to Warwickes bounty, his
loyalty to the King did cancel al inferior obligations. By which bravery of
his carriage he won so great reputation with the King and the Duke of
Burgundy (who ever hated the factious pride of Warwick, and even from the
beginning of these troubles had labourd to continue Vaucleere firm in his
alleigance) that from the King he received by Letters Patents the Captaineship
of Callice in Chief, and from the Duke an annual pension of a thousand
Crowns during life. Into thus much honor and profit did dissimulation work
him, while under hand by the subtilty of council he steerd the Earl of
Warwick to safety, and by false appearing fidelity betrayed his Prince. For he
assertain'd the Earl of his good intentions to his affairs; and howeven now
but that he knew it could not but be ruinous to both, he would declare
himself. For if the Earl entered the Town he did but imprison his person, to
be detained till the King were pleased to command it forth to execution.
Considering that the inhabitants were but unsure friends, and the Lord of
Duras, the Earls professed enemy, Marshall of all the Forces in the Town.
Moreover the Burgonians territory encompast Callice by Land, and their fleet
was in readiness to block it up by Sea, so that no way would be open to his
escape. Wherefore he advised him for his present security and future hopes,
presently to address himself to King Lewis of France, who was ever ready to
entertain any Lord of another Nation in quarrel with his Prince. But above
all would welcome the Earl both in regard of the near intelligence he had
long held with him; and the hatred he bore King Edward for affronting the Lady
Bona; and the Duke of Burgundy for so often confederating with the rebels of
France.

By this council the Earl of Warwick steered his course to Deep, by the way
making prize of whatsoever appertained to the Duke of Burgundy or his subject.
And no sooner was he landed there; but most solemnly invited to the Castle of
Amboys, where King Lewis then kept his Court. The ceremony (short ever with men
of business) past over at the first meeting; suddenly they entered into
council how to renew the war, and restore King Henry. Whose re-establishment
in the Kingdom Lewis ever most passionately urged, not in respect of the near
alliance, commiseration of his long sufferance, or opinion of his better title;
but only because he knew him inferior in courage to King Edward, and
therefore the less dangerous neighbor: and probably while any of the house of
York remaind, civil war likely to keep the English Arms busied at home.
Wherefore by his importunity Queen Margaret (who hitherto had lived an exile
in France, and now upon the Kings invitation came to Court) was perfectly
reconciled to the Earl of Warwick. Warwick who before had chased her out of
the Land, disinthrond her husband, and opprobriously imprisoned him, cut off
the many branches; and almost plucked up the very root of the tree of
Lancaster. But necessity took away the sting from nature, and united them in
the nearest friendship. For that there might not be left any tract of former
discontent or path to future jealousy; a marriage was concluded and celebrated
between. Prince Edward the Queens son, and the Lady Anne younger Daughter
to the Earl. And on this marriage was agreed that King Edward should be
deposed, King Henry re-inthrond, the Crown to be entaild upon Prince Edward,
and for default of his issue, to come to the Duke of Clarence and his
posterity. By which conveighance humane policy did her part to perpetuate the
succession of the Kingdom in the posterity of Warwick, But the Almighty made
a mockery of this Babell, which fell soon to ruin by self division, and
confusion, not of Languages but affections. For the Duke of Clarence began now
to consider how by following the Earls desperate Counsels; he had gained
nothing but the conscience of an unnatural revolt, and how ruined he were if
the success of this enterprise should not be prosperous; and if prosperous how
upon the destruction; of a brother, he had built himself a less greatness,
than he might have enjoyed, without sin or hazard. There being a vaste
distance between the neerenesse of two sons to one mother, and only husbands
to two sisters* Neither had he any sure ground for confidence, that when King
Henry were restored; hereditary malice might not prevail, and destroy him for
the crime of his family. And now more than ever he found himself declined,
being forced to submit not only to Warkicke, but to a new young Prince; having
before acknowledged no superior but the King and him a brother. Neither was
the Duchess of Clarence her self a weak engine, on which this alteration
moved. For however as a daughter she might wish prosperity to the attempts of
Warwick; yet ever since the last agreement of reinvesting the house of
Lancaster in the Kingdom; she found in her mind a strange alicnation from
the Faction. And indeed either she began to dislike the variety of her
fathers resolutions, as whom ambition led violently to build and pluck down:
or in conscience thought the justice of the claim was wholly in King Edward,
having in her childhood (and those impressions are ever deepest) been
instructed to affect the house of York, and approve the title. Or (and that is
the most probable in a woman) she envied perhaps the preferment of a younger
sister; hating that Fortune should throw back the priority of nature. However
it was, yet certainly by her means King Edward labored to recall his brother,
and though not suddenly yet in the end prevailed. For having sent over a gentle
woman (her sex took away suspicion from the practice) with full instructions
both to advice the Duchess not to work the ruin or at best the lessenning of
her husband by those counsels held then between Queen Margaret and the Earl
of Warwick, as like wise to promise (if she persuaded her husband) to him and
her as much love and greatness as the ^^^ of Nature, and so great a merit
might justly challedge: He in fine got a promise that, soon as the Duke were
disintangled from his present engagements, he would declare the natural
affection he owed a brother.

This weak hope, the late victory and see^ling ba^ishment of his enemies,
loose^^ed King Edward to his accustomed wantonness and ri^^ For certainly
never lived Prince whom adversity did more harden to action; and prosperity
more soften to volupt^ousnesse: So that by the judgment on his life, we may
say, like a stone cast into the air, he was by necessity forced up to glory;
while his center remained beneath in the sense of pleasure: And so improvident
was his memory, that he forgot the greatest injuries, and res^^^ed* the
Archbishop of York into favor, not hearing so much as a watchful eye over a
reconciled enemy. By which his coun^^iles were betrayed and he persuaded to a
false and most dangerous security.

But the Duke of Bu^gundy, whose recreation was business, and whose delight,
extent of dominion; who by having long ^^astled with Lewis the Eleventh, had
lea^^t all the slights of war and peace, labored ^o disper^e the storm
before it fell upon England* Whel^ ^^on he daily advertised King Edward of all
passages in the Court of France, his intelligence holding good there, and who
knew how near danger came to him, should our King be overthrown. He advised
him by vast promises (which no way oblieg'd performance) to win some; and
^owing the poisonous ^eede of aemulation, to recall others* As likewise to send
over some great Lord into France, who pretending discontent, shall adhere to
the faction, and under hand discover all their counsels. But above all he
solicited him to rigge up and set forth his Navy whereby to prevent their
landing: Affirming it to be a most ridiculous madness in a King (unless
urged by inevitable necessity) to stake his Crown at a battle, against the
desperation of a rebel.

The King, contrary to this sober counsel, never endeavored to hinder the
return of Warwick, but building on the protestations of the Marquess
M^ncatute, and the Archbishop of York securely gave himself over to
licenciousnesse. In which interim, the Earl, with his retinue, conducted by
the Bastard of Burb^^, Admiral of France, saild back into England; King Le^y^
having furnished him with a full supply of m^nies* and for shouldiers he needed
no ^o^taine levies: his name and faction was so great at home. For though the
Country by ^ivill war was much dispeopled, yet the commonalty, being for the
most borne and bred up in tumults, were naturally addicted to arms, and prone
upon any innovations to take the field. Neither could the Duke of Burgundy,
though most passionately he labored it, hinder the Earls landing by giving
him battle at Sea: for the winds fought for Warwick and dispersed the
Burg^nian fleet (the best in that age commanded upon the Se^) casting some
ships upon the coast of Scotland, others upon the re^otest parts of Holland.

Neither did the King any way repent his error when he understood the Earl
was landed, but presently dispatched a messenger to the Duke, entreating him to
continue his Army at Sea, to impeach Warwicks flight back into France, as if
he were ascertained fortune would never deny him victory. So secure was he
grown by an overbold presumption, the bastard daughter of a long prosperity.
But they whom experience had instructed to more caution, pitied his mistake
and foresaw the ruin. And he himself not long after understanding how
mightily the Earl increast in power, began to think his safety brought into
hazard. Which he much more believed when he found the Nobility, whom he
summoned to his aid, to excuse themselves; and the common stream of people to
ebb wholly from his devotion.

And indeed, even in the City the adverse faction was grown so strong; that
Doctor Gooddiard, Chaplain to the Earl, at Paul's Cross in his Sermon dared
even to act the Herald, and conclude Edward an usurper. And thereupon to
commend the most religious intentions of the Earl, and to exhort the Audience
to join with him in restoring their imprisoned Sovereign King Henry to his
Scepter, and the Common wealth to liberty.

The credulous multitude took this heresy for true doctrine, and with some of
the zealous ignorant, it so far prevailed, that in pure devotion they
committed high treason. But would to God the Pulpit might only speak things
sacred; matters of State having room enough to be discust in Council
Chambers, and other places erected for public assemblies. For certainly how
erroneous soever the tenet be, if uttered there by a Priest with appearance of
Religion, it gets two much authority in the ear, and too much ground upon the
conscience. As this opinion did, which no sooner received, but all began to
incline to revolt: and with the first retired away the late reconcild
Archbishop and the Matquesse Montacute his brother, both having so often, and
so ceremoniously vowed never to forsake the title of King Edward; and both now
perfidiously breaking those vows, and with the lowdest crying out, Long live
King Henry.

The treachery of Mountacute, who having raisd in King Edwards name six thousand
men turned now with them to Warwick, and the general defection of the Land
threw the King down into extreme despair. For those few Lords who constantly
adheard to his declining fortune, commanded over so small a number, that to
resolve upon a battle were to betray themselves to slaughter: And when
misfortune drove their thoughts upon safety by flight, they knew not whether
to resolve: No Land being willing to receive that Prince, who is forced to fly
his own. But while his imaginations remaind thus confused, he had hardly
escapt a surprise in the night; had not his former misfortune served him now
for instruction. And finding his stay only begot disreputation to his
quarrel, and danger to his person, he began his flight toward Lincolneshire.
But the Earlesent after him his Light Horse, following with the whole body of
his Army; and so close did the Light Horse pursue him, that with much
difficulty, and with loss of all his carriages in his passage thorough the
Washes he reached Linne.

The Lord Hastings, faithful to the King in all fortunes, and who had yet
three thousand Horse under his command, stayed some short time behind: and now
when he imagined the King past the reach of imminent danger, he dismissed his
Forces and followed after. At parting he commended the faith of the Soldiers
to their Prince, which nevertheless for the present he advised them to
dissemble. No present security, nor hope of doing after service, but by
submission to the prevailing faction. Ere long he promised to return, when a
better fortune would invite them to show the loyalty of their affections; the
violence of the storm being too mighty to continue, and King Edward in
faction at home and abroad too potent, so easily to quit a kingdom; however
for the present he withdrew himself a while.

Having exhorted thus his Soldiers, he obeyed necessity, and by speedy flight
went after the King. Who having hired three ships, one of England and two of
Holland, presently embarked, having in his company the Duke of Gloucester, the
Earl Rivers, the Lords Scales and Say, and in retinue about one thousand. As
soon as they were put to Sea, the King encounterd dangers great as he had
escapt at Land. For the Easterlings (a people ever famed for Sea affairs and
then at enmity both with France and England) had set forth not long before
some men of war: Who having descrted these ships and guessing them to be
English, made sail after them. The King by benefit of the wind got first to
the coast of Holland, and in regard it was ebbing water cast Anchor so near
the shore, the Easterlings (being ships of far greater burden could not
reach them:) But the next tide infallibly had exposed them a prize to the
enemy, had not the Lord Gronteere, Lieutenant for the Duke in Holland by mere
accident been at that time at Alquemare, a Sea town close joining to them.
He* soon as he understood that those three small vessels carried in them the
fortune of England, commanded the Easterlings to forbear hostility, and
license those passengers a quiet landing. And presently himself came abord the
Kings ship, expressing in the obsequiousness of his respects as much
ceremony and love, as was due to so great a Majesty, and the brother in law to
his Prince. And no sooner had he attended the King ashore, and found how
unprovided of all things necessary, the suddenness of his flight had made him
and his followers; but he furnished him and them according to their quality and
want. For the Kings escape was so hasty that not only his apparel and other
furniture were lost or left behind, but even his treasure: So that to defray
the charge of his transportation he was necessitated to give the Master of the
ship a Gown furred with Martins: And remain beholding to the Lord Gronteere
for his expenses to the H^ge, whether he was conducted to expect the coming
of the Duke. Who soon as he had perfect knowledge of the Kings so ruinous
success in England, and arrived in Holland as to a Sanctuary, began to repent
his so near alhance, and cast about how to close with the adverse faction. And
now indeed his time was to act the most cunning part of subtletie, by
endeavoring to retain the good opinion of his brother in Law, and yet secure
himself from hostility with the Earl of Warwick. Whereupon before ever he
came to the Hage he dispatched his Agent to Callice, to show the chief of the
town, that the peace heretofore concluded between King Edward and himself,
was no way personal: But between whatsoever Princes should rule in either
dominions, and betwixt nation and nation: and therefore by no change of King or
length of time dissolvable. Upon which consideration he entreated (for loath
he was at the same time, to wrestle both with France and England) that the name
of Edward might be changed into Henry, and the former league continue sacred
as before.

The unsettled state of England and the universal desires of the Merchants of
the S^aple at Callice soon affected the Dukes purpose. For they who had
continual traffic into the Low Countries, and vented all their wool to the
subjects of the Duke, had been unabled to pay their usual tribute to the
King, if free intercourse had been denied. Whereupon unwilling to discontent
and impoverish so great a body at home, and too hastily to run into a dangerous
quarrel with a most potent enemy abroad, the Earl for the present dissembled
his inveterate hatred, and recal'd his Soldiers who had spoyld all the Dukes
territory bordering upon Callice. And that the Duke might make himself strong
in a faction potent with the present time, he renewed his friendship with the
Dukes of Sommerset and Exceter; whom he solicited earnestly to endeare him to
King Henry, and revive in him the memory of their so near kindred. To acquaint
him how zealous himself and his father had ever been for the honor and
safety of the family of Lancaster, in which himself did so much participate.
As likewise to promise all the perfect offices of a consederate and neighbor,
if so be that his faithful intentions might receive a true interpretation.

This did the Dukes voluntarily offer to negotiate; Sommerset in respect of
propinquity in blood, Exceter of those many favors received in the Low
Countries during his so miserable exile: Both out of an extreme malice to the
Earl of Warwick, who had subverted their families; and to whose aid, they
envied the King should owe his restitution. And easily was the Duke brought
upon good terms with King Henry; his neighberhood and friendship being of so
notable consequence, and the very appearance of disclayming the adverse party
(what secret aid soever he afforded) being so disadvantageous to any pretense
King Edward might have to renew the war.

This aspect, full of a smiling flattery, did the Duke of Burgundy bear to the
present fortune of the state. While upon King Edward he cast such a
supercilious look, as the worlds wise men usually do upon men in adversity.
Often sharply he reprehended his so great carelessness, and neglect of
wholesome advice, which had ruined him to this so wretched flight. He objected
the much contempt this misfortune would throw upon his quarrel, and how loath
friends would be to adhere to his present necessities, since he knew so ill
to manage profperitie. Yet remembering that hereafter there might happily be a
change in fortune, he often changed his humor, and amid these reprehensions
mingled some passionate complements of love. He protested seriously that he
wished all happiness to his affairs; to advance which he would neglect no
industry: yet he desired his pardon if for the present he dissembled.
Considering it might at once draw on a war from his two most dangerous
neighbors, England and France: Against both which nations should he be
necessitated to a quarrel, he should be very unable to defend himself; much
less to serve another. And when a Proclamation was set forth by the Duke
prohibiting his subjects any way to aid the pretenses of King Edward or his
faction, and that it was with much indignation received by the King: he
protested the intention of it to be only to betray King Henry to an unsafe
security, that in the interim he might without suspicion levy a greater aid
for his designs. King Edward (whom a short adversity had already instructed
much) appeard to take the false coin of these excuses for current, and by
example of the Duke practiced to dissemble. But after this time it was noted
that he never bore the Duke so sincere affection as before. Princes best
maintaining a nere friendship, by keeping at large distance: jealousy and
aemulation take their growth with familiarity; and if either be necessitated
to demand supply, reason of state oftentimes weakens love, and roots up good
nature

To increase King Edwards discontent abroad, no news came from England but
what spoke absolute ruin to his hopes. For though here he heard first the
comfort of his being father to a son, yet was this son borne poorly in
Sanctuary, and christened without the ceremonies belonging to a Prince, and if
fortune beyond expectation alterd not, heir apparent only to his fathers
misery. Neither did that wild insurrection of the men of Kent, which ensued
presently upon his flight effect any thing, or so much as openly pretend for
King Edward. But some disordered companies gathering into one, hoped to fish
fair in the troubled stream of the Kingdom, and by the advantage of the
present distraction of state to purchase treasure to themselves. Whereupon they
directed their march (if such straglers can be said to march) toward London;
where by the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Major they were soon suppressed, and
some for the general terror, made examples in their punishment. But after this
all things tended presently to quiet, and King Henry set at liberty went in
solemn procession to Paul's Church, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commonalty
reacknowledging all obedience to him. And, as if there were left no memory of
King Edward or hope to reestablish his title, every man addressed himself to
King Henry, and all his former servants recovered their lost honors and
places. But that this might not appear to be the act of faction, but the
universal consent of the Kingdom, a Parliament was summond: wherein nothing
was denied, which the prevailing party thought fit to be authorized.

King Edward therefore and all his adherents were attainted of high treason,
their lands and goods confiscated. He and his posterity for ever disabled to
inherit not only the Crown, but any other hereditary estate; His claim to
the kingdom rejected as a most unjust pretention, and his former government
condemned as of tirannous usurper. And that there might be a great example of
their justice, John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, Lord high Constable of, England
(having been apprehended in the Forest of Waibrige on the top of a high tree*
which expressed the precipice of his fortune) was on the Tower bill beheaded.

Next they proceeded to intaile the Crown upon King Henry and his beires
males, for default of which to George Duke of Clarence and his heirs forever.
By which in^^ile the ^arle of Warwick showed not only the extent but the
insolency of his greatness i^^^ if the title of the kingdom appertained to
them who were nearest in alliance to him, not next in blood to the Crown. For
if the justice of Lancasters claim had the pre-eminence for w^^t of issue of
King Henry, why should not the sove^^inty fall to the Duke of So^^^iner^set? Or
i^^ha^ line were crooked in respect of ba^^idie, why not to the house of
Portugal; without any blemish des^ending from John of G^int? Or if the house
of York bad the better title, why was George Duke of Clarence th^^ set down
but second in the li^^^ile: Or if the right were in Was wick himself (for his
power ordered and disordered all) why was the kingdom to descend first of all
to the younger daughter? But preposterous ambition never knew how to give: an
account to reason.

Their were ^he ^^^le^ of Oxford P^^brooke, and m^^y other^ restored to their
^states and ^il^s, and ^he Duke of Clarence (that greater hopes ^^ight ^^^
invite him to re^^^^st to his brother) possessed of the Duchy of York.

And lastly, the government of the King and kingdom ^o ^^mitted to the Duke of
Clarence and the Earl of Warwick: so that King Henry (in whose best of fortune
it was never to possess more then the name of King) seemed not to be set at
liberty, but only to have changed his keeper, and get his prison somewhat
more enlarged. But Queen Margaret and Prince Edward, though by the Earl
recald, found their fate an^ the winds so adverse, that they could not land in
England, and to taste this running banquet to which fortune had invted them.
And stayed so long by necessity; that dis^^^tion instructed them, in the end
there was no hope of felicity, scarce of safeti^ in then return.

The re-establishment of King Henry in the kingdom by the universal
acclamation of the Parliament, and the general silence of ^^^ other ^^^^ion ^
no man so much as mentio^^^ ^^^ ^^^^ of York to ^^led ^h^^ servour of respect
with which the Duke of Burgundy had a^ ^^^st embraced ^^^^g Edward. Especially
which the t^^ison'd ^^ Mou^si^ur ^^itleere was apparens for of ^^^ice ^^^^ the
King and the Duke ever thought themselves secure; he having declared himself ^^
for faithfully, they rewarded him so liberally, But ^ow the ^^aytor turned his
i^^^^^ outward, and with the loudest proclay ^^^^ ^^^ joy for the prosperity
of Warwick: And so far did vanity of his former services betray him, that
he boasted even hi^ treason for merit. And what ev(...)age^ the King sent to
him, he rejected with s^^^^e to ^^^^se(...)ne ^^iable affront* he wore
enameled i^^ his^ h^^ the Bear and ragge^^ staff, the Earls ^^^^^zance.

The neglect which accompanied his adversity made the King wea^y of any
^uither dependa^^^e^, and urge the Duke to have license for departing. For
although the Duchess neglected no duty of a sister, and wooed him most
passionately to a longer stay; yet so little had his fortune instructed him to
patience, that neither love nor fright of danger could detain him longer. For
the Duke was distemperd with such an ague of discurtesie, that those fits which
before came but every third or fourth day, became now quotidian, neither knew
the King to how high and dangerous a malice the disease in time might rise. His
importunity therefore in the end prevailed, and underhand obtained a large
supply of money, and some men. Four great Ships of Holland, and fourteen
of the Easterlings men of war well armed, he hired for the transportation of
his Forces: Which consisted of the English who accompanied him in his flight
and had escaped over after him, and two thousand Dutch men. With the Ships
he convenanted, that they should serve him till fifteen days after his
landing; and to the Dutch Soldiers he gave such large promises, that they
vowed their lives to the greatest cruelty of his Fortune.

At Ravenspur in Yorke-shire he landed, where the people naturally devoted to
the house of Lancaster (showed in the malice of their looks, what evil luck
they wished him) though they wanted courage with their arms to oppose him.

Which so dismal aspect made him more wary in his march to York, fearing it
might presage the general rising of the Country. But when he came thither
and found the Citizens so well pleased with the present state, and so in their
opinion confirmed for King Henry, he began to despair the recovery of the
Crown. And in that resolution perceiving them obstinate beyond any hope of
remove, fashioned his behavior to a new art. Whereupon since he could not move
them to obedience by the authority of his unquestioned right to the Crown; by
relation of his present calamity, he persuaded them to compassion. So that
whom they refused to serve as King, which had been an act of loyalty; they
condescended to aid as Duke of York, which was absolute rebellion. It being
high treason in a Subject, though never so apparently injured, to seek his
remedy by arms. And by the sense of his own misfortunes, he made his Oratory
so powerful, that all began to exclaim against the injustice of the last
Parliament in conferring the Duchy of York, which by right of primogeniture
belonged to Edward, upon his second Brother George, Duke of Clarence. Which Act
could not be imagined, freely granted by the Parliment, but extorted by the
overgreat sway of Warwick: And had Edward by usurpation of the Crown,
deserved so heavy an attainder; He might yet quit himself from the crime,
having been incenc'd thereunto not by his own ambitious desire of reign, but
by the instigation of Warwick. Who no longer would suffer the government of
his King, then the King knew how to obey his insolent direction. And who had
thus planted and supplanted Princes, not out of love to Justice, but only
thereby to transplant the Soveraignety into his own Family.

Thus the Commonalty argued for Edward, and made him yet partake in the fortune
of a Prince, by not permitting him to bear the burden of his own faults and
that he might recover the ^^^tchy belonging to his family many persons of power
and name resorted to him, be solemnly swearing never to attempt hereafter the
re-obtaining of the kingdom. The same oath swore Henry of Bullingbrooke when
pretending to the Duchy of Lancaster he landed in the North and armed against
King Richard, which he brok as Edward after did upon the like advantage. So
that with humility we ought to wonder at the judgments of the Almighty, who
permitted perjurie now to unbuild the great nesse of Lancaster, which at first
was built by perjury.

Leaving therefore a Garrison in York (a safe retreat upon the worst occasion)
he marched toward ^^^do^^ about which place he had ever found his fortune most
benign. And confidently led on his Forces (which could not deserve the name of
Army) although the Marque^^e Mountague with a far superior power lay then ^^
Po^^fret to impeach his journey. Nigh which when King Edward came expecting
battle; Mountague who had both ability and opportunity to have destroyed
him, let him quietly pass, not permitting any act of hostility to be showed,
or advantage taken.

This gross oversight in so absolute a command received several
interpretations, according to the complexion of the men discourst it. The more
Religious who favord King Edwards title thought Almighty God, intending to set
the Crown upon the right head, had infatuated the counsels of his enemies:
The more vulgar judged it cowardice in the Marquess which durst not fight
against that Majesty for which he had so often ^ought, and against a Prince
who ha^ never been in ^a^taile but victoriou^li But the ^^ ^^^ in different
esteemed it a piece of over cunning (which in the event i^ ever folly) to let
his forces pass, whereby after he might enclose him ^^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^ and his
brothers army, and so without ^^^^^ ^^ destroy him, or else son^e intelligence
which ^^^ore ^^^^^ held with King Edward ^o who^^ love and be^ef^^ ^^^ owed so
much. Whence this ^^^stake proceeded, I will not dispute, but certainly it
served well to the Kings purpose had safety and received ^omd^ the Earl of
Warwick and his faction no other name then of falsehood and trea^^on.

King Edward was no sooner past this danger but at any of the Nobility with
mighty (...) re^^^^^^ to him ^^her des^o^^^ of another (...)on of ^thro^ (...)
having found their expectation dri^^^ ^^^^ ^^ (...): ^^ directed by their
better A^g^ll to (...) to that side which ever ^^ as ^o^^^ just and suddenly,
more likely to be (...) ^orto^^^e. But before they would solemnly declare
themselves, they entreated and soon prewail'd with him to cast off the poor
intention to a Duchy, and lay his challenge to, what was his inheritance, the
kingdom. For it would lessen, even to contempt, the great reputation of his
birth and (...) victories; to let the people perceive that a short eclipse of
fortune had made him fall so low, as to depose himself from the Roy^loie.
Neither could they justify their taking arms to settled subject in his
inheritance. Since the Law is open to and such controversies, and if he would
subject himself to the Law, the last Parliament, ^^^^ forever disabled him
from any such claim.

Weaker arguments would have been of power enough to have persuaded his great
Spirit: but by these he was confirmed in his own thoughts: and with the title
of King, and a ^^^ Arm ^archt directly to Coventry, fier^e in his desire to
give Warwick batt^ile, who lay there ^ncamp^. But no provocation could bring
him from his ^renches, knowing his Army divided, and those forces he had there
undeo his command, unequal to maintain fight with the King. For the Marquess
Mountagae was not yet returned from the North: and the Duke of Clarence, though
often and earnestly solicited excused himself, and kept his power apart. So
reservd way in them, made Warwick begin to hold both in suspicion, but most of
all Clarence, whose Forces were so near and in so good order, that there could
be no excuse but in the unpreparednesse of his mind.

The King therefore perceiving no thing could force Warwick upon uneven terms
to fight, marched against Clarence, and soon as he drew near, both Armies
prepared for the encounter. But as a plot in a well contrived Comedy is so
cunningly wrought that it discovers not it self till the last Scene, and then
expectation acknowledged her self deluded by invention. So this reconciliation
between the brothers agreed on long before, on the sudden now broke forth when
all outward apparences threatened hostility. For the Duke of Gloucester and
other Lords seeming to abhor the inhumane nature of the prepared battle,
past often formally between the brothers, and urged them by all respects both
religious and polliticke to prevent a quarrel so ruinous and so scandalous to
both: wherein the triumph could not be but almost destruction to the Conqu^ror.
After much mediation and much seeming relectation, that was in the end
concluded, which had long before been resolved on. And the Duke of Clarence
submitting himself to King Edward, brought with him all those forces which
upon Warwicks reputation, much more then upon his own, he had raisd. But that
in this agreement he might not appear to forget the office of a son in Law
and a friend, he jointly with the King sent to entreat the Earl to enter
league with them; for confirmation of that title which himself had first
defended; and to avoid the effusion of so much blood as this quarrel must
necessarily draw. For conditions he himself should set down his own; knowing
he would be so rational in his demands, as to require nothing above the
decorum of a subject to ask, or a Prince to grant.

But Warwick had a spirit too stubborn to bow down to any conditions, which
himself had not been the first proposer of: and as an injury threw back all
offers of courtesy. And now too late he began to curse the error of his
indulgency; which had added power to these brothers only for his own
destruction. From Edward he could expect no safety, for he deserved it not;
having canceld all former obligations by his last revolt, by which he forced
him to so hazardous a flight, and from George he could not look for a true
faith, considering for the only appearance of better hopes he had heretofore
broke it even with a brother. And from both what thought of perfect friendship,
unless (and that his nature could never suffer) he would fall beneath his
former height; in which should he continue, suspicion would never let him
remain secure from danger. That subject scarce never having been reputed
innocent, in whose power it was to be nocent.

Whereupon King Edward, by all the charms of former friendship and promise of
future, unable to lay the spirit that raged in Warwick; left him obstinate in
the prosecution of his own designs: And accompanied with his late reconcild
brother and followed by a gallant Army marched to London. Where the Citizens out
of conscience of their late oath taken so solemnly to King Henry, made some
show of resistance: but soon the care of their own safety absolvd them from
that scruple, instructing them that oaths by fear retorted lay no obligation
upon the soul. And with much alacrity they yielded up their City together
with the person of King Henry, reserved still to be made the sport of fortune.
For certainly history shows us not an example of any Prince, who in so many
vicissitudes, never met with one fully to his advantage. So that justly we
might have condemnd him for unhappy, had he not been endued with such a piety
as raisd him above his fortune, and united him to God.

At his entrance into the City as general applause entertaind King Edward,
all those inhabitants who had covertly wished happy success to his affairs,
now openly expressing their triumph; The Queen and those many of the Kings
nearest followers, who for the space of six months had secured themselves in
Sanctuary, running forth to congratulate their own, in his restitution. And
even in this general alacrity concurd the vows of many Merchants, natives
and forrainers, who before had hated him and supplied King Henry with money to
his destruction. For the King out of the easiness of his natural disposition,
and a desire that at this universal triumph there should not be a sad look so
much as among his enemies, gave their offenses a general pardon. Only letting
them understand that he knew both the value of his own mercy and of the
greatness of their forfeitures, their ayding the contrary faction having lost
them their estates and liberties, and in rigor their lives. Neither was this an
unhappy policy in him, to obliege many by the forgiving that, the extremity of
which had he taken (his business being then so unsettled) might have endangered
a mutiny in the City, upon the first approach of the enemy.

Having therefore by his happy fortune comforted his friends and by his
clemency won upon the affection of the rest; and so settled the Town to his
obedience, that he suspected no danger at his back: he led forth his Army to
oppose the Earl of Warwick, who having reunited his scat^erd forces by easy
marches was come to Saint A^ban. The reason of bringing his power so near
London was a confidence he had, his reputation among the inhabitants would
draw many to his part, or at least so divide them that they should be no
advantage to the King. But the King jealous of their levitie, as who had known
them (how affectionate soever they profitted themselves to his fortune) siding
still with the prevailer, interposed his Army between the City and the enemy:
whereby he cut off even the possibility of intelligence. And that the presence
of King Henry might not be the occasion of any tumul^ in London, nor his escape
add such (...) Warwicks quarrel, o^ hereafter ^^ danger a f^^^^er war, he
^^ o^^ hi^ to the battle* Where by the poor dis^^^st King, what side so ^^e
prevai^^^* was mo^^lly certain of destruction.

Upon a Plai^^ near ^^rner (...) way between London and Sai^^ Alban the King
pitched his field. The (...) commanded by the Duke of Gloucester, the Rere by the
Lord (...), ^he maine battle by himself. To the common Soldier heeded no
encouragement of words, the great examples of their Leaders was the best
Oratory. And no^e of them but understood their lives, estates, and liberties,
at ^he ^take: Their ^^inc^ if overthrown^, every day ^o^ ^^lilo^ to produce new
troubles, and new dangers; (...), a full (...) of this war, with (...) and
triumph*

On the other side the Earl of Warwick with as bol^ (...). The right Wing
which consisted of Horse, he committed to the Earl of Oxford, in whose company
^ought the Marquess Mountague: The le^^ to the Duke of Exeter; and the maine
^ar^^^l^ which was composed of Bills and Bows (the best sin^^es of o^^ English
strength) to the Duke of Sommerset* He himself giving direction in every
quarter. And when he had (...) his whole host, and liked both their order and
their courage, he (...) away his Horse, resolving to fig^^ o^ foot* and that
day to try the u^most of his fortune; pref^^i^g (...) his imaginations no mean
between victory and death. Then be lovingly in bear'd ^^ those great
Commanders, in every of wh^^ appearid a ^^solution equal to the cause* And
having by (...) protestations declared their sincere faith and forwardness to
the present service, every man bet^^ke himself to his several charge. Nothing
extra^^dinary to be^ observed in ordering the field on eit^er side, but that
neither George Duke of Clarence, nor the Marquess Mountague commanded any way
in chief that day: So impossible it was to extirpate that suspicion, which by
their fo^mer actions had taken root in their brothers minds.

It was Faster day in the morning (a day too sacred to be profaned with so much
blood) when both Armies addressed themselves to fight. That for the King took
courage from the justice of their quarrel, and the fortune of their Prince.
That of the Earl from the long experience and noble valor of their Leader,
and from the piety of him for whose redemption that day they had brought their
lives to the hazard. Both fought for their Kings, both Kings having been
crown*d, and by several Parliament^ acknowledged And indeed the question was
so subtle, that even among Divines it had held long, and at that day remained
not absolutely decided. No marvel then if the common soldier had on both
sides the same assurance of truth, since if they have any, their faith for the
most is led by the direction of their General. Both Armies therefore had
equal justice, which made them with equal fierceness begin and continue the
fight.

Six hours the victory was doubtful; advantages and disadvantages indifferent
on both sides: ^ill at length error brought disorder to Warwicks Army, and
that a final overthrow. For the Earl of Oxford giving his men a star with
streams for his device begot in the Army a mistake that they were part of the
enemy whose badge was the Sun: and which mistake might easily happen by the
thick mist that morning; wherefore being in the right wing, and pressing
forward they were thought King Edwards men flying, which made their own maine
battle fall fiercely on them in the back. Whereupon Oxford suspecting
treason in Warwick (whose haughty and reserved ways were ever liable to
suspicion) fled away with eight hundred men, and King Edward with certain
fresh troops of Rutters for some such purpose reserved, perceiving disorder in
the enemy violently assaulted them, and soon forced them to shrink back.
Warwick opposed against their fear both with language and example; but when
nothing could prevail, he rusht into the thickest of the enemies; hoping
either his whole Army would bravely follow, or otherwise by death to prevent
the misery of see^ng himself overthrown. Mountague perceiving how far into
danger his brother was engaged, ran violently after to his rescue, and both
presently oppressed with number fell, and with them the spirit of the Army. In
their deaths they both cleard those calumnies with which they were blemished.
Warwick of having still a swift horse in readiness by flight to escape from any
apparent danger in battle: Mountague of holding intelligence with King
Edward, or betraying at Pomfret the quarrel of his great brother. For it is to
be rejected as a fable forged by malice, that history which reports the
Marquess having put on King Edwards livery, slain by one of Warwicks men, and
the Earl laboring to escape, at a Woods side where was no passage, killed and
spoild to the naked skin by two of King Edwards soldiers. Yet both of them in
their deaths partaking with the common condition of men; the poor being ever
esteemed as vicious, the overthrown as cowards. By which judgment we
impiously subject the Almighty disposer of humane bussinesse to our depraved
affections, as if felicity or in felicity were the touchstone by which we might
discern the true value of the inward man.

King Edward soon as he saw the discomfiture of the enemy and certainly
understood the death of the two brothers: that himself might be the first
reporter of his own fortune, with King Henry in his company poasted up to
London. He came into Saint Paul's Church at even Song, and there offered up his
own banner, and the standard of the Earl of Warwick; the trophies of his
morning service: where waited on him an universal acclamation, the flattering
shadow which never forsakes victory.

To the Duke of Clarence and the Duke of Gloucester was left the care to quarter
the Soldiers: whose enquiry soon found that on both sides that day were
slain four thousand six hundred and od^e. On the Kings side of eminency only
the Lords Burcher and Barnes, he son and heir to the Earl of Essex, this
to the Lord Say: On the other side were killed the Earl of Warwick and the
Marquess Mountague attended with three and twenty Knights. The Duke of Exeter,
who by his many wounds was reported dead, recoverd life: but was never more
seen in action; his body after some length of time being cast upon the shore
of Kent; as if he had perished by shipwreck: the manner of his after life and
death left uncertain in story.

To this violent end came the Earl of Warwick, the greatest and busiest
subject our later age has brought forth. And indeed how was it possible such a
stormy life, could expect a calmer death? In his Spirit, birth, marriage, and
revenue he was mighty: which raised his thoughts above proportion. For all
these benefits of nature and fortune served him only as instruments to execute
his rage; into which every small displeasure taken or mistaken from his Prince,
threw him headlong. His bounty extended it self most in hospitality, which
was dangerous to the guest, for his meat was infected with the poison of
Faction. The open aim of all his actions was at the Public good, which made
his power still recover strength, though so often weakend by evil Fortune: but
his secret intention was to advance his own greatness, which he resolved to
purchase though with sale of the public safety. He was questionless valiant,
for a coward durst not have thought those dangers, into which he entered upon
the slightest quarrels. His soul was never quiet, distasted still with the
present: and his pride like a foolish builder, so delighted to pull down and
set up, that at length part of the ^rame himself had raised, fell upon him and
crushed him to death. He was a passionate extoller of continency in a Prince,
which proceeded rather from spleen than zeal: because in that he tacitly
made the King contemptible for his volup^uous life. Being bred up from a child
in Arms (the worst school to learn Religion in) he had certainly no tender
sense of justice: and his varying so in approving contrary titles, showed
either a strange levity in judgment, or else that ambition not conscience
ruled his actions. The pretenses of his revolt from King Edward, were neither
to the world politic nor to himself honest. For what greater hopes could he
conceive by restoring a family himself had ruind? since injuries make so deep
an impression, that no after courtesy can take it away? Or how could any
violence offered to his Daughters honor by the King (for that was then by him
pretended) license him to war? since no injustice in a Sovereign can authorize
the subject to Rebellion. But who will give a true account of his latter
attempts, must look back upon his first familiarity with Lewis the eleventh.
For never had France such a Merchant to vent discord in foreign Kingdoms,
and buy up the faith of all the greatest Officers to neighboring Princes. But
when by the most powerful engines of policy and war, he had screwed up his
intentions to the highest, by making himself King in Authority though not in
title, the Crown being entailed upon the two Princes, who had married his
Daughters: Almighty God in one overthrow ruined him, and permitted his Sons
in Law, with their wives not long after to end by strange deaths, none of them
answering his hope, but the younger Daughter and that preposterously to his
design. For she indeed by marrying Richard Duke of Gloucester, the butcher of
her husband Prince Edward, became Queen to an Usurper; and soon after by
poison (as it was justly suspected) made resignation of her Crown. His
Grandchildren by Clarence, who arrived to any age, dyed by the Axe upon a
Scaffold; and all that greatness he so violently labored to confirm in his
posterity, by violent deaths was reduced to nothing: The large River of his
blood divided now into many streams, some so small, they are hardly observed
as they flow by.

Of his brother the Marquess Mountague little can be clearly spoken: so
reserved were his imaginations and so obscure his ways: especially to us who
look on him so far off, and with so imperfect a light. Neither of himself
can he afford much to story, having never been but second in any business of
moment: and like some poor gamster seldom or never played his own Cards. He
had certainly as much valor and dissimulation, as rendered him both a perfect
Soldier and Courtier. He never miscarried in any battle, till the last, in
which he perished: so that indifferently we may ascribe to his good conduct and
fortune, the prosperity of his success: His affections being divided between
a King and a brother, made him suffer that misfortune that ever attends
neutrality: Though indeed he may be rather said to have been for both, than
neither. His nature was nothing so stubborn as his brothers; which perhaps was
bended to plausibility, by the dependances of his fortune. The comportment of
men s^ldome swelling to a distasteful pride, unless from the very cradle
flattered with respect, without the competition of an equal. He abhord peace,
whose strict rules circumscribed him within the narrow limits of his own
revenue: and loved war which called not his expenses to accoumpt; and
equaled, if not elevated him above those great men, whom he must have envied in
a quiet s^ate. In a word, the dispositions of these two Brothers are b^st
discovered to us by the King himself* of whom Warwick was still either
esteemed or hated, Mountague loved, or pitied.

The affection which King Edward bore^ Mountague, during life, appeared by the
good language he always used of him, even when in Arms against him, which
perhaps occasioned some jealosie of his faith in Warwick* And after death in
permitting his and for his sake, his brothers body the honor of a convenient
burial. For after they had both lain two or three days barefaced in St*
P^uls Church, exposed a spectacle obnoctious to such passions, as the beholders
were inclined to either by Nature or Faction: they were carried down to the
Priory of Bisham: Where among their Ancestors by the mothers side Earls of
Salisbury, the two unquiet brothers rest in one Tomb.

Queen Margaret now when it was too late Landed ^^ Waimouth, having in her
retinue some few French Forces, the wary King Lewis loath to venture much upon
an after game of fortune. And here when she expected the acclamations of
triumph, she first received the news of Warwick slain and his Army
defeated. Which to her mind, prepared then to have some taste of happiness,
was so sad a distraction, that she knew not which way to direct her
resolutions. At length desperation forced her to the common poor refuge of
Sanctuary. And in Bewlye in Hampshire, a monastery of Cist^rcian Monks she
registered her self, her son, and followers for persons priviledg'd. To her
in this ago nie of soul came Edmond Duke of Sommerset (who had escaped from
the overthrow at Barnet) with his brother the Lord John Bewfort, John Courtney
Earl of Devonshire (brother to Thomas who taken at Towt^n field was beheaded
at York) Jasper Earl of P^mbrooke, younger son of Owen T^uther by Queen
Katherine Dowager, John Longs^^other Lord Prior of St. John's, and John Lord
Wenlocke who had received his first advancement to honor by his great Services
to King Edwa^d, and ^ow by the folly of his ingratitude, had betray ^ himself
to a ruinous Faction.

These Noble personages greater far in the reputation of what they had, or
might have been, than in their present power, labored what they could by
their comfort and presence to raise up the Queen, sunck with the weight of her
misfortunes. They related to her the hopes she yet might retain in the amity
with France, and authority she had in England: multitudes yet surviving, whom
if not affection to the title, desperation of their own fortunes, and safety
of their persons, would necessitate to take arms. All overthro^es rather
sowing, then taking away the seeds of war. Neither if she looked in
differently upon the last battle, had she reason to be disconsolate. For if
she reflected on the number of the slain, it was not considerable; Or upon
the death of the General the Earl of Warwick: She might receive that loss
as a benefit. He having been indeed a cruel enemy; but never but an insolent
friend: Whose fortune had it continued prosperous as it began, it might have
been a question whether the ^arle of Marches or his ^surpation would have
been the more insupportable. They urged farther the authority Sommerset;
Devonshire, the Lord Prior, and Wenlooke had in England, and the multitudes
Pembrooke might arm in Wales. But above all, what a confluence of the boldest
youth would be to the Prince, would he but take the field, and appear in his
own quarrel. Nothing having advanced the title of York, but Marches presence
in all battles: or ^o^^d the reputation of Laucaster, but King Henry's unactive
piety, and fighting still by Deputies. The Soldier thinking it desperation for
them to hazard their lives, where the Prince, whom it concerns, timerously
refuses to stake his own.

But all these arguments exemplified by the most persuasive Oratory, could not
recover the sad Queen to a perfect life in her spirit. For either so many
disasters, and falling so thick together, made her despair success: Or else
the soul before a great mischief has a certain divining knowledge of future
accidents. And now she began to think that small time her husband had been
re-invested in the Kingdom, was but a lightning before the death of all
loveraignety in his Family. Yet when she looked upon the Prince, hope flattered
her desires, that he might hereafter revive the greatness of his blood: but
then the memory of forepast misfortunes, made her a melancholy Prophetess of
future r^ine. Howsoever the objects of her thoughts were dismal, she
dissembled them, and was as busy in all polliticke contrivances, and as
forward in setting forth the army as the most resolute Commander. But when she
perceived the Lords earnest to have the Prince present in the battle; she
violently opposed. ^n respect of his youth, want of experience, and the so
mighty venture. For if he perished in this storm, even hope it self would in
him be shipwrack'd. She therefore urged earnestly to have him reconvai'd into
France, where in safety he might attend the success of the present
enterprise: which if unprosperous, he might there r^maine, till by the
increase of years and power, he might be enabled to fight his own quarrel.
But the contrary opinion overruled in her all the passions, both of a woman,
and a Mother; and h^ving alre^dy lost so much at this play of fortune, she was
persuaded like a desperate ga^^^^^er, to ha^^rd at one cast the remainder of
all her stock.

Having therefore yielded to this resolution, she leaves the Sanctuary and pu^s
her self in arms: The very name of Prince Edward, like an adamant, attracted
multitudes to the war. Her companies immediately* s^ee advanced to Both,
where the Duke of Sommerset, and the ^arle of De^vonshire were high in
reputation; and by whose Authority daily new for^es came into the Princes
service. Yet were they not grown to so full a number, as might encourage the
Queen to think upon a battle. Whereupon she keep^s her self in the Town,
until the coming of Jasp^^ Earl of Pembrooke, upon the addition of which
Wel^h Forces, she resolved to take the field, and encounter King Edward.

Who soon as he had perfect intelligence of her resolutions, gathered his army
together, which he (ever too confident of peace, so amourously counted by him)
had after the victory at Dar^^^, licenced to disperse it self. And with so
unexpected suddenness he made his preparations, that before the return of
Pembrooke, he encamped at Mar^eborough, within fifteen miles of Bath: and by
the interposition of his Army, hindered all su^^^urs could come to the enemy
from Wales. Which so near approach distracted the resolutions of the Queen,
and made her suspect her safety, if she remained longer there* Wherefore the
retired to Bristow, from whence she sent to the Lord B^uchampe, of ^o^y^^, who
had the keeping both of the City and Castle of Gloucester, to desire passage
over ^^^^^ne there (...) ^^^^ed, her, and ^or^ed her to ^^^^^ up ^o ^^^^ ^^ry,
there to endeavor to cross the (...).

In her way ^^^ther, as she past by Gloucester, which in (...) she durst ^^^^^
assaul^, though by the former (...) provoked: he taking advantage of the place
and some disorder in the Queens Re^eward, fell suddenly upon it and carried
away, after some slaughter of the uncircumspect Soldier, much of her
Artillery. This loss troubled her a little, but when she found her self
pursued by King Edward so close, that before she could reach T^wxbury* he wi^^
his Horsewere in sight; despe^ation ^^^^^d her, so that she began only to
look which way to fly* And indeed to that extremity was her business
reduced, that there was left no no other hope of safety: The King having so
much odds in courage and number. But the Duke of Sommerset prevailed against
her fears, and the sober opinion of most of the best Commanders* Upon which
neglecting to escape at first into ^^^^^, where Pe^brooke had raised mighty
Forces for her service; She was soon by the King necessita^ed, either to yield
or endure the battle. Whereupon she resolved to fight it out that day which
was the last, and that which decided the great quarrel between the two houses.

The Duke of Summer set (...) field in a Park ad^oy^ing to the Town* and (...)
this Camp round so high and so strong that the enemy could on no side force it;
^^^^ when he perceived an inevitable necessity of present fight, he Marshalled
his host for the service. The Foreward he and his brother commanded, the Earl
of Devonshire the Rer^. In the maine Battle was the Prince, under the
direction of the Lord Prior, and the Lord Wenlocke. The Queen seeing the hour
draw near and that there was need the Soldier should have advantage of valor
to equal the enemy, who bad it in multitude; took the Prince with her and ^ode
about the army. In her look appeared nothing but life and resolution, in her
language almost an assurance of victory; So cunningly she concealed the wound
her despair had given her, that then only it bled inward. She told them,
that it rested in their courage that day to restore their imprisoned King to
liberty and his Crown; and themselves not to safety only, but to honor and
treasure. For the wealth of the rebellious Cities should be their spoil, the
Kingdom their inheritance to be divided only among them, and all those titles
the enemies so proudly wore, to be conferred upon their deserts. If the
inequality of number frighted them; she showed it was not such, but that they
might be confident their great hearts animated by the justice of the cause,
would easily take away the disparity. Then she wished them to look upon the
Prince (whose personage the fond Mother thought, would make them like desperate
lovers contemn danger) and fight for him their fellow Soldier, with whom they
were to share in fortune, and who once in possession of the Throne, would never
forget them, by whose courage he was seated there.

The Soldier generally appeared resolved against the sharpest danger,
receiving her words with much alacrity: And soon as the Signal was given
bravely repulst the Duke of Gloucester, who having the leading of King Edwards
vantguard, had assaulted the Queens Camp. Upon which repulse, the Duke of
Sommerset seeing Gloucester retire with some appearance of flight (an appearance
indeed it was only to betray the enemy) ran after ^o far in the pursuit,
that there was no safety in the retreat. Then did Gloucester on the sudden
turn back upon him, and having by this deceit enticed him from his trenches,
he cut all the vantguard in pieces. The Lord Wenlock who had the conduct of
the maine battle and whom it concernd to have relieved the Duke, only looking
on as if he were a spectator, and no actor in the present tragedy. Sommerset
enraged with his discomfiture, and having Wenlocks faith in some jealosie; upon
his escape back obrayded him with the most ignominious terms of cowardice and
treason: and transported by the heat of passion, with an Axe he had in his
hand struck out his brains. This outrage begot nothing but disorder in the
Queens Camp; and so great grew the confusion, that no man knew whom to obey,
or how or where to make resistance against the assaulting enemy. So unhappy is
government both in war, and peace, when all authority is not conferd on one:
a multitude of Commanders dividing the obedience of the inferior, and ever
distracting resolutions among themselves. Whereas nature instructs us to a
Subordination, and as in our own, so in a public body, it is monstrous
either to have no head, or else to have more then one.

The King took advantage of this uprore, and by it gaind a most entire
victory: For entering without any opposition the Queens trenches, he committed
a most cruel slaughter on all who resisted. Three thousand of the common
soldiers (for they always pay for the rashness or folly of their Commanders)
were slain that day, and among them the Earl of Devon-shiere, the Lord John
Beufort, and some other Gentlemen of name. The thick of the Park preserved
some, and the Sanctuary others but them only for a while: for King Edward who
was never an overscrupulous observer of religious rites, with his sword drawn
would have entered the Church and forced them thence. But a good Priest careful
to maintain the immunitie of the place, with the Eucharist in his hand,
opposed the violence and would not let him enter a place sacred to our most
merciful God, until he had granted to all there his mercy by a free pardon.
But this pardon betrayed them, for on the Monday after they were taken out of
the Church; and all beheaded in the Market place at Teuxbury. Among whom of
principal note were the Duke of Sommerset and the Lord Prior of Saint John's,
and many other Knights of great reputation and fortune. By which violation of
the Sanctuary he made good the opinion which the world before had conceived of
him; that Religion never could prevail so far upon his conscience as to be
any bar either to his pleasures or revenge.

The Queen half dead in her Chariot was taken in the battle, and not long
after, the Prince was brought prisoner to the King by Sir Richard Croft. Who
taking notice of the Proclamation, whereby the revvard of a hundred pound by
the year during life was promised to whosoever should yield the Princes body,
dead or alive, up to the King: (with protestation not to offer any violence to
his person if alive) brought him unhappily to his death: Which when the good
Knight afterward found, he repented what he had done, and openly professed his
service abused, and his faith deluded.

For King Edward presently upon the delivery of the Prince, caused him to be
brought into his presence, and entertained him with some demonstration of
courtesy: Moved perhaps thereunto by the innocence of his youth, compassion of
his misfortune, or the comeliness of his person; the composition of his body,
being guilty of no fault but a too feminine beauty. At first it was supposed
the King might have some charitable intention, and resolve happily to have
settled him in the Duchy of Lancaster, his Fathers inheritance, a patrimony too
narrow for a King, and something too large for a Subject; and thereupon to have
enterd discourse with him, whereby to make experience whether his spirit would
stoop to acknowledge a Superior. He therefore questioned him what mad
persuasion had made him enter into so rash an enterprise; where the very
attempt was rebellion, being against his Sovereign, and folly being in
opposition to a Prince so far in power above him? He expected an humble
answer deprecatory for life, or soft and gentle, according to the complexion
either of his fortune or his face. But he with a resolution (bold as his
Grandfather Henry the fifth, would have replied with) answered, that to recover
his Father miserably oppressed, and the Crown violently usurped, he had taken
arms. Neither could he be reputed to make any unjust claim, who desired no
more then what had been possessed by Henry the sixth, the fifth, and fourth, his
Father, Grandfather, and great Grandfather, Kings of England; And acknowledged
by the approbation not of the Kingdom only but the world: and even by the
progenitors of King Edward.

By the spirit of which language, when the King perceived how much his life
might threaten danger; with a look full of indignation he turned from him,
thrusting him disdainfully away with his gantlet. Which so mighty rage
observed, and his so distempered parting out of the room: The Dukes of
Clarence and Gloucester, the Marquess Dorset, and the Lord Hastings, seized
suddenly upon the Prince, and with their poniards most barbarously murdered
him. ^ Of whom we can make little mention, his youth having performed nothing
worth story, though it promised much. For under the government of a Mother (the
worst education for a Son) he had been bred up, until this last scene of
life; which he acted alone, and bravely; so that posterity has sense of his
misfortune yet, and applaudes the justice of the Almighty in punishment of his
murderers. For all of them came to violent ends; Gloucester being executioner
of the rest; and of him the Earl of Richmond, the next surviving kinsman of
the butchered Prince. The severity of which example, holds a glass before the
eyes of the wicked, and shows them how rotten is all that greatness, which is
not raised upon, and maintained by virtue: and as the conscience is ever after
such a crying sin, inwardly tortured upon the rack of fear; so seldom does
the body escape outwardly an exemplary death by violence.

After this general defeat of the enemy, the death of the Prince, and all the
great partakers with the house of Lancaster, and the surprise of the Queen her
self: the King returned toward London: This being the only complete victory
he ever gained, from which no man of eminency escaped; and no man, who might
pretend to a competition, was now preserved except King Henry, and he
issuelesse and in prison.

And to make this triumph resemble something of the Roman, the King carried
with him his great captive the most afflicted Queen Margaret. A woman most
unfortunate to her self, and most ruinous to this kingdom. For after her
marriage into England. Soon finding her husbands weakness, safe however in
being directed and strengthened by sober council; she never left off inventing
new machinations till she wrought him into her sole command, with the
destruction of his nearest friends. So that to make the prospect from her
greatness larger she broke down and levelld his strong bullwarkes. The Duke
of Gloucester which might perhaps a little check her ambitious eye, but being
taken quite away left her open to every tempest. Having therefore by fomenting
dissension at home lost (except only Callice) all our void territories abroad:
by the murder of the good Duke, her Husbands Uncle, she gave liberty to the
house of York, to make their just claim to the Crown; and in the end to put
her out of that government, she prepo^terously managed. In her prosperity,
she was rather ambitious, then wanton; though from the last opinion did not
absolutely acquit her. Which aspersion certainly was cast upon her, by reason
of her too intimate familiarity with some of the younger and finer Lords: For
the more discreet and aged, either dislikt her projects; or were disliked by
her, as persons too cautious to consult with a giddy woman. Her mighty
confidence in the Duke of Suffolk, who wrought her marryage with England, has
left the largest part of that false suspicion upon his name. For who are just
to her memory, cannot but say beside that she was religious, she was even too
busy to think of Love matters. But perhaps the misfortune of her carriage
gave some small occasion of the report. Her prosperous fortune presents her to
us in the worst colors a factious, busy, and imperious Queen. ^er adverse in
the best, a most industrious woman to recover what her folly had lost, an
excellent Wife, and a most indulgent Mother. And had she never appeared in
action but when misfortune had compelled her to it; she had certainly been
numbered among the best examples of her Sex: But now the merits of her later
part of life, by redeeming the errors of the former, serve only to l^vell her
with the indifferent. The time she continued a prisoner in England, she
showed us no face but that of desolation: the strength of her spirit, either
broken in the murder of her Son; or else she accounted it a needless
employment now to raise her self above her sorrows. After some time, her
Father with the sale of much of that poor estate remained yet in his
possession, ransomed her; whereby she was redeemed to another air, though not
to a freer fortune. In addition to her other miseryes she was punished with a
long life, which she spun out sadly and ingloriously, living humbly upon the
narrow exhibition her Father did steal from himself to afford her. Her life
was much the talk of the present and succeeding times: because it concurred to
the destruction of the house of Lancaster, a Family beyond any then in the
Christian world, both in extent of dominion, greatness of alliance, and glory
of action. Her death was so obscure (for who counts the steps of the
unfortunate?) that it is not left certainly in story when she dyed.

But King Edward by her misfortunes reckoned his own felicities: and now
justly conceived himself secure in that Throne, he so passionately had
endeavored to sit at ease in. But because the Scene of his fortune had had
more changes, then any King in England yet, except his Competitor: he continued
still with a most watchful eye to look about him. And not knowing to how
dangerous a growth his enemies might arrive, which for the present appeared
weak: he thought fit to take order with Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, who
remained in Wales, with a power unable to offend the King, but able enough,
considering the nature of the place, to defend himself. Wherefore, that
without a public trouble he might destroy so private a person, he sent Roger
Vaughan strong both in kindred and followers, with commission by some stratagem
to entrap him. But the Earl had a discovery of his plot, and to deceive the
deceiver; seemed to give opportunity for execution of the design: by which
means he got Vaughan into his possession, and presently caused him to be
beheaded. But knowing this act concurring with the whole progress of his life
in opposition to the King, Would bring him to ruin, either by open power or
secret practice; he resolved to sail over into Britain, and under the
protection of that state to secure himself from the present storm. With him
he carried his Nephew Henry Earl of Richmond, heir of the Teuthers Family by
the Paternall, by the material side of the house of Sommerset, for the civil
war had now destroyed all those great Dukes, who had with loss of their
lives showed their devotion to King Henry, and left the inheritance of their
honor with a far more favorable aspect to this young Earl.

By the Duke of Britanny, they were received not only with promise of safety,
but with relief of pension. Him perhaps the consideration of the instability
of humane affairs, moved to this noble pity. But Peter Landois (the sole
directour of the Duke and a wicked man) persuaded his Master to give them
entertainment out of an avaritious hope one day, to make a good merchandise
for himself by sale of them into England.

Yet could not the King bring his happiness to that quiet he desired; Some few
small drops fell upon him after the great tempest. For a base Son of William
Nevill Earl of Kent, commonly known by the name of the Bastard Fauconbrige,
having bin employed Vice Admiral by the Earl of Warwick, during the late
combustions of the kingdom, to hinder all succors which might come from the
Low Countries to King Edwards aid, soon as he understood the Earls death,
set up for himself and fell to trade in open Pyracy. His conditions were
ignoble as his birth, and only can be said a fit instrument to move the baser
multitude to sedition. between Dover and Callice he robbed most, and had now got
under his command a Navy great enough to work mischief. Especially having
the chief of Callice (who had sided lately with the Earl) of his confederacy,
and by that means safety upon all occasions in their harbor. Gathering
therefore into his retinue many of those who had escaped from the two former
overthrowes, and presuming upon the affection of the Kentish and Essex men, he
saild up the River of Thames.

The intention of his arms divulging to be for the common liberty, and the
redemption of the King and Queen imprisond by an usurper. By which pretense,
ever powerful to incline the vulgar to sedition, he invited to the quarrel so
great a multitude, that the number was reckoned seventeene thousand fighting
men: Most of them the dregs and lees of former rebellions: Such who having
been heretofore on King Henry's side, and wanting courage to make good the
undertaking had by flight escapd; or else men whom guilt of some enormous
disorder had prepared for any attempt; because neither could hope to remain
long secure from punishment, when once the severe eye of a peaceable
government, should look narrowly into their offenses.

With this he marched to Kingstone hoping there to have crossed the River, but
being debard he led his Army into S^. Georges fields, and from thence with his
Ordinance made some small battery on the City. And to strike the more terror,
in the mean time he causd three thousand of his men to be transported by boat
at Saint Katherines, to make an assault on the other side at Algate and
Bishopsgate. Who being set a shore with a courage as desperate as their
quarrel, offered to force an entrance, but by the Citizens were bravely
repulst. The Lord Major and Aldermen directed by the great experience of the
Earls of Essex and Rivers and the Marquess Dorset, neglecting no part of the
best Commanders. And so valiantly they pursued the rebels (who soon began to
shrink) that Fauconbridge with much difficulty recovered his ships. For he
overconfident of success had commanded them to fall as low as the Downs,
little fearing he should so soon be forced to seek safety at Sea. And having
vainly deluded himself and his Soldiers with expectation of great Forces from
Wales under the conduct of Jasper Earl of Pembrooke; With much danger of being
destroyed at Black Heath, where for a while he entrencht, he got at length to
Sandwich and fortefied the place. Few of the Rebels who had any weak hope of
pardon, following their General upon a forced retreat.

The Commons entering thus upon every slight invitation into rebellion, when the
preservation of King Henry was but mentioned, made the King begin to consider
how dangerous his life was to the State; and that his death would disarme even
the hope of his faction, for ever reslecting more upon the wars. It was
therefore resolved in King Edwards Cabinet Council, that to take away all
title from future insurrections, King Henry should be sacrificed. For howsoever
some either to clear the memory of the King, or by after cruelties guessing at
precedent, will have this murder to be the sole act of the Duke of Gloucester:
Who can believe a man so cunning in declining envy, and winning honor to his
name, would have undertaken such a business of his own council, and executed
it with his own hands. Neither did this concern Gloucester so particularly, as
to engage him alone in the cruelty: nor was the King so scrupulous, having
commanded more unnecessary slaughters, and from his youth been never any
stranger to such executions. In killing the Prince he had Clarence, Dorset, and
Hastings for his conductors; and in the very murder of his Nephews (which was
the securing his usurpation) he trusted Tyrrell: So confident had his innated
inhumanity made him, that he doubted not but others might be faithful in
villainy. But the death of King Henry was acted in the dark; so that it cannot
be affirmed who was the executioner: only it is probable it was a resolution
of state. The care of the Kings safety, and the public quiet, in some sort
making it, however cruel, yet necessary.

But that the world might not suspect King Henry lived still, and thereupon
lean to new designs, he was no sooner dead, but with some show of Funeral
Rites, his body was brought into Saint Paul's Church: where upon Ascension day
his face uncovered, he was exposed to the curiosity of every eye. For the King
was resolved rather to endure the scandal of his murder, then to hazard the
question of his life: Which continually gave life to new seditions. From Saint
Paul's next day the corpse obscurely without any ceremony (in those days with
much piety observed toward the dead) was conveyed to the Blackefryers, and from
thence by boat to Chersye. Whence, after it had rested some while, it was
remooved to Windsore, and there at length found quiet. The King having even
after death partaked with the troubles and disgraces of his life.

The reason of burying him thus in the dark, I cannot guess to be any
disrespect to so great a Prince; but only to stop the discourses of the
Commons, who always pity them dead, to whose deaths their votes concurred.
Unless it be true, what is commonly written, that the people began to censure
hardly of his death, because at what time his body lay in Saint Paul's, and
after in Blackefryers, a large quantity of blood issued from his nose. A most
miraculous way of speaking the barbarism of his murder, and giving Tyrants to
understand that the dead dare in their language tell the truth, and call even
their actions to account. For this manner of bleeding was never observed to
happen, but when against Law, Nature had been oppressed with violence, and
seemed to challenge Justice.

With what aspect he entertained his fate, I cannot write; But well we may
believe, he could not but smile upon death, who by a continual exercise in
virtue, from his very Infancy had triumphed over sin; which only makes death
formidable to a Christian. Of his outward actions, all good men of that time
took a reverend notice: Especially of his due observation of all the Laws of
the Church, his exemplar piety, humility beneath the state, commonly usurped by
Princes; and a modesty even to admiration. But they were the virtues, which
Crowned the first part of his life, past over in a full prosperity, and
appertain not to this story. His misfortune and death only fall to this
task. And in his misfortune he expressed so singular a fortitude, that he was
never observed dejected upon the report of any sad accident. But entertained
all afflictions as sent from the Almighty, and absolutely resigned his will to
that of heaven. How innocently he spent the last ten years of his life, which
was in as much adversity as ever Prince suffered, his ghostly Father gave a
happy testimony. Affirming that in all that long trial of the inward man, he
never in confession could accuse himself of any actual sin. His employment
was prayer, and his recreation only pious discourses which persuaded man to
set a true value upon heavenly things, and throw a just contempt upon the
world. And to such reputation the sanctity of his life arrived among the common
people, that after his death they honored him with the devotion due to a Saint.
And King Henry the seventh (who owed most opinion to his holiness, because he
had fore-professed he should enjoy that Crown for which the two houses then so
much contested) labored his Canonization with the Pope. But that succeeded
not: For however the world was assured of his piety, there was much question of
his government. So that he might be termed a just man, but an unjust King.
Since his title to the Crown was unjust; for though it came by descent to him,
yet was it but a continued usurpation: His Reign was guilty, I will not say
through his demerit, but through his evil fortune, of much mischief, and the
effusion of a Sea of Christian blood: And however in the contemplative part he
was religious toward God, in the active he was defective to the world. So that
to have made him worthy that honor Henry the seventh would have provided for
him: He must either (being resolved in conscience his title was just) have
fully performed the office of a King: Or knowing it questionable have submitted
it to be disputed, freely and upon the resolution made resignation of what he
unlawfully possessed. But Justice which commands any diminution of greatness, is
seldom obeyed by Princes; and death only makes them surrender up what was
violently by their Progenitors usurpd, and unjustly by themselves continued,
for till death ambition betrays the conscience, and fear of being less makes
it not dare to see the truth, which persuades to restitution.

King Henry thus taken away, the forces under Fauconbridges command; which
before had the specious title of a just war, could now pretend to nothing but
an unjust sedition. And so low they fell both in spirit and reputation, that
all they intended was but to make show of war, whereby the easier to work
their peace: No man of name or power, who before secretly had favored them but
openly professing against the enterprise. In Sandwitch nine hundred of them
remained, till they certainly understood the Kings approach with a mighty
power: then they sent forth Sir George Brook, to acquaint his Majesty with
their desire to return to his obedience, if they might by his pardon, be
secured of their lives and liberties. They protested it was no fear or present
necessity induced them to this submission, having confederates enough abroad to
releeve them upon extremity, and for the present victuals for six months, and
munition to oppose any assault. If this offer might be accepted, they would
give up with themselves, the Town and Castle, together with all the shipping
in the Harbor: If not, necessity would force them to their own defense. And
if they must dye, they would sell their lives at so dear a rate, that the King
might repent his purchase. Considering he had killed so many who would have
been as bold to have fought his quarrel, and lost so good shipping, and so
commodious a haven Town; For they were resolved to see both consumed with
themselves: that the victory might be no triumph to the conqueror, and the
conquered might have that comfort in their ruin.

The proposition was accepted by the King, and the Duke of Gloucester (whose
wisdom and valor had wrought him high in the opinion of the King) was sent
with a general pardon to the Rebels, and authority in the Kings name to
receive the Town, the Castle, and all the shipping in the harbor.

But the King who never let any pardon be an impediment to his purpose, having
them in his power; caused the Laws severely to proceed against them. And for
the example of the rest, Spicing and Quintin (two of the chief in this
rebellion) were executed at Canterbury; and their heads set upon those gates,
which at their last being at London, they so furiously assaulted. And that the
King might not only dravv blood, but treasure from this business, a
Commission of Oier and Terminer was directed to the Lord Deubam, and Sir John
Fog, to inquire against Offenders in the last rebellion, and to inflict either
corporal or pecuniary punishment. But the Commissioners who understood both
the necessity and intention of the State: made rather choice of the later,
knovving death would but incur the opinion of cruelty, and no way advance
the Kings benefit. Whereas great fines weaken as much the discontented, make
the Prince as secure from danger, even with the reputation of clemency.

And that Fauconbridge the first moover of this sedition might have no more
privilege then his accomplices; coming into South-hampton he was apprehended
and put to death. The inserting of his name in the former pardon, though often
pleaded by him, serving only to make him suffer the same execution with the
rest.

The punishment of these succeeding so well, the King proceeded against others.
And first against the Archbishop of York, brother to the Earl of Warwick,
who with his spiritual authority had set a gloss of Religion upon all the
later attempts. And by his working inclined the Commons of the North to so
constant a resolution for King Henry. With him the King took order, because he
found his ambition irregular, and sent him to be kept prisoner in the Castle of
Guisnes. Where deservedly he endured a long restraint, never attained liberty
till death enlarged him. No man afforded the poor comfort of pity to his
affliction, because in his prosperity he had been insolent and factious.

The manner of the attachment was, according to the custom of the King,
unfaithful. For having admitted the Archbishop, after Barnet field, not only
into favor, but a special familiarity; as he was hunting with him near
Windsor, he promised to come to the More (a place in Hartford-shire, which was
not long before purchaste, and built up most commodiously by the Archbishop)
and there to hunt with him: with this caution that there might be nothing but a
liberal mirth, and friendly entertainment. With much complacency, the
Archbishop retired to his house, joyful to see the King so free in his
affection, without memory of former discontents. And that the entertainment
might not be altogether beneath the Majesty of his person, against the Kings
coming; beside all provision which the shortness of the time could make; he
had gathered together of his own and his friends, plate and other rich
housholdstuffe, to the value of twenty thousand pound. Next day expecting the
presence of the King: On the sudden, Sir William Par knight, and Master Thomas
Vaughan entered the house, and by virtue of a Commission to that purpose,
confiscated all those goods to the Kings use. Who having arrested his person
and sent that to prison, seized upon all his estate both temporal and
Ecclesiastical: The former forfeited for ever, the later during the
Archbishops life.

The crime objected against him was treason, for secretly aiding the Earl of
Oxford; who at that time had fortefied Saint Michaels Mount in Cornwall. For
the poor Earl seeing the whole Island lost from the house of Lancaster (in
whose defense he had been so constant) and all the great favorers of the
quarrel destroyed: having no place of safety to shelter himself abroad, took
this corner of the kingdom, and endeavored to make it good. But this was but
the enterprise of a desperate man; for all his hope this way could be only to
prolong a wretched life without servitude. As for liberty he was his own
jailer, and his fortress his prison. The whole number of his Soldiers were
but seventy, scarce enough for his retinue. Yet with these he managed his
business so happily, that though besig'd, he revictualled the place: and made
his defense good some months. But when Richard Fortescue, Esquire of the body
to the King, and then Sheriff of the County, came down, and by open offer of
the Kings free pardon to all the Earls men, and secret practicing; had wrought
them to his purpose. The Earl was forced to yield, and with him the Lord
Beumount, two of the Earls brothers, and Thomas Clifford: all persons of great
name and quality: The King received them to mercy, as far as their lives were
concernd. But for their estates (for now he began to husband his victories to
the benefit of his treasury) he confiscated them wholly; not allowing the
disconsolate Countess any part of her jointure. Insomuch that during the life
time of King Edward (for all that while was the Earl kept prisoner near
Callice in the Castle of Hames) she was forced to live upon the courtesy of her
friends, a kind of better sort of alms.

All now were reduced to order, except the Earls of Richmond and Pembrooke:
and them the King labored to fetch in: For now either his nature was altered
to a strange mistrust, which in his youth had been so taxed for an
uncircumspect confidence: or else he began to be governed by a Council of a
more wary judgment, and whose sight could discern danger a far off. And
certainly who compares the first and last times of the Kings government, shall
perceive a strange difference in the policy: unless in those affairs wherein
he obeyed his own direction, and in them remained a taint of his natural
error. Which change of government may be ascribed to the Duke of Gloucester, a
man whom the conscience of his own infidelity, made jealous of the faith of
others: who thought no enemy alive and with liberty, but full of danger, how
weak so ever his power or pretense might be: and who at this time held the
stern of the Council, while the King at pleasure wantoned in his Cabin. By
his advice Commissioners were sent over to the Duke of Britain, in whose
dominions the Earls remained, to expostulate the injury of giving
entertainment, to any evil affected to the state of England. Pembrooke having
been upon all occasions an open Rebel, and Richmond only wanting age to take
arms, and who shortly appeared to threaten no less dangerous. They desired
him as he respected confederacy with England, and the common policy of
Princes, not to disobliege the King by comforting his enemies, and succouring
such who could bring nothing but ruin to their abettors: Neither to prefer
faith to two miserable exiles, before love to a Prince, who had both the power
and intention to join with him in any war that might tend to the safety or
honor of his Duchy. They concluded with an earnest request that he would
deliver up into their hands the two fugitives that such order might be taken,
as was safest for the present state. Or if the too scrupulous observance of an
oath, perplexed him, that at least such care might be had, that they might
neither attempt confederacy abroad, or a power to enable them to return home.

The Duke made answer, that in point of honor he could not condescend to the
Kings first demand; having upon their arrival there given them his word. But
for the second part he would beyond the Kings own desire consult for the
safeguard of his Majesty, and restraining them from any power to attempt new
enterprises. And perhaps, as it would preserve his reputation clearer to the
World, so would it more advance the Kings purpose to let them remain in
Britain, rather then to have them returned into England Considering at home
they had a great kindred, and by the slaughter of the rest, were grown chief
of the faction of Lancaster; Whereas if they continued with him they should be
in a free but a safe custody, in a Country where they were so far from power,
that they wanted acquaintance. And that himself would narrowly look that no
discontended persons should resort to them, or that they should make their
addresses to any other Prince. Whereupon he entreated his Majesty to consider
him as a Confederate most religious in maintenance of that amity, heretofore so
happily begun, and hitherto so faithfully maintaind.

With this answer the Ambassadors returned, and the Duke made good his promise
to the King. For presently he remooved all their English servants; and set
Britains to attend them, who did rather observe then serve them: Men who
cunningly marked, not only who made their dependancies upon them of the
English, or with what people they held intelligence: but even their looks, and
sent the Copy of them into England, oftentimes with a false interpretation.
Then (that two together might not animate each other, and enter into dangerous
Counsels) they were kept divided, and all communication either by language or
letter, absolutely interdicted. And (that both being in the same sufferance,
might not conspire to the same escape) there was a guard set upon them, who
narrowly though respectively wa^ch^ them. So that we may guess this great care
the King took for their restraint, to have wrought a strange effect. Richmond
esteeming himself more considerable as he was more suspected; and by the
fears of the King making valuation of his own pretenses. Great thoughts crept
into his mind by the circumspection of such great Princes; and the vulgar both
abroad and at home began to believe (for they always think there are strange
depths, even in the shallowes of Princes actions) there was much mystery in
Richmond, title, and danger in his liberty. Whereas had he lived unsuspected by
the King; he had perhaps dyed unobserved by the world.

By this negotiation with Britain, having secured himself of these two
Earls, who might endanger trouble to the kingdom at home; he began to look
abroad, whether yet he had never liberty to cast his eye: His pleasures or
dangers higherto so taking up his time, that he had only served his appetite
or safety. But now he had quieted all civil troubles, and even rooted up the
very fear of war hereafter. He therefore thought it necessary to look,
first upon France, a nation which had made benefit of our ruin; and while we
busied our thoughts and courage, in destruction of each other, recovered so
much life, they were grown dangerous. Of their farther growth the King was
fearful, and resolved, if he could not make them less, at least to keep
them at a stay. Whereupon having intelligence of a marriage in agitation
between Duke Charles (brother to Lewis the Eleventh, and then heir apparent
to the Crown) and the daughter and sole heir of Charles Duke of Burgundy; he
endeavored by all art to break off the treaty. For he considered how
formidable the French would grow to our kingdom, should the so large territory
of the seventeene Provinces with the other dominions of the Duke be added. How
they would then be enabled to revenge those many injuries, the fortune of our
victories had done them; when we should be left to our own arms; the
Burgonian (by whose aid we had enterd and conquered France) now prepared to
war upon us. How France, superior always to the English in multitude, and
extent of territory, and defective only in commodious Havens, would by this be
enlarged with a mighty Sea coast, and as good men for Navigation as the world
then had: By which they would have absolute command at Sea, and keep us within
the narrow limits of our Island: If they would permit us that. These
considerations made the King solicit both the Duke of Britain, and the Count
S. Paul (the two earnest meditators for Duke Charles) to desist from farther
negotiation in the marriage. Britain he moved to reflect upon his own
danger, if Charles should survive King Lewys, as by course of years it was
probable, and have so great an Empire under his command. That greater Princes,
like greater Rivers swallow up the less, and after a while retain no memory
of them. And if he presumed upon the friendship between him and Duke Charles,
and the many courtesies done him; it was a treacherous hope, that never yet kept
faith. That Britain never enjoyd all the privileges appertaining to the
Duchy, but when France was disabled to infringe them.

With the Count S. Paul he dealt another way, by representing to him the near
friendship that ought to be between them too, in respect of the so near
alliance, being Uncle to his Queen: By which he entreated him not to urge a
business so prejudicial to the safety of the Crown of England; which in a
near degree concerned his own blood. VVithall he advised him to take care of
himself, and not to exasperate too far King Lewys, to whom the treaty of
this marriage was most unpleasing; in regard to the safety of his own estate.
To foment discord between brothers, being injurious to religion, and unsafe to
policy. For Nature reunites them, and throws both their mallices on him, who
occasioned the first breach, and who for the most part is yielded up a
sacrifice to the reconcilement. He concluded with the madness of his actions
who would provoke the just anger of so subtle, and so revengefull a Prince;
for the frail amity of so weak and inconstant a man as his brother Duke
Charles, who so often had been entrapt.

From both these Princes he received such answer as showed they resolved to
prosecute their design, but not to have him suspect it. Giving fair
protestations of their desire to be overruled by the Kings direction. But
neither of them understood the business in that dangerous nature, as it was
conceived in England. For though King Lewys had no Son at that time, yet was
there every day expectation he might have: the Queen likely to conceive, and
Lewys in much health and strength of body. And indeed soon after a young
Dolphin was borne who succeeded in the kingdom. Moreover they considerd the
malice between the brothers grown to that height, that all fear of
reconciliation was needless: And that there was no such certain way to
maintain a general dissension in France, as by enabling Duke Charles with a
power to make good the former contestation. Nothing likely to incline him to
seek friendship with his brother, but being disabled to continue an enemy.

The King suspecting the reality of their intentions and resolved upon any
terms to prevent the marriage, had in his determination to have forgot all
former discontents justly conceived against King Lewys in abetting the contrary
faction of Lancaster, and to have enterd into a particular league with him
against the Duke of Burgundy. But before he would make the overture, he tried
by his Ambassadors to know the certain resolution of the Duke himself, who
had in the marriage of his daughter always held his thoughts apart from the
world. And in truth the end of his intentions was to keep all neighboring
Princes in expectation, but to conclude with none. For at the same time when
Duke Charles had so many underhand promises with the self same hope did he
entertain Maximilian Son to the Emperor Frederick the third, Nicolas Duke
of Calabria, and Philibert Duke of Savoy. His ambition being to create many
dependancies upon himself, and never to marry her to no man, unless he
should be forced to it by some evil fate in war, and then he doubted not
but by her to work himself safe and honorable conditions.

Much importuned by the English Ambassador to give his resolution, and not
knowing to what danger the Kings suspicion might grow, or to what new leagues
it might incline him; he answered him faithfully that he intended no such near
alliance with Duke Charles. And that all those apparences of treaty were only
to retain him in discord with his brother, who otherwise might chance to be
reconcild, and hazard to destroy that faction, which the necessity of his
affairs did enforce him to advance. He desired therefore the King not to
listen to every false suggestion, but to believe he would do nothing in so
material a point, without much advice, and care had for satisfaction of so
great a confederat, and so near an allye.

This so absolute resolution of the Duke took away the former jealousy, which
soon after would howsoever of it self have vanished. For Duke Charles not
without a strong suspicion of practice in King Lewys, dyed of poison, and so
fixed a period to those many civil wars which had distracted the state of
France, and to all those busy ambitions, which had so much disquieted his own
content.

At home the King was continually stunge by a swarm of Creditors, who during
his late troubles had supplied him with treasure, and for whom gratitude did
obliege him to provide repaiment. He found his Exchequer empty and a
necessity to desire the Commonaltie to contribute with their purses that many
of his best friends might not be ruinated. He therefore summond a Parliament to
be held at Westminster, wherein though the reformation of abuses, and enacting
Laws wholesome for the present time was pretended, a liberal subsidy was the
aim. But in the beginning all those acts which had been heretofore made during
the first part of King Edwards government, and abrogated by King Henry the last
Parliament when for a time he was restored, were revived and enacted to
continue in full force for ever: And whatever other statutes were made by King
Henry, repealed. By virtue of which acts all the Nobility who had adherd to
the house of York and had been for that attainted, were restored in blood and
to their patrimonies; and all of the contrary faction found guilty of high
treason, and their estates confiscated to the King. Then for relief of the
Kings great necessities (for all those so mighty fortunes served only to
reward the multitude of his adherents) a full subsidy was granted; In
recompense of which he gave them a general pardon. And indeed by that,
liberally repaid them; For by the late civil wars, the laps into treason was
so universal, that scarce any estate could be safe if license were given to
informers the Cormarants of a Commonweal, who swallow much, seldom or never
grow fat; and least of all advance that they most pretend, the Kings benefit.

Some few days before the Parliament began, Lewys of Bruges a Netherlander
Lord of Gruthuse and Prince of Steinhuse came over into England, who was
received by the King with all the demonstrations of amity: And on the
thirteenth of October in the Parliament Chamber created Earl of Winchester,
receiving with the title the ancient arms of Roger Quincy, heretofore Earl of
the place, with addition of the coat of England in a canton. The reason of
this so extraordinary favor conferd upon a stranger, was the much application
of respect he made to King Edward, when by the prevayling fortunes of the
Earl of Warwick, he was forced to fly for refuge under the protection of the
Duke of Burgundy. For he being a noble man of that Country, dedicated himself
totally to comfort, the King distracted with his present affliction.

Soon after him, the Parliament being newly ended, came Ambassadors from the
Low Countries; who after the first open audience (wherein for the most part
passed only the complement of Princes) admitted to the King and some few Lords
most intimate to the Kings resolutions spoke to this purpose.

May it please your Mtie.
We are sent by our great Master the Duke of Burgundy upon an Embassy that
may prove strange to the first apprehension, and even in it self
contradictory. To congratulate your Majesty the glory of that peace you enjoy,
and to invite you from it, to a new war. But glory is like time,
everlastingly in motion, and when it stops it ends.

Your Majesty has by the happy conduct of your power and fortune, restored
the Kingdom to itself; That was an act of necessity. For you could not be
your self, if your great enemies had not been reduced to nothing. Now as
great a justice does invite you and the recovery of a larger Kingdom. Which
we know your high spirit cannot refuse to undertake, least the world have just
reason to suspect you took Arms to live, not to reign. For if your title to
the Crown of England be just, as man did always allow in judgment, and
Almighty God has approved in the success; The same title is good to the
Crown of France. Both having been united into one ever since the usurpation
of Philip de Valois.

The peoples affection to Princes of their own nation enacted an injurious
Law; that authorized injustice, and confirmed the Soveraigntie in the heirs
Male. The Female were excluded, as if the distinction of kind could make a
difference in right, and the being borne a woman were to be borne
illigitimate, for the Law Salique in a manner bastardizeth the whole Sex.

Your great Ancestor Edward the third, whose name and magnanimity you inherit,
with his Sword abrogated this Law: And called the Lawmakers to a severe
acacount at Crecie and Poitiers, where more veins of France were opened, and
more blood issued; then any time records: Considering the small numbers of the
English. In the later of the two battles John, Son to Philip of Ualois,
laboring to make good the pretentions of his Father, was taken prisoner, and so
continued less then a free Subject, by endeavoring unjustly to be a
Sovereign.

The little handful of men with which the English then opposed the vast armies
of the French, not only showing the high advantage the Nation has in courage:
But the miraculous justice of the Almighty, who delights to make the
destruction of Usurpers, his own Work; and not to permit man by his power to
rival heaven in the punishment.

Your Majesty needs not History to persuade you to the quarrel, or example to
assure you of the success. The justice of the claim will easily prevail with
you to draw again your sword, which has been hitherto almost still
unsheathed in vindication of your right: And that with so much prosperity, that
they who admire your valor and direction, applaud your fortune.

But if the nature of man, delighted in the felicities of peace, should advise
your Majesty to satisfy your mind with the triumph of those victories, you
have already purchased. Yet neither a just revenge, nor discreet policy will
admit it. For how can England remain safe from future injuries, and acquit her
self in honor against those who have heretofore affronted her: if France,
where all the late combustions were first conceived, remain unpunished?

The huge body of the civil War lies now a dead trunk, wounded to death by
your arm, but yet Lewys of France, the head of that monster, though contrary
to the ordinary course of Nature, retains still a life, and quickens mischief
hourly against this Kingdom: least otherwise his own be not secure. And
should your Majesty out of desire to avoid the further effusion of Christian
blood, permit him to continue in the unjust possession of a Kingdom, he would
interpret his safety and your mercy to be either a blind ignorance, or a
degenerate fear: And from your lenity draw the boldness to prepare new
troubles against your quiet.

And if it be not an over much care in a confederate and an allye, to make so
narrow a scrutinie into your Majesty's affairs Our Master believes that this
war, will not be unnecessary for the present state of England. In regard this
way those many evil humors, gathered in the body of the Kingdom by the late
disorders, will be easily purged away, or at least diverted. Seeing experience
teaches us how impossible it is, for a Nation nursed in civil war, suddenly to
embrace a peace, and endure a severe government. And should the discontented
not vent themselves thus abroad; how dangerous it might make the disease at
home, is easy to be conjectured.

But all this shows only the justice and necessity of your war: Preparations
great enough to oppose a King of France, yet we have not touched upon. And that
indeed is it, our Master gave us in our instructions most to acquaint your
Majesty withal: As by which it will be most apparent, how without any
reflection upon his own occasions, he invites you to this undertaking. For his
Highness understands how far this overture lies open to a false
interpretation, considering his enmity with King Lewys; did not the
circumstance of the business show how your Majesty is rather desired to a
triumph then a battle.

Never had France so many enemies, so powerfully united; and never so few
friends, if she may be said to have any. For except only the poor Duke of
Lorraine, who happily may be a burden, never an aid to any Prince; we can
hardly reckon a confederate. For so treacherous have been all King Lewys his
arts, so dissembling his nature; that the world has concluded it much safer to
be at enmity with him, then upon the fairest terms. His friendship having
ruined some, his arms never any man.

In confederacy with our Master, and in absolute resolution to invade France,
are the Duke of Britain, and the Count Saint Paul. Britain able of his own
Subjects to bring a powerful army into the field; Saint Paul by his kindred
and intelligence to cause a general revolt of all the nobility from the King.
And indeed such has been the carryage of that polliticke Prince (for that
epethite his poor shifts have got him) that a continual contempt has been
thrown by him upon the great Lords, and a most near familiarity entered into
with the basest people. His barber being more acquainted with the affairs of
state, then the whole body of his Council.

This preposterous course of favor, has made the greatest states of the
Kingdom scorn their present King, and reflect upon your Majesty, whose
comportment in war and peace has been such as justly makes your triumph in
the general affections of your many friends, and utter destruction of your
enemies.

If it may therefore please your Majesty to admit of that greatness your high
descent has title to, and your Predecessors' have had possession of; The arms
of these great Princes are prepared to serve you. Our Master first honored
your Majesty as a potent neighbor, great in your self as in dominion. Then by
marryage he grew into the nearest degree of correspondence; the title of
Brothers, (a ceremony used between Princes) being of due in alliance between
you two: Lastly, he had the happiness which Potentates seldom have (though
with some trouble to your Majesty) to enjoy entire familiarity: By which those
other respects, common among persons of like quality, and which are often but
weak ties of amity; converted into a perfect friendship. So that this desire
his Highness has to advance your Majesty's glory and command, proceeds only
from love to the posterity of your person, and just claim. With How powerful
forces he will concur to this great action, has been of purpose omitted:
Because the world has had sufficient testimony, how able his Highness has
been to oppose, if not oppress, King Lewys without borrowing aid from a
confederate. He therefore intreates to know your Majesty's resolution, whether
you will pass over and personally make your own claim to the Crown. Your
Majesty's only presence being of power to raise a fuller army in the very
heart of France, then yet ever King of England led to conquer France.

This overture took generally with the great Lords, who in their infancyes by
their Nurses having been told no stories but of our triumphs in France (and
those tales imprint deeply in the memory) and now for many years ever
acquainted with the wars at home, embraced danger as the only means to
honor. Moreover an appetite of glory, mingled with a noble emulation of the
prowes of their Fathers, made every man of name thrust forward to this action.
Neither were the more covetous backward, considering they were to war with a
richer, and a more effeminate nation; and not unlikely to return laden with
spoil; if not to remain there in a fertiller and a pleasanter Country. The
Soldier, who was in a manner all the gentry of the Land (for the civil wars
had engaged them all to the study of arms) rellisht this business more then
the great Lords. For they, having been bred up in the free license of war,
abhord to be circumscribed within the narrow bounds of the Laws, which never
have absolute power but in peace. So that the whole body of the Kingdom
passionately affected the quarrel, and by their universal acclamations in
praise of it, persuaded the King soon to declare his assent.

Whereupon sending for the Ambassadors, he showed his resolution to the war,
which he would undertake in person, and that very Spring (for it was now
presently after Christmas) transport his Forces into France. He desired
therefore to understand, in what readiness the Duke of Burgundy had his army,
and where he would appoint the place for the English to join, and which way
should first be taken. To which the Ambassadors made answer; that the Duke had
his Forces so well prepared that if the King would nominate a certain time
when he would be at Callice; the Duke would be sure three months before to
waste the whole Country belonging to the French, and to have his men so expert
that they should be able to instruct the English, unacquainted with the place.
And as for transportation of his Soldiers they desired his Majesty not to
perplex himself, in regard his Highness would provide boats for that purpose.
Then that the King might perceive how faithfully the Duke dealt with him, they
showed the Articles agreed upon between the Dukes of Burgundy, Britain, and
the Count S. Paul; to join in a war offensive against King Lewys: As
likewise a Catalogue of the names of all the great Lords of France, who held
secret intelligence with them, and who would revolt from the French King, soon
as the Dukes army took the field.

With this so satisfactory answer, the Ambassadors returned to the Duke, who in
this attained the ambition of many years working. For all the fear which
troubled his busy mind was, least King Edward won by the practices of King
Lewys, might be induced to side with France, or else to remain a neuter. And
indeed the last he suspected most, knowing the nature of our King so prone to
voluptuousness, to which the noise and trouble of the wars never gives free
license. He therefore by continual Embassies, kept him constant to his
resolution, and with larger promises of supply, and clearer apparences of
success, pricked forward his ambition to the enterprise.

But all these arts were needless, for the King was forward to the quarrel:
Either out of a brave emulation of Henry the fifth his Predecessor of the other
line; or out of a confidence as easily to throw King Lewys out of the throne of
France, as he had King Henry out of the Soveraignety of England; or perhaps not
to appear backward in an attempt of glory, when the expectation of the
kingdom called upon him to arm. For unless some malice rancord in the genius
of our Nation against the French, the Saxon government having received a
final overthrow by them, in the conquest of Duke William (though to that great
business conspired all the adjacent Countries) it would be our wonder why the
English were never sparing of their lives or treasure, when any war might be
advanced against the French, And of this so extraordinary forwardness in his
people, the King took a great advantage.

To compact the body of this enterprise, money the nerves and sinues of war
were wanting. The ordinary course for supply was by Parliament, and that at this
time was held difficult if not impossible: In regard the King but a little
before had dissolved the assembly, having received for discharge of his debts a
large contribution: and to urge them to a second aid, would probably end in
distaste, if not in denial. Neither could it appear less then extreme
exaction, to force the Farmers, who make up the greatest number in any payment,
to yield to asubsidie; considering the precedent troubles of the Kingdom had
utterly: impoverisht them by hindering tillage and all good husbandry. And for
the Nobility, who pay a large share in all general collections; they for the
most prepared themselves for the expedition. And it could not but rebate the
edge of their courages to be at a vast charge not only in the particular
setting forth of their own persons and their retinue; but in the general
preparations. There was therefore a new way found out, by former ages never
known without oppressing the Commons, to supply the King, the name it bore was
a benevolence, (though many disproved the signification of the word, by their
unwillingnesse to the gift) and it was cunningly and discreetely required only
of the better sort of people, who were known to have a plentiful revenue. And
especially of such whom ease and wealth were likely to detain at home. Knowing
that the heaviest burden might be laid on them without a public murmur, as
men hated by the Soldier, and upon whose prosperity ever attends a common envy.

In advancing this contribution no policy was omitted, either by private
menaces, or public entreaties. Some came in led by fear (not knowing to what
indignation a denial might provoke the state) Other cunningly persuaded to a
vain hope of enjoying the Kings particular favor by their forwardness: Few
granted it for love to the enterprise; Most only because their neighbors did
it, and they wanted courage to disobey example. In History a Widow is much
spoke of, who having freely, and somewhat above the proportion of her estate,
contributed twenty pound, received from the King a kiss. Which his so
extraordinary favor (extraordinary to a Widow declined in years) so
overjoyed her, that she doubled the sum, and presented it to the Collectors.
By which slight passage, a judgment is easy to be made of the Kings nature:
either of it self full of humanity, or without difficulty bending to the
lowestcurtesie, when it any way concerned the advancement of his profit.

By this art moneys were raised, and now nothing was wanting to the expedition.
The universal language of the Kingdom being of the wars, and all exercises
military. No person of blood or quality, but prepared for the journey, except
only those whom infancy or extreme age exempted, or the necessary
administration of the Common weal. And all they who went emulated, each other
in the glory of their armor, the richness of their pavilions, the bravery of
their horses furniture, and servants apparel. Every man being held so far to
recede from honor, as in his preparations he expressed an unwillingnesse to the
business.

The army consisted of fifteen hundred men at arms, fifteen thousand
Archers, eight thousand common Soldiers, beside three thousand Pioners
appointed to guard the ordinance and the carriage. Three thousand good
soldiers were sent into Britain, to join with his forces, and assault
France on the other side.

All things disposed in so full a readiness, the King sent over to the Duke of
Burgundy, to acquaint him with the state of the army; and to know in what
forwardness businesses were on that side. Who returned answers full of
confident promises, and exhortation to the King to make all possible haste
over, the Summer coming on a pace; which if past further without action, would
endanger the loss of the whole expedition for that year. He assertain'd him
moreover of certain Towns under the government of the Count S. Paul, which
should be surrendered into the Kings hands, for retreat to the English upon any
occasion of the badnesse of weather or fortune. And indeed how weak soever the
Duke knew the condition of his army, yet fearful he was to express it; least
the King should take advantage to give over the undertaking. The Kings nature
being known diseased so much with the love of peace, that the Duke was justly
suspicious how sound soever it appeared for the present, it might upon the
least distemper fall into a relapse.

Upon these assurances from the Duke, the King gave order that all his Forces
should repair to London: Whence after some few months spent in preparations,
he marched toward Dover. But before he took shipping, that the progress of the
War might be the more successful, the beginning was made according to the
old heroicke strain of bravery. For the King sent a Herald over with a letter
of defiance to Lewys of France: in which he was required to surrender up to the
King of England, the Realm of France, as due to him by the laws of
inheritance, and violently wrested away from Henry the sixth, by Charles the
seventh, and as unjustly possessed by Lewys. By which voluntary resignation of
the Crown, was showed how without effusion of blood, the King of England
should be enabled to restore the Clergy, and Nobility to their ancient
greatness and privileges, and the Commons to their liberty: Of which they had
all been so cruelly deprived, by the injurious usurpation and tyrannical
government of Charles and Lewys. It shovved likewise how far the Kingdom
of France in general, would by this receive benefit, considering it would be
eased of all those many and unsupportable exactions, which by those covetous
Princes, had been laid upon it. It concluded with a threatening of all the
mischiefs accompany war, and an absolute despair of all future mercy, or
care to be had of Lewys his provision; if upon so fair an admonissiment, and
summons given he refused to yield the Kingdom.

This Letter says Comines (an Author of that time, happy in vvriting many
cunning particulars of the Princes he served, but rude in the art of History,
and ever blemishing the glory of our Nation) was penned so elegantly both for
language and matter, that he believed it was beyond the abilities of an
English wit. A bold and ridiculous censure. For how could he who was borne no
Native of France, and never had been instructed in any learning, judge of
language? Or how of the witty contrivance of the Letter; since in his own
History, which is received by the world with so universal an applause, there
is an apparent defect in order and method? And without vanity our Nation may
assume to it self the praise, considering the narrow limits of the Island, to
have produced as many Scholars admirable in all degrees of knowledge, as any
Country on this side the Alps. Neither was that age (though according to the
necessity of the time, more expert in arms then arts) without excellent wits
famed for literature. But this digression the reader must pardon; a sense of
our Nations honor thrust my pen out of the way, if this be from the purpose.

Whatsoever the Letter was in the composure, it was such in the substance, that
it discomposed King Lewys, and troubled all his imaginations. He read it
softly and fearfully; which was beneath that part of understanding he was most
Master of, even policy it self. For it could not but beget strange
interpretations in the Court, when the message of an enemy delivered publickely
by letter should be kept concealed. The demand must probably be easily
conjectured, and this silent way of answering could not but procure suspicion,
that his resolution might descend to yield more then became a Prince. But in
the manage of this, as in all other businesses, King Lewys delighted to give
order alone, and show his authority independent of any Council, without
perplexing himself at all to satisfy opinion.

Having read the Letter he withdrew himself into a Wardrobe, and commanded the
Herald to be brought to his presence. To whom he in answer to the Letter
said: That he knew the King his Master had not resolved upon this enterprise,
out of his own disposition; but overcome by the solicitation of his people,
and the persuasion of the Duke of Burgundy, and the Count S. Paul. His people
infatuated with a vain presumption of victory, because heretofore the success
of their wars in France had been fortunate, never considering the disparity of
the state of things, or the uncertainety of events, especially where fury and
fortune, two blind powers, bear the wholesway. The Duke of Burgundy, (loving
war for it self, and having rashly engaged himself into many quarrels) out
of desire to draw the King of England into his dangers, or at least at another
cost, to beat the bargain of peace, to a lower rate. The reason why he had so
labored King Edward to take arms, and revive an absolute title to the
kingdom of France, being only for his own preservation which was threatened
by all his injured neighbors, or else as it is reported of people diseased of
the Plague, in envy to the health of other Nations desirous to infect even his
nearest allies with the contagion of his quarrel. As for the Count S. Paul,
who had ever subsisted by dissimulation and setting division between Princes,
whereby his assistance either for the prosecution of the war, or conclusion
of peace might be required as necessary: All his hopes in this quarrel were
only to fish in troubled waters, and by an universal combustion to raise
himself into authority, in regard peace levelled him with inferior Lords, and
made his service of no use.

King Lewys proceeded on to tell him in how miserable a condition the Burgonian
army was, having been broken at the siege at Nuz (a desperate and mad
undertaking) and now returned home, the Soldier destroyed either by the sword
or famine: and that small number escaped, so wretched that the Duke might well
expect protection from the King, but could no way be of power to advance his
purpose. He added how the season of the year, Summer being almost past must
of necessity deter the King from crossing the Sea, and many other arguments
against the present undertaking: As if the Herald being persuaded to quiet by
Oratory; France might have been reprived from war for that year. And to
make him the more his friend, he gave him three hundred crowns, with promise
of a thousand more, if the peace, so much desired by him, took effect.

The Herald overcome much by his persuasions, but much more by his money,
replied. That no travel on his part should be omitted, that might tend to the
service of his Majesty's intentions: And that he, as far as his observation
upon the Kings nature could reach, imagined no great difficulty to bring his
Master to a fair accord: But that, as yet, the motion would be most
unseasonable: Considering that after so vast a charge in levy of an army, and
so universal an applause to the design, his Majesty could not retire, until
at least he had led his Forces into France: and made some appearance of
intending what so constantly he had pretended. He advised him therefore to let
the army pass over to Callice, and thither to send his Herald to desire a
safe conduct for Ambassadors: with order to make addresses to the Lords Stanley
and Howard, and himself. And that the way should be prepared so plain for
King Lewys his purpose, that there should be no impediment at the worst to a
fair respect: if not to a full satisfaction of his desires.

All this discourse past in private; In public there was caution, by the
Kings strickt command given, that no French man should have any communication
with him: And soon as possibly, he was dismissed with many fair words, and
thirty Else of crimson velvet for reward. The King after his departure,
expressing in his look and carryage, much cherfulness and courage, either
comforted by the faint hopes our Herald gave him, or else cunningly
dissembling his fears.

The order of this discourse between them, is delivered to us as a high reach
of policy in King Lewys. But to an indifferent understanding it appears
nothing but the ordinary wit of cowardice: and certainly how covetous soever
the necessity of his occasions made him to buy peace, yet his manner of
traffic at this time was beneath the spirit of a Prince. For although his
largess to the Herald wrought the wished effect, yet he might have been
deceived by him, and by his so earnest desire to avert the present war, have
endangered it much more fierce upon him. Neither could it be imagined common
discretion to commune his fears to an enemy, who might perhaps betray them to
the scorn of the English army; or to negotiate peace with a Herald (though
even persons of much worth and understanding) yet commonly remote from the
knowledge of the inwarder resolutions of state, But the manage of this
business thus, took a good effect, and that concurring in a Prince, whose
other actions were pollitickely ordered, made it have so happy a censure.

Upon return of the Herald, the King embarked for Callice, and after him
followed his army. Which was transported in certain slat bottomed boats of
Holland and Zeland, by them usually called Scuts, lent as before covenanted by
the Duke of Burgundy. And notwithstanding the commodiousnesse of the vessels
and the multitude, being five hundred in all, three weeks were they in their
passage, among all the forces not being one page. Which as it instructs us in
the vast numbers of the Soldier, so does it in the strength and power; in
regard they were all able men, who undertook this enterprise; and who came not
to learn but to make proof of their knowledge in arms.

Soon as he heard they were certainly a shore, the Duke in all haste came to
congratulate the Kings safe landing, and happy arrival of the army: for there
was just ground for fear, that the French Navy might have endeavored to
trouble their passage. But the Duke coming with a very small train, much
afflicted the expectation of the English* who thought to have seen him march
to meet them with five and twenty hundred men at arms well appointed, beside a
large power of horse and foot: As by his Ambassadors and his own Articles
had so amply and frequently been promised. But to take away this suspicion from
them for fear it might any way drive back their thoughts toward England; he
told them that his so private coming to the King, was only to express his
joy for the Kings safety and theirs: and that his army was further in the
Country, so well prepared for the present design; that they should have no
reason to think him any way to have boasted. He therefore invited them to
march up into the Land, where they might be better accomodated, and conducted
the King to Bullen: A Town which having been heretofore morgaged by the
French, to Phillip Duke of Burgundy, with a large part of Picaray; was
notwithstanding the often tender of the money by Lewys, still detained violently
by Duke Charles. There he gave the English a free intertainement, and still
kept their expectation high. From thence he went with them to Peron, another
Town of Picardy kept upon the same terms. Into which he admitted but few of
the better sort of the English, and over those too he carried a watchful eye:
The army forced to lodge in the field, which was the less inconveni*
convenient in regard of the Season of the year, and the commodiousnesse of
pavilions and tents, with which they were so plentifully furnished. The Duke
perhaps loath to trust the army in possession of so important a place, least
their expectation irritated they might attempt to him some trouble. To Peron
the Count Saint Paul sent to congratulate the Kings arrival in France, to
promise all service to his enterprise, and his towns to his use and command.
Whereupon the King removed to Saint Quintin, over which Saint Paul commanded
there to accommodate his Army; till the Dukes forces were in readiness to take
the field. But as some over-hastie Troops having got the start of the Army
came confidently toward the gates, expecting to be received, if not with
triumph, at least with all the demonstrations of joy; the Artillery from the
town shot against them, and some of the Garrison issued forth to skirmish, in
which two or three of the English perished. This appearance of hostility from a
Confederate, confirmed the former jealousy of the Army, and raised a strange
murmr both against S. Paul, and the Duke. Which increast by the difficulties
of a tempestuous night, with which the English after were troubled: For an
extraordinary rain fell, and made the so open lodging very unpleasing, with
danger of diseases to the Army.

The Duke of Burgundy opposed against this discontent, with his authority; but
in vain: For not able to give satisfaction for his own weakness and breach
of promise, he was more disabled to clear suspicion from another. Whereupon he
took his leave of the King, entreating his and the Armies patience for a
while, till he brought his Forces to join with them, and a full account from
the Count S. Paul, of his Garrisons demeanure at S. Quintin.

But this his departure compared with the former carriage of things, begot yet
a stronger doubt of their intentions in the English, who being strangers in
that place, and not having any particular arm in conduct of the business; but
only a general resolution to regaine France, interpreted these delays and
false play to direct treason. And began openly to inveigh against their own
folly in confiding on the promises of such, who indevored not the glory of the
English name, or the Kings title; but only their own safety. For preservation
of which, under a specious pretext of recovering a Kingdom, they had seduced
them into a strange Country, in hope hereafter to sell them to the French. And
although this discourse were only in the mouth of the common Soldier; yet did
the thoughts of the Commanders participate with the vulgar; though not so
freely opened For hitherto there had been no assurance given of any real
intention either in Burgundy or Saint Paul.

The much indignation expressed by the English upon this occasion was thought a
strange kind of rude ignorance, and a note even of barbarism. Which censure
savoures too much of malice; considering it could not be judged blind
presumption induced our Nation to this undertaking; the State, for it, having
the fairest appearence of human reason, and the religion of the strongest
oaths. And if the unexpected treachery of S. Paul engendered choler; why should
this passion be so contemptible; since an injury from a friend, is ever quicker
and sharper to the sense; and all nations removed from their own seats upon
dangerous adventures, are prone to suspicion. And for ignorance in the Art of
war. ^ see not how by malice it self it can be obtruded upon the English;
since their only misery was too much experience in arms; which ever begets
knowledge. Neither could they be but skillfull even in the militar exercise of
the Frecnh, few of the Soldiery who were now of any age, but their youth had
been bred up and instructed under the command of that great Captain Talbot
Earl of Shrewsbury and others: Not full twenty years expired, since we turned
our swords upon our selves, and gave France liberty to recover breath.

But this delatory way in the Duke, and treachery in the Count, prepared the
army to a good thought of peace: And brought the two confederates, into more
hatred then an open enemy. So that when an Herald came from King Lewys, he was
received into the English Camp with much humanity; and friendly invited by the
Soldier, to refresh himself with wine and meat, till the King, who was then
at dinner, were at leisure to give him audience. For Lewys, following the
instructions of our Herald, soon as he understood King Edward was landed, and
had heard likewise of some disgusts, appearing between him and the Duke;
resolved to send to him, and attempt to persuade a peace: But so poor was he
in the outward ceremonies of Majesty, that no Herald attended on his Camp:
whereupon he was enforced to suborne a fellow, of whose wit and confidence he
had taken some notice, to act the part* Who having received full instructions
from his Master addressed himself to the Lords Stanley and Howard, and the
English Herald, by whose aid being brought to the King, ^e hansomely
delivered his message. The effect of which was: To show the great desire the
King his Master had to live in perfect amity with all neighboring Princes, but
above all with his Majesty of England, as who in the extent of Empire, and his
own Prowess was most considerable. That he had much reason to believe the
present war had not received the first life in England, especially not in the
disposition of the King; which (as he was informed) abhorred the unnecessary
drawing of Christian blood. That they who had first hatched this quarrel, did
it only with their neighbors danger to procure their own safety, and when
they had made an advantageous peace, to conspire with him, who before had been
the common enemy, for beating back their best friend the English. That he
doubted not but that his Majesty would suddenly find good ground for
suspicion, when he should perceive the Duke of Burgundy, not able to bring
into the field one entire regiment. All his Forces having been utterly broken
upon desperate services; to which an innate love to the war had madly engaged
him. Then he proceeded to excuse his Masters succouring the faction of
Lancaster: To which he protested he never gave comfort for it self, but only
for the Earl of Warwickes sake. Whom he supported only to affront Burgundy,
whose irreconciliable enemy Warwick had ever professed himself. And if he had
inclined more to favor King Henry, he might well excuse it, in respect of his
near kindred to him and his wife Queen Margaret, and something too in reason
of state, to oppose Burgundy who pretended to be a friend (how false soever he
proved to the house of York. That if his Majesty would be pleased to search up
to the very head of this business, he shall find more streams of assistance
to have flowed from Burgundy then from France to King Henry; Duke Phillip and
this Duke (till his marriage with the Princess Margaret) having most
passionately labord the supportation of that family, to which they were so
near in kindred. The conclusion was to desire his Majesty to grant a safe
conduct for a hundred horse, in whose company should come Ambassadors enabled
with larger instructions, and who should make proposal of such conditions, as
could not be rejected by the King or Kingdom of England, since they should be
for the honor and profit of both: Unless it would better stand with his
Majesty's liking to assign a place of treaty in some village between both
armies, to which they might jointly send Commissioners.

This message delivered in a soft tone, expressing much humility, and ever
ascribing to the Kings greatness of Spirit and the nations glory; together
with promise to make overture of conditions both honorable and profitable;
begot a favorable audience. And many of the great Lords, who had plentiful
revenues at home, were as forward as the King to listen to peace, and forsake
unnecessary dangers abroad. Neither did the greatest statists dislike a
treaty, considering that all our wars in France had rather purchaste fame
then treasure to our Kingdom, and when our Soldier returned home, their
scarres were greater then their spoils. And howsoever we had at staits got
possession of the largest territories in France, yet still we retired back
again: As if the devine providence had decreed to have our Empire bounded with
our Seas. Moreover they who affected the happiness of a Kingdom and loved
their own country, desired rather France under a foreign governor, least if
in possession of our King, England being the less both in extent and
fertility, might be reduced to the condition to a Province, and live in
obedience to a Deputy, enriching the greater Kingdom with her tribute. Other
consirations likewise of the present state of the wars, prevailed to get
content for a treaty, whereupon with reward the Herald was dismissed, a safe
conduct granted, and the place for the Commissioners appointed in a Village
near Amiens. For the King were nominated, the Lord Howard, Sir Anthony St.
Ledger, and Doctor Morton: for the French, the bastard of Burbon, Admiral of
France, the Lord Saint Peire, and the Bishop of Evereux.

This at the first meeting brought almost the treaty to a conclusion, for on
both sides they brought minds disposed to peace. And although the English
Commissioners at first demanded the Crown of France as due to the King by
right; from which in honor he could not recede; and afterward with much
appearance of difficulty condescended to be content with Normandy and Guien,
yet they themselves knew well Princes never use to part with Countries upon
treaty, before the battle has imposed a necessity to yield. And indeed
the English expected not that Lewys would be frighted out of so important lims
of the body of France, only upon the braving of an enemy. Soon this first
flourish of businesses came to more easy terms. Edward desired to be gone
without loss of honor, Lewys to have him gone with as much reputation as he
desired. Edward had occasion of money, and Lewys was willing to make him a
bridge of Gold from Callice to D^ver, whereon to carry back his Army. And
shortly to both their contents an absolute atonement was made. Whereby
threescore and fifteen thousand Crowns were to be paid to King Edward before
his departure out of France, and fifty thousand annually.

Concerning the annuitie of fifty thousand Crowns, there is much controversy
among French and English writers about the name. They call it a Pension, wea
Tribute. And certainly the later (to speak without partiality to our selves)
has in it much more propriety of language. For a Prince who overawed by a
powerful Army mediates by deprecatory massages to divert the battle, and
afterward buys his safety not only with a present Sum, but an annual
payment cannot have a freer name then tributary. And as for pensions they are
granted upon petition to the poorer and weaker, not upon fear to the mightier.
But to compare the greater actions of Princes to the customs of Subjects: The
threescore and fifteen thousand Crowns was the fine King Lewys paid for
France, and the fifty thousand annually the rent: Only the farm was too
mighty to be set, and the tennant too strong and stubborn ever to quit
possession to his Landlord.

Then for establishment of future peace (that posterity might partake in the
benefit of this accord) it was concluded that the Princess Elizabeth, eldest
daughter to King Edward, should marry with Charles the Dolphin Son to Lewys:
And for her present maintenance five thousand Crowns from France to be paid in
the Tower of London; and after the expiration of nine years, she and the
Dolphin to be invested in the Duchy of Guyen. And that on the English side
there might be no fraud; upon payment of the first sum the Lord Howard and
Sir John Cheinie Master of the Horse, were to remain in hostage, until the
Army were returned into England. But that the King might not seem to forget
his confederates, the Duke of Burgundy and Britain were comprehended if they
would accept the peace. The Count S. Paul was abandoned in this treaty, as an
efficiall servant and subject to the Crown being Constable of France; and who
by his dissimulation and treason, had most offended the nature of our King. And
usually thus to reconcile great Princes, lesser are offered up for sacrifice.

This peace was generally received by the Army with applause, as by people who
began to consider no victory before the battle certain, and in the battle
much hazard. Only the Duke of Gloucester, who stood aloof off on the other
side, for honor frowned at this accord; and expressed much sorrow, as
compassionating the glory of his nation blemished in it. He repeated his
jealousy of the worlds opinion, which necessarily must laugh at so chargeable
a preparation to attempt nothing: And scorn either the wisdom or courage of
the English; when they shall perceive them in so full numbers, and so well
armed to pass the Sea, after a defiance sent, and challenge to a Crown to
return back without drawing a Sword: Moreover to forsake the amity of so
constant friends, and in extreme necessity to betray them beguiled by a
common dissembler: whose shifts and tricks of state, like the slights of hand
in juglers, are discovered, and wondered at by those fools only, whom he
cozens. And what carried with it an appearance of most danger, to necessitate
the Duke of Burgundy to a peace with King Lewys, whereby both may hereafter
join in a common league against us: Who by this one act have forfeited all
leagues with our ancient confederates, and frighted any other Princes from
joining with us.

With Gloucester agreed many of the Army, who were either dependant upon him, or
who had as unquiet thoughts as he, some likewise, who having set up the rest
of all their fortunes upon this gain, found themselves undone in their hopes
because the Princes had drawn statues. But most of a discontented humor, that
maliciously always interprets the actions of Princes to the worst sense. But
the Duke of Gloucester had a further and a more dangerous aim; as who by the
dishonor of his brother, thought his credit received increast, and by how much
the King sunk in opinion, he should rise. And in regard good and quiet men
were delighted in the accord he would be had to the wicked; and unquiet, and
add a luster to his faction by drawing the nations honor to his part.

But why this peace should endure so hard a censure, both at home and abroad is
strange, and above all why King Lewys should ascribe any honor to himself, or
think the advantage on his side* For what eclipse soever the English glory
suffered, certainly the French by a most servile way purchased safety. They
descending beneath the honor of men by money to wave a battle; we being
only faulty in not having performed more then men. For if we consider our
selves subject to the chance of war, why was not an honorable peace to be
preferred? Especially since if we had faild in the success, how wretchedly had
our forces been broken in opinion, and how impossible on the sudden to
reinforce the Army? And if the French had declined the battle into what
necessities had we fallen, the Summer almost paste, and both Burgundy and S.
Paul refusing to let us have towns to winter our men? And if we look upon
the peace it self, nothing is in it disadvantagious to our honor or profit.
Considering it brought not only a great present sum and annual revenue, but
brought it from the then greatest Prince in Christendom enforced by fear. And
for convenience, the marriage of the Kings daughter to the Dolphin, could not
be but esteemed of maine consequence, why then won that apothegme so much
reputation, that reported our King to have gained nine battles in which he
personally fought, and never to have ^ost any but this? Since in this he
overcame a Prince of far greater power then he ever fought with before with
no disadvantage, but that the victory was purchased without blood, which should
be esteemed an addition to the glory of it. And if you cast your eye back upon
the course held in the most famed Empire, and especially in the Roman, which
was the noblest, you shall find they never refused their friendship to any
Prince who supply (as Lewys of France to King Edward) requested it: And took
more glory to have Kings their tributaries, then their Kingdoms farmed out to
a more profitable revenue. But of this enough, and but enough, since it tends
only to vindication of the English honor; which the French vaunted so much to
have suffered in this treaty. In which they think us by their wits miserably
overreacht, and perhaps indeed we were, if the articles be only judged by
their fears, and not by the difficulties of our army at that time, and the
just jealousy of the King that his confederates intended not his but their
own business.

The news of this Peace no sooner came to the Court of the Duke of Burgundy,
but in all have he poasted to the English Camp, attended only by sixteen
Horse. The distraction of his look and gesture expressed the wildness of his
thoughts; so that the whole Army discovered his discontent, before he uttered
it. His first address to the King was, in question of the truth of the common
report that spoke a peace concluded between him and King Lewys? Which when he
was resolved was true, he presently broke into a most passionate fierce
language. Obrayding the King with inglorious sloth; and the indefatigable
courage of former Kings of England: upon whose attempts waited ever the noblest
victory. He made a scornful repetition of the mirth his enemies would make at
his return: as if he had come over with so huge an Army, Merchant like to
traffic for a little money: and the contempt he must needs become to his own
people, when they should perceive the great conquests their contributions have
brought home. And when it was intimated to him, that he and the Duke of
Britain, were included in the Peace: he disdainefully rejected it, protesting
the love he bore the English name, not care of his own safety, had persuaded
King Edward to this enterprise. And to show how little dependancy his Fortune
held on any other, and how without mediation of an allye, he was able to make
his own peace; he vowed to conclude none with France, until the English army
had been three months at home. After he had thrown forth these disordered
speeches, in much discontent he left the King: Who wondered to hear himself
to disdainefully entreated: Having, seldom been accustomed to any language,
but what was pollisht to delight by flattery. But they who misliked the Peace,
commended the spirit of the Duke, overjoyed to hear their unquiet thoughts,
which fear restrained from utterance, so freely spoken.

But the Count Saint Paul, assertained of this accord, was seized upon by a
far other passion. For by dissembling with these three Princes, in hope to
win into love and reputation with the more fortunate; he had offended them
all, so far, that he knew not to which confidently to fly for refuge.
France was irreconciliable, because he had been ever in practice against the
quiet and safety of that state: and who both by the ties of alliance (as having
married the sister of King Lewys his wife) and loyalty as who held much Land in
France, and executed the place of Constable; being obliged to seek the
preservation of his Country; had for many years nourisht treason, and
sometimes brought the Crown it self to the hazard. Then from England or
Burgundy, there was no probability of friendship, both having been deluded by
his promises, and in the last business at S. Quintin, provoked to the highest
indignation. For although the English only sustained the loss in point of
safety, for the present expedition; yet in point of honor, the Duke had his
share in sufferance: He having before the Kings passage out of England,
covenanted for the faith of the Count Saint Paul. But certainly the misery of
a petty Prince is lamentable, and his estate most unsafe, when there is any
jealousy growing between his more potent neighbors. For Neutrality is
incompatible with his fortune, in regard his Country shall then lie open to the
spoil of every army, if he deny to declare himself, and if he declare
himself; he must run the hazard of another Fortune. And oftentimes the very
situation of his Principality enforces him to take part, not with the
stronger or juster; but with the nearer neighboring, as in danger of whose
rage his estate is most subject. But in addition to the misery of his Fortune,
S. Paul had the unquietness of mind, raised up into a high ambition, by the
cunning of wit. For he had so many, and so far fetches in his imaginations,
and of them some had prospered so much to his advantage; that it made him
presumptuous of his abilities to dissemble, and therefore continue in it; till
at last the discovery took away all belief from his after pretentions, and
happily too from his real intentions. But among the greatest of his
misfortunes, is to be reckoned, the time he lived in: For had he not met with
so polliticke a Prince as Lewys of France, who had likewise the start of him in
good luck; he questionless might have attained some one of those many
designs, he so wittily and probably contrived. But in the conduct of their
affairs, Princes shall find a discreet honesty not only toward God, but even
to the depraved World, the safest rule of humane actions. For the absolute
dissolution of a state was never known to happen by observance of faith or
Religion: and seldom in the time of a good Prince, I mean if his goodness
were active, not overruled by evil Counsel to misgovernement.

S. Paul in this distraction of thoughts endeavored to recover a game quite
lost, and made his addresses to the King of England; whom he believed to be of
the easiest nature, and from whom he expected less severity, because the King
had suffered less then the others by his dissimulation. He therefore first
excused the distaste given the English at S. Quintin, casting the whole fault
upon the unhappy rashness of his Soldiers billited in the Town, and the
jealousy of the Townsmen: Then he advised him to be wary of giving too much
faith to King Lewys, who was resolved after the departure of the English army
to observe no covenant: wherefore his safest course would be to demand Eu and
S. Valerie to billet his Soldiers in this Winter; which he was secure Lewys
his fears durst not deny; and by which grant he would not be necessitated to
so sudden a return. Lastly, (observing the avarice of the Kings disposition in
the last treaty) he tendered him the loan of fifty thousand Crowns, and
promise of all faithful service in the future.

But the memory of former unfaithful passages, and desire to enjoy the
pleasures of peace, defend the King so far to these new propositions; that it
ended even in scornful language of the offerer, which drove S. Paul into
utter despair. For the King was not to be remooved from his new begun amity
with Lewys, which every day by the interchange of favors, and by laboring to
excel each other in confidence, gathered increase. For presently upon
conclusion of the Articles between the Commissioners, a truce being made,
until the peace were ratified by the oaths of both the Princes; the English
soldiers had free admission into all the French towns. And one day so great
number of the army went to make merry in Amiens, as might have endangered the
surprisall if there had not been faithful intentions in King Edward. But he
to show the integrity of his mind, and to take away all occasion of jealousy
of any underhand design, sent to King Lewys to entreat him to give order for
restraint, if by entering in so large multitudes the soldier endangered
suspicion: which Lewys (never overcome in Complement) refused with many
protestations of his confidence; only desiring our King, if he disliked the
absence of so considerable a part of his Army from the Camp, to send some
Yoemen of his Crown to guard the gates, in regard he was resolved no French
man should stop the passage of the English. But our King strained his courtesy
much too high, when to out-vye King Lewys his favors, he offered to give him a
catalogue of all the French Noblemen, who had conspired with S. Paul in this
war; and had given faith to revolt to the English. For as in the rule of
common justice, this discovery could give no better an attribute to the King
then that of state Informer; so could it not but infinitely prejudice the
affairs of England; considering it would shut up for ever the passage to all
intelligence, if this peace should chance to break hereafter. And indeed by so
voluntary undertaking that office, which an honest mind thinks it self
unhappy to be forced to, presents his nature to us most ignoble: since this
treason was only intentionall, and as the state of businesses now stood in
France, reconciled to the English, it no way concerned the safety of his new
confederate.

On the other side King Lewys showed himself most affectionate to the English,
when, contrary to the circumspection of his nature, he rejected all the
suspicions of his Council, who wished him to be watchful that King Edward by
pretending this peace, did not betray him to a ruinous security: When likewise
he sent such exceeding plenty of all provision to the English Camp, and
liberally feasted those so innumerable multitudes, who daily resorted to
Amiens. But perhaps some state Critickes will interpret the former in him, not
a good opinion of our faith; but a conceit of a dull ignorant honesty in our
Nation not quick to take advantages: and the later only an obsequious way to
continue us in our former resolution for peace. What ever passion prevaild with
him in other courtesies, I am confident he expressed more Nobleness then in any
other action of his life; When he refused to destroy the English army; having
oftentimes so fair opportunity, by reason of the many disorders the truce
begot.

While these passages of endearement lasted between the two Kings, a place
convenient for an enterview was found out at Picquigny, a Town three leagues
from Amiens, standing upon the River Some. Commissioners to provide there
should be no danger of treason in the place, for the King were the Lord Howard,
and Sir Anthony, S. Ledger: for the French, the Lord of Bouchage and Comines. In
the choice of which place Comines lays a gross oversight to our
Commissioners. For he affirms by reason of a Marish on both sides the causey,
on which the King was to come to the Bridge where the meeting was; his person
might have been in danger, if the French had not meant good faith. And if this
were true, it certainly deserved a signal reprehension; in regard the sad
experience of those times taught, there could not be too much circumspection
at such an enterview: But the success guilty of no infelicity; cleared the
Commissioners either quite from the fault, or from much of the blame.

At the meeting there was as much interchange of courtesy, as could be
between two Princes. The French King was first at the grate (for these two
Lions could not without danger of combat meet but at so safe a distance) and
our King was a Gallant in manage of his body, by bending himself lower at
salutation: In which he expressed youthfullnesse and Court ship. In their
language was much of sweetness and endearing, and in their behavior an
appearance of a congratulatory joy. Each laboring to obtain the victory in the
expressions of a cordial affection; and indeed the maine business took up
lest part of the time. Twelve persons of principal name, attended on each
Prince according to the nature of the Ceremony, out-vying each other in the
curiosity and riches of their apparel. On the English side the Duke of
Gloucester was absent, in regard his presence should not approve; what his
opinion and sense of honor had heretofore disallowed. And that there might be
no fraud nor treason; on the English side were four of the French, and on the
French four of the English: who watchfully observed every word and gesture: So
much jealousy waits upon even the most friendly meetings, and so suspected is
the faith of Princes. Eight hundred men at arms attended on the French King,
on the King of England his whole Army. Which set in battle array to the best
advantage for the eye, afforded a prospect of much delight and bravery to them;
who at a more unfriendly encounter would have trembled at the sight.

The Chancellor of England made an Oration congratulatory for the happy accord:
whereby so much blood was preserved in the veins of both people, and so many
blessings of peace like to enrich both Kingdoms. His congratulation was
intermingled with prophecy of future happiness, which would grow stronger by
the age of time; touching in that upon the marriage of the Dolphin with the
Lady Elizabeth of England. But the good Bishop of Lincoln (for in him was then
the office of Chancellor) in this showed himself a better Orator, then
Prophet. Himself living afterward to disprove his own divination.

After the Oration ended, and the two Kings sworn to the forementioned peace,
King Lewys something wantonly (as who knew how to tune his language best to
King Edwards ear) invited him to take a journey as far as Paris: where if
any of the beauties should make him trespass upon his chastity; the Cardinal
of Burbon (a gentle Ghostly father) should easily afford him absolution. The
King in the pleasure of his look approved the faceciousnesse of the discourse;
and found no great difficulty in himself to admit the off^r.

But King Lewys (who never used mirth but as a preparative for something
serious) having wrought himself into the Kings good liking* and as he thought
facilitated him to grant any request, urged that the Duke of Britain might
not remain in the protection of the English: But that he might be left to his
own defense, against the just anger of the French, whom he had so often
provoked by open confederacies and secret practices. To which the King answered
resolutely that he never would forsake the care of a confederate, who had
maintaind his faith so constantly. And afterward importuned by some great
Lords, imployd to that negotiation by Lewys; he not only showed an apparent
distaste to the motion: but openly professed, that rather then the Duke should be
endangerd in his safety, he would forget all other amities, and pass the Seas
himself to his relief. Which showed a noble disposition in the King and an
advisd judgment: For the Duke had been ever friendly to him in the worst of
fortune, and in his better a most faithful neighbor; and in this enterprise
on France had used no dissimulation, nor in the least carriage of business
betrayed that faith at first he promised. In the protection therefore of him
against the French, *the King showed the gratitude of his memory; as likewise a
polliticke caution that the Crown of France might not grow too potent by
warring with a weaker Prince: whose ruin could not but give to it a dangerous
addition.

But this discourse touching the Duke was in private between the Kings: for
Lewys to show the authority he had over his greatest Lords, had commanded them
to retire when he enterd into this speech. And in treating this business,
which so nearely concerned the policy of his intentions, he showed a great
art; not urging the King so far, as that the denial might come off with a
distaste. But smoothly he gave it over, when he perceived him not easily to be
removed: although with some inward difficulty to find his affection so
constant to the Duke: of whom he had resolved to make a spoil, and to lay the
first stone of his mighty building in his destruction.

He presently therefore diverted his discourse again to ceremony, and after
some short intercourse of courtship they both at the same minute parted from
the grate, and took horse: publicly giving very liberal commendations of
each other. And how ever enterviewes are generally esteemed unsafe for Princes;
in regard the advantage falling of necessity on the one part, throws a
contempt upon the other: yet this was both in probability before and after in
the success most fortunate. For both Princes though of different complexions
had equal preheminences; and by several ways came to stand upon even ground.

King Edward had the advantage in youth, personage, and behavior, which win
suddenly upon estimation: Lewys in the cunning of wit, and authority of his
carriage, which although slowlier, sink deeper in opinion. Edward had a daring
courage ever seconded by a propitious fortune: Lewys a circumspect judgment
which orderd businesses so sure, that he left scarce any thing to fortune.
Edward by his Sword had brought himself to the present greatness of his
state: Lewys by his policy had settled himself in his fathers conquests. And
indeed so apparent was the equality of these Princes, that they both dispaired
to gain any thing by opposition: which made Lewys at any rate desirous to buy
King Edwards return; and Edward willing no more to traffic with Lewys, from
whom nothing was to be got in the way of bargain: What soever the one did by
valor, the other likely to undo by cunning.

This peace by all conjecture was likely to suffer in opinion at home, where by
comparing the fortune of the present with that of former expeditions,
expectation promised it self nothing less then the entire recovery of France.
To prevent which the King had happily, perhaps judiciously (as who foresaw that
the success might end an accord) brought over with him many from London for
their wealth of most reputation in the City. These men whom plenty endeard to
the love of life, soon as he had resolved to decline the present watre, he
causd to be assaulted every hour with new fears: Representing to their
affrighted minds the horror of a battle; the many difficulties of a siege, and
the certainty of a timelesse death if not by the Cannon or the Sword, yet by
the inconveniences of lodging and the weather, which the winter coming on was
likely to be most tempestious: And if beyond hope death were escaped, how
cruel might be an imprisonment, and how deep the ransom. Then he gave
order that the Enemy should be reported of far more danger then indeed he
was, and every night false alarums to be given. And for distrust already held
of Burgundy and S. Paul he let it be augmented in the Army; causing rumors
to be spread abroad that there was treason in them from the beginning of this
enterprise; and that now they were prepared to unite their forces with the
French to the utter destruction of the English.

By which frights he so molded them to his desires, that they writ back to
their friends, the impossibility of any success in the present business, and
the great judgment and fortune of the King, if he could conclude a peace, with
advantage of honor. The example of this policy King Edward bequeathed to
Henry the seventh, who left none of his predecessors arts unpractisd that might
advance either his profit or reputation. And so far this desire of peace and
delight in it spread it self, that when upon the day of the enterview by
accident a white pigeon lighted upon the Kings pavilion; and there pruned it
self after a shower of rain, the Sun shining comfortably, the Soldiers
cried out it was the Holy Ghost, who descended in that form, to show how
grateful the present accord was to heaven. Which interpretation pleased
exceedingly the present humor of the King: Any superstition being nourisht in
the subject, which tended to advance the reputation of their Prince; especially
when his actions are doubtful to be understood.

The night that ensued the enterview many of the English nobility resorted to
Amiens; the French affability, and something too of curiosity inviting them.
The Lord Howard, who was always foremost in his application to King Lewys, at
Supper whisperd him in the ear, that he conceived his Master might be
persuaded without much scruple to make a journey to Paris; where by a friendly
entertainment the new begun amity, might be perfected.

But the wary King had no desire to bid so dangerous a guest to Paris; for
fear the delicacies of the place might invite him, either to a too chargeable
continuance there; or to such a love of the French air, that it might persuade
him to return hereafter thither, though unbidden. He therefore chid his own
overforward straining a complement, and was forced to the invention of an
excuse to take away discurtesie, from denial of that before ceremoniously he
had offered: he answered the Lord Howard thereupon suddenly, and to the outward
judgment seriously, that he was extreme sorry the necessity of his unsettled
state, would not afford him license for so much happiness: being presently to
make an expedition against the Duke of Burgundy. Who was busy in his
preparations against him, so that with safety yet, he could not attend the
pleasures of peace. Which answer gave but a half satisfaction; but the Lord
Howard was devoted to his affairs; and that made the relish of it better with
the King.

But that the King might neither reap all the benefit not yet bear all the
blame of this peace, there were few Lords, great in opinion of the state, but
shared proportionably in the booty. Even the scrupulous Duke of Gloucester
returned not home without a large present both of Plate and Horses. For when he
saw the whole stream of the Army flow into King Lewys; either out of
curiosity, or in policy loath to particularize an enmity upon himself from
so potent a Prince, he went to him at Amiens, where he found a respect
answerable not only to the greatness of his blood, but to the extent of his
judgment and authority.

But with him King Lewys dealt with more circumspection; knowing it impossible
to win ground upon him by any slight or strength of wit. The good affection
of all the other Lords he bought up, according to the ordinary course in
Markets: As they were worth more in the Kings esteemation, so were they at a
higher price with him. The principal men of name who were in pension as we
find them in History, were the Lord Hastings, Lord Chamberlain to the King,
the Lord Howard, Sir John Cheiney Master of the Horse, S. Anthony, S. Ledger,
and Sir Thomas Montgommery. Among these, beside the present gifts, he
annually distributed sixteen thousand Crowns, and exacted from every man an
acquittance for the receipt. Which no man refused, but only the Lord Hastings,
denying absolutely that ever his hand should be seen among the Kings accounts
at Paris; but welcomed still the pension, which without that formalitie was
continued.

At how high a rate King Lewys prized his amity with England by this profate
liberality (a quality so contrary to his parcimonious disposition) is easily
to be judged. But how lawful it was in the receivers, I will not too severely
censure. For although in this Kings reign, as likewise in the time of Henry
the seventh, many of the great Counselors were in pension to Lewys, and
afterward to his Son Charles the eight, yet is hard to judge how it could
agree with the decorum of their dignity: It being much beneath the honor of a
noble mind to owe any part of their revenue to a Prince, whose safety and
advantage must never be in the first place of their care. In peace it may
happily not carry any appearance of disloyalty, because by their good offices
they may deserve that way of gratitude; but in times of jealousy, and
especially of enmity it can no way be allowed. For though the Pensioner give
no underhand intelligence prejudical to his Country; yet by a certain necessity
of gratitude, it stops the freedom of advice, and renders him however
undeserving to the one. Rewards are given for forepast merits, pensions to
retain in future: he therefore who receives a pension, obliges himself
tacitly to the service of two Masters: And oftentimes the second in his
thoughts, is that Prince to whom he owes a natural duty: An extrordinary way
of benefit begetting an extraordinary diligence. And hence proceeds that
malady in the body of a state, which inclines it so totally to one side: that
all injuries how gross soever are connived at from one neighbor; while from
another the least shadow of offense begets mortal war. But if these pensions
be received with approbation of the King, certainly as they are lawful, so
likewise are they less dangerous: for then the state is armed against the
advice of such, whom they know to lean to one side: The crookedness of
counsel being easily discerned, when not boulsterd up with simulation of
integrity.

And questionless the distribution of these Crowns like a dangerous poison
dispersed it in some principal veins of a body, infected the whole Court. And
though perhaps the secret resolutions of the King and state were not betrayed
to him; yet was his intelligence larger than convenient for so cunning a
neighbor: Who out of slight and trivial occurrences, such as were but Chamber
talk, could guess at the most reserved counsels. Neither would those so
apparent affronts offered by him afterward, have been so patiently dissembled;
especially the King knowing him a timorous Prince, and who trembled at the very
thought of a return of the English into France; had not they whose advice was
most listend to, passionately excused him in every charge the more zealous
statists laid to him.

But these mischiefs the years succeeding were guilty of; for the present
the King full of joy and treasure returned toward Callice: And indeed with more
then ordinary haste and caution for fear the Duke of Burgundy should attempt
any thing upon his retreat. But with safety he both came thither, and sayld
to Dover; whence in much pomp he directed his journey to London Upon Black
Heath the Lord Major and the Aldermen in Scarlet, and five hundred Commoners in
murrey received him; and thence with all ostentation of triumph conducted him
through the City to Westminster. And perhaps he gave order the solemnity of
his return should be more glorious, to set off the shortness of his stay in
France, and the small or no honor purchased there. The vulgar for the most part
valuing the glory of the victories according to the information of the Ballad,
and the glittering of the Pageants.

The French King, who ever affected the substance, smild at these huge
shadows: and never quarreld with King Edward what pompous titles soever he
assumed in receiving the forementioned sums of money. Willing that he should
husband his actions of least worth to the greatest advantage of credit with his
people. While he on the contrary, in all businesses never heeded what
judgment opinion gave; and so his ends were effected, cared not by what sordid
or humble means: Whereupon presently after the departure of the English,
notwithstanding the many injuries received from the Duke of Burgundy, he came
to treaty, and suddenly to agreement with him: In many points unexpectedly
yielding; only that he might revenge himself upon the Count St. Paul, for
him he accounted the Conjurer, who by his dissembling charms, had raisd those
so many and so tumultuous spirits against the Crown of France: And till he
were destroyed, King Lewys conceived it impossible to remain safe from civil
or foreign war.

It was therefore agreed between these two Princes that what places had been
wrested away in the former troubles, should be immediately restored: and which
of the two could first surprise the Count St. Paul, should within eight days
put him to death; or deliver him up to the discretion of the other. By which
agreement the wretched Lord found how inevitable was his ruin: And considering
the vanity of any hope that might persuade to defend himself against so
potent enemies he enterd into discourse with his own fears, to which he might
make his addresses with more probability of safety. And knowing the
immovable resolutions of King Lewys, and how impossible it was to deceive a
Prince so cunning in the Art; he resolved to make trial of the Duke. Who
disdainefully received the first offers of his service; but in the end,
overcome by importunity he granted him safe conduct: Relying on which he
poasted to him, but soon found his ruin by the want of that faith, which
himself had never observed.

For the Duke notwithstanding the safe conduct, gave command he should be
imprisoned, and not long after delivered him up to the French King. Who caused
process to be made against him; certain Letters written to King Edward and
by him delivered to King Lewys, being the chief articles of accusation, by
which he was condemned: and for which not long after he lost his head. He
embraced death with much resolution, only somewhat astonished to meet it upon a
Scaffold; the manner, not the thing it self, amazing him. But the
officiousness of the King in delivery of those papers to the condemnation of
his wives Uncle, and a confederate was certainly treacherous and ignoble; and
makes his memory sound harsh in the ear of any worthy mind.

And indeed he was on the sudden become so passionate a debtor on a reconcild
enemy* and so passionate an enemy of his late friends: That when he understood
of the treaty of peace at Vervins between the French King and the Duke, he
sent over Sir Thomas Montgomery with instructions if possible to break it off.
Who urged that the Duke should not be admitted to treat of himself, but
only as mentioned in the King his Masters peace: that if the Duke refused to
treat in that manner, and the King any way suspected his own strength; his
Master would the next Summer cross the Seas and join his forces with him:
Conditionally that half the wages of his Army might be defraid by the French,
for whose service the war was to be undertaken; and that he might be allowed
fifty thousand crowns annually in respect his loss would amount to the
value, by reason the English Woolls at Callice could during that time have no
vent into the Netherlands. To such an over officious friendship did his new
malice to Burgundy, and the counsel of King Lewys his great pensioners
incline him; that he voluntarily offered without respect of glory or hope of
profit, to fight like a journeyman for a Prince, whose growth in power could
not be but most unsafe even to him, and dangerous to his kingdom.

This embassy King Lewys received with appearance of much content,
congratulating the felicity of his own arts, that had brought the King to so
obsequious a respect: but he no way desired to see him any more in France,
especially not to pay for his presence, whose absence he had lately bought so
dearly. He therefore returned many thanks for the offered favor; but
withal showed how much too late it came, in regard the truce was already
concluded between him and the Duke: from which being now sworn to it, he
could recede neither in honor nor religion. But that the world might
understand how scrupulous he had been in preservation of the King of Englands
reputation; the present truce varyed not in one point from that sworn at
Picguinie: except only that the Duke was admitted to article for himself
apart: which indeed was the maine thing the King endeavored to have prevented;
since by articling apart, the Duke showed his independance; and that the
English by their arms, had no way advanced his business.

But that this answer might endanger no misinterpretation he liberally
presented the Ambassador, and sent over with him the two hostages, the Lord
Howard, and Sir John Chiney. For King Lewys continued still in much caution to
offend the King, least perhaps he and the Duke of Burgundy, though now asunder,
might like a limb broken and set again, knit the faster. He was therefore
diligent to increase every day new discontents between them, and to preserve
the English, in their amity firm upon any terms: knowing the Duke by no
policy ever to be reduced to a perfect friendship. And so far had his
cunning and pensions prevailed, that nothing was more in the vote of the
English; then to preserve King Lewys safe in his estate at home, and noble in
reputation with us. But among all the ties which kept the King surest to him,
the hope of marrying the Dolphin with his Daughter; and this way at least to
settle the Crown of France in his Posterity, most prevailed. Of the reality of
which article, the French permitted not the smallest occasion to be given for
suspicion.

This intention of entering into war with the Duke of Burgundy, being crossed:
the unquiet Nature of some Princes, ever affecting to beget trouble to
themselves, that the King might feel no perfect rest, receives the former
jealousy concerning the Earl of Richmond. But why the reducing him into this
power, should so much perplex the state is beyond reach; unless it were a
divination of future accidents, which instructed the Kings fears to expect
danger from him: who neither in the point of justice nor strength was for the
present considerable. For if we look upon his faction at home; the civil
wars had ruined them so low, that no person of authority had any relation to
him, except the Lord Stanley: who being Father in law to him might perhaps wish
his fortunes well, but bore a most faithful mind to the King, in whose
especial favor he continued to the last: And if we consider him as his
neerenesse in blood to King Lewys might render him formidable from abroad:
Certainly there was no just ground for suspicion: The French being so lately
entered into a particular amity with England, and never having afforded either
comfort or countenance to the young Earls exile. Then for any claim to the
Crown, the King could not fear him, his title being of so impure and base a
metal, it could no way endure the touch. His Mother, by whom only he could
pretend, heir indeed of the house of Sommerset, but not of Lancaster, in
regard the stream of this descent was poisoned in the very Spring. For John of
Gaunt having entertained an affection to Katherine Daughter of Sir Pain de
Ruet, during her attendance on the Lady Blanch his first wife: in the life time
of his second the Lady Constance, his affection grew into a nearer familiarity,
and so happy was he, that his familiarity proved not barren: his Mistress (for
to what a servitude does lust betray a sinner?) making him Father of three
Sons* and a Daughter. The Duke zealous to reward any that had so well
deserved, married his bedfellow to Sir Otes Swinford, and either through
impotency or conscience afterward refrained her company. Some years past (she
having buried her Knight, and he his Duchess) in gratitude to her former
merits being now grown very old, he took her again to his bed, with the
lawful ceremonies of the Church: And thus his ancient Concubin became his new
Bride: Having righted her honor, to leave no monument of their sin to
posterity, he labored the ligitimation of the children: and so far in the
time of Richard the second, prevailed; that both the sentence of the Church and
Parliament pronounced them lawful, and enabled to inherit the Lands of their
Father, in case his issue by his former wives should fail. The eldest Son of
the three, thus ligitimated, was John created Earl of Sommerset, Father of
John Duke of Sommerset, whose sole Daughter and heir Margaret, married Edmond
of Haddam, Earl of Richmond, whose Son Henry was now the mark at which all
the arrows of the Kings suspicion aimed.

By this Pedigree, to the eye at first appears so me dawning of a title, but
certainly it is a false light, such as oftentimes deceives the credulous
traveller. For the legitimation by the Church was to take away as much of
scandal, as possibly, from the children: and a dispensation only for the
benefit of the bastards, without prejudice to the right of any other. For these
bastards were not of the common nature, such as after marryage may make
legitimate: being not Natural but Spurious; begot in adultery on the one side,
and consequently incapable of any benefit by dispensation. Add to this that
not being of the whole blood (according to the common Law of England) the house
of Sommerset was farther of from inheriting any title from King Henry the sixth,
then the most remote of the line of York. Lastly, in the very legitimation it
self, the children were only made capable to inherit the estate of their
Father. The Crown being never mentioned: and for the Duchy of Lancaster they
could not pretend, that being the inheritance of the Lady Blanch his first
wife, from whom they no way descended, Neither were the Princes of the house of
Sommerset ever numberd among the Plantaginets, or ever obtained so much as to
be declaired heirs apparent, if Henry the sixth; and his Son Prince Edward
should extinguish without issue. As Mortimer had got to be before in the reign
of Richard the second, and Delapole after, during the usurpation of Richard the
third. And if there were any cause of suspicion from the branches of that
Family; then was the Duke of Buckingham, much more to be feared: Who was by his
Mother heir of Edmond Duke of Sommerset, and himself a Prince, mighty in
descent otherways from the Crown, as being heir likewise of Thomas Duke of
Gloucester, younger Son to Edward the third. Moreover in the faction of a great
kindred, and dependancy of a multitude of tennants, far more to be suspected:
Then an exild Lord, who claiming by his Mother, could during her life have no
color of a Title.

But the King found the wound of this jealousy ranckle in him, and nothing but
Richmonds apprehension to heal it. He therefore most earnestly solicited the
Duke of Britain, by his Ambassadors to return him into England. Their
motives were, the much good will the Duke owed their Master, who never would
forsake his protection; though several ways and at several times most
importunately provoked. That he had in answer to the French requests to that
purpose protested; that if the Duke were any way endangerd by them, personally
to cross the seas, and make the quarrel the same, as if his own kingdom
were invaded. Then for the innocence of the Kings intentions toward the Earl;
they affirmed that so far from malice the desire to have him returned into
England was, that it merely tended to his present safety and after honor. In
regard his Majesty would not only restore him to the possessions of his
Ancestors, but endeare him in a nearer tie, even by the marryage of one of his
own daughters to him, and this blessed way absolutely to root up all the
ancient rancor between the houses of York and Sommerset. This was the
pretention, which though the King no way intended, yet the Almighty afterward
made good: to instruct after times, that the deep mysteries of cunning Princes
are mere illusions compared with true wisdom; and the disposition of
kingdoms is the work of Heaven.

By this simulation and tender of a large sum of money (for the King had learnt
how to traffic by example of King Lewys) the poor Earl of Richmond was
delivered up to the Ambassadors; and immediately by them conveyed to St. Malos,
the next haven Town, where instant preparations were made for his
transportation into England. Here fortune, or what is less uncertain, the
wind took compassion on his affliction (for the very imagination of the ruin
he was betrayed to, had thrown him into a violent Fever) and hindered the
Ambassadors from taking ship. Where while they remaind joyful in the
success of their undertaking, Peter Landois Treasurer to the Duke, in
appearance of a ceremonious visit, but indeed to contrive the Earls escape
most officiously came to them. For no sooner had the Duke given up this
innocent victim to be sacrificed, but some of the Court sensible of the Law of
Nations and their Masters reputation, to himself related the injury and
dishonor of this action. And so far aggravated the perpetual infamy that
would cloud his fame by selling his guest to whom he had promised safety and
protection; that the Duke repented the delivery of him, and advised Landois by
some art to regaine him.

And indeed Landois undertook the employment readily, willing perhaps to
gain the honor of doing one good deed among the multitude of his mischiefs:
and likewise to revenge himself upon the evil memory of the Ambassadors, who
had forgot by their money to make him an instrument in effecting this treason.
This villain (for he was fittest for the business) so ordered the matter,
that while he entertaind the Ambassadors in a most serious discourse, the
Earl was carried into Sanctuary; and no notice given them till he was beyond
their reach. Which when they understood, finding themselves defrauded of so
great a bargain, and even of the money laid out in the purchase: indignation
transported them into bitter language against Landois. But he excused himself
of the practice, and laid the whole fault of the misfortune upon their
negligence: desiring that their carelessness in loosing a prey, might not be
cast as a crime upon that respect he had showed them in his visit. And when the
Ambassadors importuned him by his authority to force the Earl from the place:
he pretended religion to the Sanctuary, which if he should out of honor to
the English but offer to violate; so great was the veneration the people hold
it in, that they would tumultuously rise to prevent so bold a sacrilege. He
advisd them therefore to give over this game lost past play; and prepare their
excuse as cunning as possible to satisfy their King. And for his part, to show
the zeal he bore to the affairs of England, he would take such order (and
he knew it would stand with the approbation of his Master) that the Sanctuary
should be severely guarded; whence if the Earl endeavored an escape it should
be into some place of safety, where he should be strictly imprisond, till the
King of England were pleased otherwise to dispose of him. With this plausible
discourse Landois left the Ambassadors to sail over, whom the wind, now too
late, servd to carry back. But the King, notwithstanding the fairest colors
they could lay upon the business, and promise on the Dukes part to keep the
Earl safe from escape, cast upon them a sower look. Misfortune to a Minister
of state procuring for the most part as much disgrace, as if he had been
perfidious in the practice.

Frustrated of his hope to gain Richmond into his power, but yet in part freed
of all danger threatening from him, the King to give a luster to that peace he
had settled, began to addict himself to a profuse hospitality: A magnificent
way of greatness, in which the Monarchs of this Kingdom have in all ages
exceeded, all the Princes of Europe. And upon all solemn times, when cessation
from labor licenceth the vulgar to admire the glorious outside of a state, he
showed a particular bravery to the eye: by presenting as well martial
exercises in Iusts, Tiltings, Tournaments, Barriers and the like; as the softer
entertainements of wit; full of an elegant curiosity for that time, subject to
too much tumult and noise to give birth to the best inventions. But of all
solemnities the feast of Saint George, Patron of the noblest Order of the
World, was celebrated with most splendour and pomp. Of which our common
Cronicles are so liberal in the relation, that they spare my pen the labor.

Among these delicacies of peace, the King forgot not to please his lust (the
bastard of an idle security;) And indeed impossible almost it was, that his
appetite flattered daily with all the curiosities of luxury, should contain it
self severely within the bounds of modesty. For as by his other actions we
may judge, how little trouble his conscience put him to; and therefore not
easy to be frighted from sin by Religion: so on the part of his body, they
who familiarly knew him affirm) that never man was framed by Nature more apt
to the exercise of love, and whom amorous Courtship did less missebecome. But
Almighty God took not his natural pronenesse to lust, for an excuse; but
severely punished him in his Sons: Who were both dispossessed of the Kingdom
and their lives by their unnatural Uncle: There being so much appearance of
right in the Usurper by their Fathers incontenency; that even an Act of
Parliament was made to bastardize them. And this sad judgment was provoked by
the disorder of his lust: to which how can we wonder if so easily he declined,
since Majesty seldom admits of any instructions to a severe correction of the
appetite? Ambition to extend their dominions, has been ever recorded the
noblest virtue in Princes: Who to lessen a neighbor state too mighty in the
growth of Empire, or in hope to conquer some territory, to which the
convenience, not the justice makes good the title; without scruple hazard large
armies of their people: And confidently boast the victory, though the war
were grounded upon injustice.

While King Edward lived at home glorious in his quiet, this doctrine was
listened to by Charles Duke of Burgundy, in following which he made so many
injurious and unfortunate attempts. For after his peace concluded with France,
he directed his whole power to the destruction of the Duke of Lorraine. A
Prince who in favor of King Lewys, to whose fortune he had devoted his
service, defied the Duke of Burgundy, when he lay at the siege of Nuze. And
though this design against Lorraine, might carry with it all probability of
success; considering the narrowness of the Duchy: Yet as it ought in
judgment to have been weighed with the supports of France and other
confederates in Germany, it might bear a face of much more difficulty. For it
had not only been a perpetual dishonor to King Lewys, but even a
disadvantage to his affairs, to permit a free spoil of so near an adjoining
country to the Duke of Burgundy: whom for the present a blind revenge
transported beyond reason, and made him war with all cruelty, not only
against the Duke of Lorrain, where the victory might in some measure recompense
the cost; but against the Switzers, because they had sided with Lorrain, and
made some irruption into the territories of the Burgonian. The Switzers, a
poor people, unknown to the world, confined to a miserable life among their
cold and barren mountains: only proud in opinion they had of their liberty,
which was rather maintained by the fortune of the country inaccessible almost
to an invading army, then by the valor of the people. Against these he led his
forces, rejecting all those submisse and deprecatory Embassies sent by them,
and that free acknowledgement of their poverty, when they protested all the
wealth of their Country sum'd up to the highest value, would not be able to
buy the Spurs and Bridle-bits in his Camp. Fortune in the beginning of this
enterprise flatterd him to a continuance of the war with prosperous success,
intending by that glorious bait only to angle him to destruction. For soon
the chance of war turned, and in three battles in one year the unfortunate
Duke was overthrown: In the last of which fought before Nancy, he was slain.
A Prince who by his alliance, and continual intercourse of business, had much
relation to the English: Whose honor and recovery of whose large territories
in France, he certainly from his heart desired And when he invited King Edward
into France to that purpose, and there failed him of his promised succors, it
proceeded doubtless not from any underhand practice or remissness in the
undertaking; but only by the misfortune of his Army, somewhat broken not long
before at the siege of Nuze. He was therefore a friend to us, if an ambitious
man be said a friend to any: or rather so great an enemy to Lewys of France
that he loved us only in opposition; and desired our prosperity, because it
could not grow without ruin to the French. How just a governor he was in
peace appertains little to our knowledge, and the world had little leisure to
consider; he was so everlastingly in Arms: In which as he showed great
courage and judgment, so likewise did he commit much injustice. And who will
examine what license war gives to injury, and how it imposes almost
necessity of doing wrong; may in some sort excuse him. But his being ever in
quarrels, into which he entered and continued, as his passion, not his reason
directed him: presents his spirit daring but turbulent, and his valor rash and
inconsiderate, and takes away all pardon from his so many errors. The two great
blemishes upon his memory, are his cruelty at Granson in Lorrain, where in
cold blood he caused all the inhabitants to be killed, the town being yielded
to his discretion: And his perfidiousnesse to the Count Saint Paul whom
notwithstanding a safe conduct he delivered up to execution into the hands of
King Lewys. The good men who ascribe punishment to the justice of heaven,
observe that after these two crimes his fortune left him, and with dishonor
death overtooke him, when he least expected it. Having at that time in his
imaginations so many and so vaste designs, that scarce the age and fortune of
man had length and power enough to accomplish them all.

The death of this Prince, having begot so much business in his life, diversely
affected all the neighbor countries. Generally according to the custom in
private families, every state entertained it with such a passion, as the
advantage or disadvantage appeared by it to themselves. Some few out of love to
his person, hope of marriage with his daughter, or compassion of humane
accidents grieved at the report: But most expressed their sorrow, for the
liberty King Lewys had attained by it, no man living now of power and will to
oppose him, should he attempt injury, and offer violence to his weaker
neighbors. For King Edward was so infatuated by his Arts, that he never
startled at this great accident, nor looked how nearely it might concern his
own safety. So that notwithstanding he were daily certified of new
undertakings by King Lewys, he rested quiet, and gave free reins to his
injurious ambition. Who soon as he understood of the death of Duke Charles,
and perceived how open his countries lay to an invader: Pretended the Duchy of
Burgundy for want of heirs male devolved back to the Crown of France, and by
the arms of the Duke of Lorrain without further dispute took it in: In the
mean time himself seizing upon all Picardie, which for many years had
remained in possession of Dukes Philip and Charles. And that he might have yet
more occasion of quarrel with an unsettled Lady unable to withstand his
opposition; he summond the Princess Mary Duchess of Burgundy to come in person
into France to do homage for the County of Flanders, and her other estates
held in chief of that Crown.

But she knowing how unsafe it was to yield her person up to a Prince who made
his advantage of every opportunity, delaid the homage, and stood upon her
guard as strongly, as in so disordered a Country was possible. For though she
were Lady of many opulent and mighty Provinces, able if not to offend yet to
defend themselves against the world; yet were the people stubborn and prone to
rebellion, and who by the weakness of some of their Princes heretofore, had
purchased to themself too large immunities. And indeed scarce any town, but
had or pretended to have such prerogatives, as debased all authority of
government: Which upon every change in state they revived, and endeavored if
possible to redeem themselves from subjection. And this hope, more then ever,
now possessed them, considering the unexperience both of the youth and sex of her
that ruled: so that by appearance of their churlish carriage to the Duchess,
and small preparations against King Lewys, who every day surpised some place
or other; they rather desired to be exposed a prey to an insolent and cruel
enemy, then endure the mild government of their lawful Princess. She
therefore sent Ambassadors to implore aid of King Edward, and declare to him
the urgencie of her present necessities. Who showed, that their Princess the
greatest inheretrix of the world, borne to a large and rich territory; was at
the present in a condition beneath the poorest subject that enjoyd but
liberty: Being detained captive by the hands, which made restraint far more
unsupportable of her own insolent rebels. Her delivery concerned the King of
England in general as a Prince; and in particular, as a neighbor and an
alley. Her tumultuous subjects, who had dared to attempt and act this treason,
took courage from the French Kings declared enmity. An injurious proceeding
in a Prince against a neighbor, which justly provokes all Christendom to
unite in her defense, and punish so barbarous a proceeding in him. That the
ancient league observed with so much Religion between England and the Low
Countries, particularly did require his Majesty's present aid: and a
consideration of what might happen perhaps in his own posterity in the same
nature, did invite him to do favors, as his might challenge to receive them
hereafter. That even in the pollitique discretion of government it was
conceived that nearely it concernd the state of England to provide against so
dangerous an addition of dominion to the French: Considering King Lewys had
already most injuriously wrested away not only Peronne Mountdidier Tournay and
all the rest of Picardie sold heretofore to Duke Phillip: But seizd even upon
Burgundy the inheritance of their Princess. And what expresses the inhumanitie
of the tyrants, and the hated malice of his intentions, sommons her at this
present to do homage personally for Flanders and her other territories. Which
sommons if she obeyes; she certainly betrays her self into an everlasting
captivity or to a necessity to surrender a large part of her inheritance for
redemption: And if she refuses, she indangers her whole estate to the
surprise of a merciless enemy, who never wanted the pretense of justice to
justify spoil and rapine. They farther urged how their Princess was not
only in her person restrained by her own subjects but had not so much as
appearance of any army in the field to oppose the invader. The Soldier being
absolutely destroyed in the former unfortunate battles fought by her father in
Lorrain: And the faith of all the Commanders who remained, bought up by King
Lewys, and turned wholly French, with surrender of the Towns and Forts under
their government. And all hope of any Levies at home vain and false, the
Commons by practice of the French King every where in tumult: and the few who
wished well to their Princess affairs, either not daring to declare
themselves, or suffering death or imprisonment for their faith. They concluded
with entreaty that the King would engage his arms in so just a quarrel;
which as it could not be but most honorable to his name and no way
unprofitable, so likewise would it cast a perpetual obligation upon their
Princess, and devote her power hereafter to his service.

This Embassy carried with it every way so much justice, that it begot a
general approbation. For the opinion was, that England never had so fair an
opportunity to win* honor to the nation, relieve an oppressed Princess,
check an insoleut and unfaithful neighbor, and provide for its own safety.
So that in the Court no person of honor, not corrupted with the French
pension, but passionately desired the undertaking: and thought it necessity in
every point, to begin this defensive war. But the King in so deep a
lethargy that no danger could wake him, nor touch of honor make him sensible;
heard this with a fair respect, and dismissed the Ambassadors with some faint
comfort. And though he could not perceive what a cloud it would be upon his
reputation to permit so foul an injury to the young Princess, and sit still:
yet he resolved to listen to the safer counsels of peace, and believe (how
improbable soever) the many protestations of King Lewys.

Who soon as he understood of these addresses to England, which at the very
first he expected, dispatched his Ambassadors to undo whatsoever had been
wrought by the former solicitation. And whereas the Duchess of Burgundy
persuaded this war by the arguments of honor and a generous pity: He
dissuaded it, by menacing an absolute breach of the peace sworn at Piguignie
whereby the King should be frustrated of his tribute, and the so mighty
marriage of his daughter. He showed farther how it was not only against the
so near amity begun and likely to continue between them and their
posterity, but even against the custom of common confederacies, to hinder a
neighbor Prince in league, when he only attempted the recovery of his own
right. And if the truth of his actions were laid open to the world, it would
appear the re-assumption of those towns into the power of France, what
interpretation soever they might suffer among the ignorant or malicious, was
but an act of justice. Since those many places in Picardie were no way of right
belonging to Duke Charles, but permitted him only, to avoid the continuance of
war: which was notorious to any man who would but call to memory, how they
were morgaged to Duke Phillip. The absolute alienation of them from the Crown
having never been either in the will or power of any French King. Then for the
Duchy of Burgundy; the original grant and the common practice in French
would manifest, that it only was conferd upon the heirs male: which failing
in the present Duchess implies a return of it back to the Crown whence it
past at first by an inconsiderate transaction. Lastly that his taking arms was
only to recover and iustisie his right, and reduce the Princess Mary to
perform her homage, which never was denied by any Earl of Flanders. And if
there be any infidelity or tumult among her subjects; she ought either to
blame the evil disposition of her people to rebellion, or the misfortune of
her own government.

This was the effect of King Lewys his answer at first, which the King was
joyful to have divulged, because it gave his slownesse to action, a spacious
show of justice and discretion. But the relief of the oppressed Lady grew so
much into the vote of the Commonaltie, and even the better sort of people
bended so much to compassion, that the French began to suspect the King might
be induced to undertake her protection. Whereupon new Ambassadors came with
new instructions something more plausible then the former, in which they were
to keep the King upon any terms at home: These offered to his Majesty a full
relation of King Lewys his proceedings hitherto; with promise to refer it
wholly to him, if any violence had been by the license of war committed.
That their Masters aim was so far from injury, that he would submit to
indifferent judgment all the passages in this quarrel: and bind himself to
any restitution, the King of England should order. For all his desire these
Arms was only the reduction of his own, and maintenance of the prerogatives
of the Crown of France. And ever among these excuses he mingled some discourse
concerning the Dolphin, his so forward growth, and the great expectation of
him: something too of the Lady Elizabeth, and the joy all France conceived of
the future marriage. Neither was the ceremony of paying the tribute ever
omitted at the day, nor the great Lords forgotten to be presented with their
precious, and something too of addition to increase their diligence.

By these Arts he won time, a merchandise he then traffiqu'd for, and the
purchase of which so nearely concerned his present design: For it was his, and
certainly a pollitique course, to send often and still several Ambassadors:
who, if in their overtures they were contradictory, laid the fault on their
instructions, and desired respite, till they had some farther understanding of
their Masters intentions: and when any thing new was proposed; they embraced it
entreating only time to inform the state of France. But when by frequent
treating the business was come oftentimes to necessity of absolute
resolution: then suddenly was the Ambassador recalled, and some new person
sent to supply his place, wholly ignorant, or at least pretending to be wholly
ignorant, of all former passages.

At the length when he saw there was an impossibility, farther to dissemble,
by pretending restitution of whatsoever had been wrested away from the
Duchess: He discovered the treachery of his former carriage, and made
propositions advantageous to the Kings profit. Offering if he would pass the
Seas with a full army and join in the quarrel, to defray half the expense
of the war, and never forsake the English, until he had settled them in
possession of Flanders and Brabant: so that the spoil might be equally
divided between the two Kings. In this one overture expressed the deceit of his
former purchase; to make which good he tenderd so great a brokage. But the King
refused this proposition; Not out of conscience unwilling to enter upon estates
to which he had no title: Nor greatness of spirit, disdaining to make
advantage of the misfortune of a Lady oppressed by an over-potent neighbor, and
forsaken by an ungrateful and disobedient people: But only out of
consideration of the difficulty. Since the towns were of strength to make
resistance against the most powerful Army that every Fort would require much
time and charge in the gayning: and if gained would prove as costly and
difficult to keep: The people though naturally prone to innovasion, and upon
the slightest grounds ready to rebel; yet by no Art to be so tamed, as to
endure the yoke of a stranger. And if the conquest was still to be made good
by Garrisons of English, the natives being both unruly and unfaithful: It
would draw much blood and treasure from England, and return neither honor nor
profit. Nevertheless the King offered immediately to declare himself in common
league against the Duchess, and to lead over an Army royal into her
territories, promising to share in all future danger if he might be admitted
to share in what was already conquered. But that the French denied as loath ever
to quit possession: yet never so peremptorily refused any proposition, as to
let the English, persuaded by despair, to enter into new counsels; even in
their denyalls leaving some way open to expectation.

During this time spun out to the utmost length by these tedious negotiations,
the French effected their, ends and almost undid the afflicted Princess. Who
left no way untried that might lead her into a perfect friendship with the
English, and engage their arms to her defense. Among the rest she tried one
which being singular in the event deserves a particular observation. Either by
her commission, ^or premission, a motion was made of a marriage between her,
and George Duke of Clarence who had lately buried his Lady. By which very
overture she doubted not but the King ambitious of so ample a fortune for his
brother, would run into her quarrel. But, as sometimes Physic misapplyed,
it wrought a contrary effect, and with other circumstances procured his ruin.
For he having by the levitie of his actions weakened his reputation with the
world in general, and particularly drawn a hatred from the Queens kindred
upon him, the King and the Duke of Gloucester likewise, having him either in
contempt or jealousy; stood in a manner alone So that the very first whispers
of this marriage were heard with emulation by some, with scorn by others, and
with dislike by all. Which gave occasion that his destruction was suddenly
plotted, and almost as suddenly executed. For the King, although he owed his
restitution to the Crown when he expelled from England, to the Dukes revolt
from Warwick; yet he remembered more perfectly the unnaturalness of his first
rebellion: And howsoever he showed outwardly all the arguments of a reconciled
brother, yet certainly the memory of the injury at first remaind deeply
imprinted in his mind. So that Clarence by his after service never regained
that place in the Kings heart, which his former disloyalty had forfeited. This
he perceived and repind against; and the King understanding that he resented
the truth, hated him yet the more: And so far grew this hatred, that no
discourse was more harsh to the Kings ear then that of Clarences marriage with
the heir of Burgundy: By which it was suspected he being enabled with power
might hereafter prepare for revenge. For according to the disposition of man he
saw all his actions in a flattering glass: Looking upon his revolt from his
brother, as on an error of seduced youth: and on his return back, as on so
great a merit, that it lay scarce in the Kings power to recompense: The King
enjoying by it all the greatness he possessed.

Richard Duke of Gloucester upon whose nature and friendship he built most,
deceived him most. For Gloucester who studied nothing but his own purposes, and
cared not by what violence all obstacles of nature and friendship were removed,
so the way were plained to his ambition; endeavord to add more poison to their
discontent: Knowing bad intentions never receive growth but from mischief. He
therefore persuaded him to be sensible of the Kings neglect, and boldly to
express his sufferance: A silent patience being in a subject loyalty; but in
a Kings brother cowardice. While on the other side he whispered the danger of
Clarence his spirit apt to receive any discontent, and wanting only power to
seek unlawful remedies. Whatsoever counsel came from him received by the
King with more attention and belief; in regard of his great judgment, and
professions of love to his brothers. And indeed Gloucester much disdained the
advancement of Clarence this way, not that he had any particular ground for
malice, but only that he hated any man, and especially a brother, should have
the start of him in fortune.

But the Queen and her kindred shallower in their spleen, spoke loud against
him: while Gloucester deep in mischief was not heard to murmur. For they
suggested continually to the King with what contempt they were entreated by
Clarence; how all their honors were mentioned as mockeries: A^ if the King
wanted power to confer his favors according to the discretion of his own
bounty. They urged the memory of his rebellion at his first marriage with
Warwicks daughter, and the much more danger of his intentions in affecting so
much greatness in the second. And so far by aggravations of every slight
error wrought that the King was willing to have his brother suffer; but only
wanted some offense capital enough, to make his death appear an act of
necessity and justice, not of plot and malice.

It is generally received among the vulgar, and wants not the approbation of
some Cronicles, that the chief ground of the Kings assent to his death was the
misinterpretation of a prophecy: Which foretold that one* the first letter of
whose name was G. should usurp the Kingdom and dispossess King Edwards
Children. Of which there is much of probability; however by his other actions
I should not judge the King easy to believe in such vanities. For credulity
in that nature, falls for the most part upon weak minds, as those of women and
children: or upon the timorous, whose apprehensions are softened to receive
every slight impression: or upon the overzealous, whom an evil regulated
piety bends to superstition. And with these three the King had no
participation in honor. Yet this served for the present, and carried with him
a strong accusation against the Duke: for this prophecy was alleged to be
spoken by some of his servants, who by Negromancy had understood this from the
Devil: Which with other circumstances served to hasten the King in this foul
mischief.

The Duke was in Ireland, the Country that gave him birth, during the time of
these contrivances, nothing suspecting any design against himself. Upon his
return to the Court he understood that Thomas Burdet of Arrow in the County
of Warwick Esquire, who ever was dependant upon him and ran his fortune, had
been in his absence apprehended, indighted, arraigned and executed all in the
compass of two days. The crime upon which his accusation was principally
grounded, were inconsiderate words by which upon report that white Bucke was
killd as the King was hunting in his Park, he wished the head and horns and
all in the Kings belly, whereas indeed he wished it only in his belly who
counsaild the King to kill it. With this accusation were mingled many other of
poisoning, sorceries, and enchantments: Crimes which every judicious man easily
perceived, were only put in the scale like grains, to make his rash language
full weight, which otherwise would have been too light to deserve the sentence
of death. These proceedings Clarence resented, as they were intended, and
expostulated with the King the injustice to his servant, and injury to
himself. And according to the custom of expostulations, his words were bold
and disorderly, and having received an apparent injury built too much on the
right of his cause, and provoked the King too far into indignation. So that
soon after he was committed close prisoner to the Tower, where by Act of
Parliament attainted, he was secretly put to death: the manner, as it is
generally received, was by thrusting his head into a But of Malmesey, by which
he was stifled.

In his attainder, according to the form, are crimes enough to make his death
have appearance of justice, the execution of which the King seemed rather
constrained to, then to have sought. For there are reckoned, how the Duk of
Clarence to bring the present government into hatred with the people, and
thereby the present state into trouble; had not only in his speeches
frequently laid injustice to the Kings charge in attainting Thomas Burdet
falsely, convict of many notorious treasons, but subornd many of his servants
and diverse others, corrupted with money, to divulge the like seditious
discourses. That he had spread abroad impious rumors that the King dealt by
Necromancy, and upon offense against such of his subjects, whom by order of Law
he could not destroy, he was accustomed to take away by poison. That he had
not rested there, but whereby to advance himself to the Kingdom, and for ever
to disable the King and his posterity from the Crown, had contrary to truth,
nature and Religion, Viper-like destroying her who gave him life, publish^ that
the King was a bastard and no way capable to reign: That to make this his so
monstrous ambition more successful and already to begin his usurpation, he
had caused many of the Kings subjects to be sworn upon the most blessed
Sacrament to be true to him and his heirs, without any acceptance of their
alleigance: After which so solemn oaths, he discovered to them his
resolution to right himself and his followers, who had both suffered by the
Kings violent wresting away their estates: And in particular to revenge
himself upon the King, who (as he most impiously and falsely suggested) had by
art Magic ordered to consume him, as a Candle consumes in burning And, what
most expressed that treason of his designs, that he had got out an
exemplification under the great Seal of Henry the sixth late King: wherein was
showed how by the Parliament it was enacted that if the said Henry and Edward
his son should dye without issue male, the kingdom should descend upon the
Duke of Clarence and his heirs: Whereby clearly appeared his intention,
immediately to possess himself of the Crown, with destruction of King Edward
and his children by pretention of a general election of the Commonweal. This
was the sum of his attainder, which we may well believe had not so easily
past but by the Kings public declaring himself, the secret working of the
Duke of Gloucester, and the passionate urging of the Queens kindred. But this
Attainder has in it one thing most remarkable, that Clarence here falsely was
accused, by laying bastardie to the King, to endeavor possession of the
Crown: Which afterward was alleged indeed by Richard Duke of Gloucester, to
the absolute disinherit of the Kings Sons. Whereby Gods severe judgment
manifests, how unsafe it is in a Prince, by false accusations to condemn an
innocent, or but to aggravate the fault of one less guilty, to the end that
cruelty, may be reported an act of justice.

The death of this Prince sudden and extraordinary; begot every where an
extraordinary censure: the unnatural severity, taking away all excuse, even
from their discourse, who most fa vour'd the King. At home it was generally
condemned, both in regard of the manner, it being prodigious to be drowned
without water, upon dry ground; and the quality of the person: He being the
first brother to a King in this Country, that ever was attainted. And what
increased the murmr, a faction appeard at Court triumphing in his ruin, all
the accusations were strangely wrested, and no matter of fact, scarce an
intention, proved against the state. Whereupon this punishment was thought to
have been inflicted upon him for no new attempt: His first taking part with
Warwick, being his only crime. For which war, though somewhat against
nature, he had many examples in France, Spain, and other parts of
Christendom: Whereas for the death of a younger Brother, upon bare suspicion,
the King could borrow no precedent nearer then the Turkish government. But
Clarence imagined the prerogative of his birth a sufficient defense against
danger, and omitted to fortefie himself with faction: which laid him open to
every assault of envy. And because he had heretofore been in opposition
against the King, the liberty in censuring any defect in government was
interpreted a desire to be in arms again. Every word of distaste being held
criminal in him for whom the King was alienated by his own disposition, open
invectives of the Queens kindred, and secret trains of the Duke of Gloucester:
who now began to look high over all respects of nature and religion. He was
certainly ambitious beyond proportion, which made him so attentive to any new
counsels, and of an easy nature, which renderd him apt by practice to be
wrought to mischief. He was a good Master, but an uncertain friend: which
delivers him to us to have been, according to the nature of weak men, sooner
persuaded by an obsequious flattery, then a free advice. We cannot judge him of
any evil nature, only busy and inconstant, thinking it a circumstance of
greatness to be still in action. He was too open brested for the Court; where
suspicion looks thorough a man, and discovers his resolutions though in the
dark, and locked up in se. crecie. But what was his ruin; he was whether the
house of York or Lancaster prevailed, still second to the Crown: So that his
eye by looking too steadfastly on the beauty of it became unlawfully enamord:
And that being observd by the Kings jealousy, he sufferd as if he actually
had sinned.

While this mischief was secretly in contrivance against Clarence, in the
Court appeard no face, but that of jollity and magnificence. For at that time
was Edward eldest son to the King (during Christmas, to mingle the solemnity
with liberty) inaugurated Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester; and his younger brother Richard, created Duke of York. The fate of
their honor and their ruin, being still the same. At this creation according
to the ceremony, many young Lords and Gentlemen of principal name were made
Knights of the Bath among whom Brian chief Justice of the Common pleas, and
Littleton, that learned father of the Laws are registered.

But the public glory of these extraordinary pompes, and the wantonness of
his private pleasures, could not be maintaind with the ordinary revenue.
Therefore to make good the expense of his own errors, the King began to look
narrowly into those of his subjects: that by this art, in a manner, he might
sin upon free cost. And as it has been a certain observation that the most
delicate and voluptuous Princes have ever been the heaviest oppressors of the
people: Riot being a far more lavish spender of the common treasure, then War
or magnificence: so those parts of the Kings life, which were wantond away with
variety of delights are noted to have bin severest. But perhaps the subject
repents not the free gift of the Kingdoms substance, when he sees the return
of it in triumph: but repines if the least part of his contribution, be the
reward of parasites, or persons to whom fortune not merit gives a growth. And
Historians likewise have more leisure to examine the crimes of Princes, in the
silence of peace, then in the noise of war: Or else Princes want opportunity
to enclose their thoughts to the study of private gain, when the Soldier in
a manner lays the wealth of the kingdom open, and makes a common of every
man's particular treasure. For now the King began to cause the Poenall Laws to
be put in execution, and wanting higher aims, to look downward into every
sordid way of enriching himself: So that a general fear possessed the people,
that his after government would be both sharp and heavy: considering the
first part of it was not without a foul blemish in that kind. For in the
seventh year of his reign he proceeded against many of the wealthiest
Citizens with so much severitie that it was repoted tyranny. The chief of them
were Sr. Thomas Cook, Sr. John Plumer, Knights, Humphrey Hewward and other
Aldermen: And their crime in their having given assistance to King Henry. Which
considering the circumstance of things could hardly bear any capital
accusation had it been clearly proved: but against these men there was no
testimony, but what was forced with torture; and even that testimony, not high
enough to bring them to the bar; yet the King commanded them to be arraigned
of high treason at Guild Hall; and withal expressed an earnest desire that upon
any terms they might be found guilty: Their wealth being the principal
witness that gave evidence against their lives. But the Jury well directed by
Sir John Marckham Knight, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, acquit them of
their treason. Which nevertheless releast them not, their estates however
found guilty; and the greatest part escheated to the King. With the offenders
the Judge was condemned, and because he preferred his integrity before a
severe command, made forfeiture of his dignity.

The memory of these carriages heretofore in a business that concerned the
life of man reputed innocent, drew the world into much fear that he would now
decline to rigor. Neither was the King totally excused, although this cruel
avarice was laid to the Queen: who having a numerous issue and kindred, by
favor raisd up to the highest titles; was almost necessitated, for supportance
of their honors, to wrack the Kingdom. And happily the universal malice that
waited on her and hers, served well for the King: They being as a screene
between him, and the unwholesome air of envy: which otherwise might have
endangerd his reputation with the people.

From this rugged way he was soon diverted by necessity to look abroad, and
perhaps by the gentleness of his nature, or repentance of his former
severitie. For the face of the world adjoining began von the sudden to change,
and while the Kings of England and France, were dividing the territories of the
Duchess of Burgundy: a third stepped in, and got possession of her and her
rich country. Maximilian, Arch Duke of Austria, son to the Emperor
Frederick the third, entertained heretofore politckly by Duke Charles was now
seriously invited to this marriage. For the Lady dispairing to receive succors
from the English, to the affection of whom she was perhaps inclined by the
neighborhood of the country, and persuasion of the Duchess Dowager whom
deservedly she much honored; condescended in the end to the desire of her
subjects: who ever labord to marry lier to some Prince of Germany, in regard of
the nearenesse in language and concordance in dispositions. And although the
hereditarie countries of this Prince lying far remote, were unlike to be any
support to her weakened state: yet considering him as son to the Emperous and
in probability like to succeed (for in an elective Kingdom scarce ever is
the heir put by, if equally deserving) he might appear necessary to her
present affairs. For he was young of a noble spirit, strong and healthful in
constitution, bold in any attempt of honor, and what won upon the affections
of the Low countrymen extraordinary affable and courteous. I know both his
actions and the histories of that time deliver him to us of no deep judgment,
and so negligent that he ever left things imperfect, oftentimes in maine
business betrayed by his credulity. But this I impute to him as an error of
the climate under which he was borne, and a certain generous honesty, which is
above suspicion. The motion of this marriage was embraced with much joy, to
accomplishment of which he instantly prepared. Neither could King Lewys with
all his Engines batter the resolution of the Emperor, who though a most
passionate lover of peace (which oftentimes he bought with loss) ran the
hazard of a war from France, rather then let his son loose the advantage of
so great a Country. And suddenly sent him to the Duchess, attended by many
great Commanders, who among a people so oppressed with arms, would be the best
witnesses of a marriage. His presence, although it did not absolutely turn the
stream of Fortune, yet gave a stay to the French conquests: And after he
appeard in the quarrel, victory doubtfully inclind, sometimes flattering
Maximilian, at other times King Lewys: Maximilian by his brave valor,
overtaking Lewys who had the start in experience and policy. So that frequent
truces were concluded between them, and unfaithfully observd: the first
opportunity of advantage renewing the war.

Lewys handled these businesses apart, never admitting King Edward, though he
ever officiously labord to interesse himself, into any part of the war of
peace. For as he knew the strength of his understanding such, that he in
treaty could loose nothing by the Archduke; so he well considered, that the
safest way to preserve the English in amity, was to keep them at home.
Whereupon he frequently entertaind the King with Embassies full of courtesy,
such as might appear rather the arguments of a sincere friendship, then the
forced expressions of ceremony. And ever communicated with him his private
counsels, requiring his faithful advice, when indeed he reserved his
resolutions of any high nature wholly to himself, and all in the conduction of
affairs, though he would listen to the opinion of King Edward, he still
obeyed his own. But this, with his other Arts continued his reputation good
with the English, and purchased that quiet, he suspected might by our arms be
interrupted.

And what renderd his security the more, troubles began between us and
Scotland: which we may well believe he underhand increast. The occasion of
them was, the evil inclination and ungovernd spirit of James the third, who
disdaining to listen to the temperate counsels of sober men, obeyed only his
own judgment; which passion threw headlong into rash attempts. The freedom
of advice by the Lords of that country used toward their Princes, renderd the
speaker hateful; and frequently was rewarded with imprisonment or exile; if
not with death. Among the multitude of them disfavour'd by him; Alexander Duke
of Albanie the King of Scotlands brother banished into France resented the
injury, and endeavored revenge. So that as he past through England toward his
exile; being admitted to the King by all arguments he incenc'd him to a war;
Which could not but prove most successful, the hatred of the Commons
considered, against so violent an oppressor. And he protested that he knew the
King fallen into so low esteem even with those he cherisht, and into such
hatred with all mankind; that if assaulted by the English, he would be
constrained, by submission of his Crown to entreat for safety.

This importunity of the Duke of Albanie soon prevailed with the King: who by
many injuries had been exasperated, and had only waited opportunity to war
upon Scotland. For the boders on the English side had been often infested, and
upon complaint no redress, nor reparation of damage. Moreover the King having
heretofore condiscended, upon a motion from King James, that his second
daughter the Lady Cicilie should marry James Prince of Scotland; and upon the
agreement paid in a large part of the portion: had received no satisfaction to
his expectation The Articles of marriage neither being performed; nor yet the
money lent, upon the bonds of the Provost and Merchants of Edenborough,
according to covenants repayd. He was therefore the sooner won to undertake
the business, which he committed to the order of the Duke of Gloucester, who
now had no competitor in greatness both of judgment and power: No Prince of
the house of York remaining, but such whom the want of years, or love of ease
indisposed to action. For the King willing to decline labor, waved the
expedition; and Gloucester ambitious to gain opinion, especially with the
Soldier, most forwardly undertook it. The King desired to live to the best
advantage of his pleasure: Gloucester of his honor. And indeed Gloucester began
now like a cunning Physician to examine the state of the Kings body, which
though he found strong and healthful, and by the ordinary reckoning of men
likely to continue many years, yet withal he observed evil symptoms of
death in him, being overgrowne with fat, and both in his diet and lust subject
to disorder. Disorder a greater enemy to mankind, and which has destroyed more
then age, the sword, or pestilence. This Gloucester perceived, and hence drew
poison, which sweld his ambition higher.

He therefore with much alacrity prepared for the war, and with the title of
Lieutenant General soon after set forward toward Scotland. The Army
consisted of two and twenty thousand five hundred, all commanded by men of
great authority or experience. Of the nobility in his retinue went Henry Earl
of Northumberland, Thomas Lord Stanley, Lord Steward of the Kings house, the
Lords Level, Graistock, Fitzhugh, Nevill, and Scroope of Bolton: Of Knights,
Sir Edward Woodvile, brother to the Queen, Sir William Par, Sir John Elrington
Treasurer of the Kings house, Sir James Harrington, Sir John Middleton, Sir
John Dichfield and others. The particular names of whom I mention, only to
show how great a shadow Gloucester began to cast toward the Sunset, both of the
Kings glory and life. The Vantguard was led by the Earl of Northumberland, the
Rereward by the Lord Stanley, the Maine battle by the Duke himself: In whose
company was the Duke of Albany: Gloucester willing perhaps to have him still in
sight; least if apart, with sale of the Army, he might purchase his own peace.

Their first attempt was upon Barwicke (surrendered heretofore by Queen
Margaret to gain a sanctuary for King Henry, when expelled England) into which
partly by terror of their Forces, partly by the suddenness of their approach,
they enterd without opposition. The town was soon at their discretion; but
the Castle, the strongest Fort then in the North, by the Earl Bothwell, was
made good against all battery. Gloucester foreseeing by the strength both of the
place, and the Commanders resolution, that this siege would spend much time,
committed the charge to the Lord Stanley, Sir John Elrington, and Sir William
Par, with four thousand Soldiers: while he with the body of the Army marched
higher into Scotland; persuaded, as indeed it happend, that they might force
the King of Scotland either to an inglorious flight, or else for safety to
lock himself up in some strong hold. By which they might so imprison him,
that his release should not be without a full discharge for all injuries both
against England and the Duke of Albany. And according to expectation it
happend, the King upon the first rumor of an enemy, enclosing himself in the
Castle of Edenborough. For in his government having not studied the safety of
his people (which is the supreme Law given to Kings) he found himself now
forsaken by them. So far that in opposition to the English, against whom the
Scots ever showed a fair resolution, no Army now took the field: the Country
lying open to the mercy of the invader.

Gloucester therefore, burning many towns by the way to strike a terror, in the
inhabitants; marched directly to Edenborough: into which he entered, receiving
such presents as the Citizens offered to him: for at the entreaty of the Duke
of Albanie, he spared the town from spoil. His entry was only a spectacle of
glory, the people applauding the mercy of an enemy, who presented them with a
triumph, not a battle: and welcomed him as a Prince, who took arms not for
pecy or malice, but for the safety of a neighboring kingdom, disorderd and
laid waste more by the license of a tyrant in peace, then it could have been
by the hand of war. The Lords of Scotland considering the danger of their state
and desirous to prevent ruin, sent from Hadington to the Duke of Gloucester to
entreat a suspense of arms, and to desire a firm peace in future. They there
offered, if the occasion of beginning this war, were as it was pretended; to
give the English full satisfaction: So that he could have no color of
continuing in hostility, but only a desire to execute his indignation upon a
Country, already sufficiently destroid. For concerning the marriage, they were
prepared when it should please the King of England to accomplish it: And for
any other injury offered to the English, they were ready to make restitution.
The Duke of Gloucester returned in answer, That his coming thither was to right
the honor of his Country, often violated by the Scots, and restore the Duke
of Albanie unjustly commanded to exile, to his native soil and the dignity of
his birth. As for the marriage of the Prince of Scotland with the daughter of
England, he knew not how his brothers resolution stood at the present:
whereupon he required repayment of the money lent to their King upon the first
agreement. And withal a delivery of the Castle of Barwicke up into his hands;
without which he protested to come to no accord. But the Scottish Lords
labourd by all means to have avoided the surrender of a place so important, by
pretending how anciently it ever appertaind to their Crown, by parting with
which now they should appear at too dear and base a price, to have purchased
peace. No argument could prevail against Glocesters resolution; whereupon they
yielded Barwicke, with covenant too by no Art hereafter to labor the reduction
of it. They likewise appointed a day for restitution of all those moneys lent
by King Edward, and promise upon a full discussion, to make satisfaction for
all damages done the English by any inroade of the Scottish borderers. And for
the Duke of Albanies provision, whose safety in this expedition was
principally pretended; a general pardon for him and his followers was granted
together with an obolition of all discontents: Whereby he was reinvested in all
his former dignities and places: and by consent of the nobility of Scotland
proclaimd Lieutenant of the Kingdom.

With this Lord the Duke of Gloucester endeavored a most entire friendship, and
by all industry imployd for his advancement in authority, studied how to make
him firm to his purposes, if occasion should hereafter present it self to
require his aid: And questionless, howsoever the fortunes of these two Dukes
accorded not in every point, yet there was in their ambitions some kind of
sympathy. Both being brothers to Kings, and both the Kings by the insolency or
licen^iousnesse of their actions become obnoxious to a public scandal. But
Albanie had the advantage in a more deserved and universal hatred to the King
his brother; whereby he might not improbably expect to be King in fact,
however his brother were in title. And Gloucester had the start in that the King
his brothers ease apparently tended to the shortning of his life; and then he,
remaining the only Prince of the blood fit to govern, was not unlikely to
govern as King both in fact and title. To the advancement of any such design,
a perfect amity with Scotland, Gloucester could not but imagine most necessary.

Haying therefore settled businesses there with all increase of glory to the
English name, (and by consequence to his own) he returned to Barwicke; which
according to the former agreement had been yielded to the Lord Stanley. Thence
in all solemnity of greatness he came toward London, to yield an account of
his prosperous enterprise. By the way permit the honor of this action to be
divulged to the greatest applause, whereby to insinuate his reputation into the
opinion of the Commons: and to show how much more nobly he in this expedition
against Scotland had managed the peace for honor of the English nation; then
his brother had in his undertaking against France. Considering that in lieu of
a little money, which King Edward got from King Lewys; he had taken the only
place of strength whereby the Scots might with safety to themselves have
endangerd us: And brought them to what conditions he appointed, forcing the
King to immure himself, while the English at liberty spoild the Country, and
possessed themselves of his capital Town of Edenborough. And farther by
Glocesters flatterers it was urged, that if their General had but had
commission ample enough, he would not have returned without reduction of the
kingdom of Scotland to the Crown of England. Obedience to a superior command
fixing so sudden a period to his actions. And certainly in this expedition
the Duke of Gloucester laid the foundation of all his after achievements: for
here having by a free spoil of every town, except only Edenborough, purchased
the affection of the common Soldier; whose aim in war is gain and license:
and by sober order and great courage, together with a brave zeal ever to bring
honor to his side, won estimation from the nobler sort: he began to imagine
himself reputed generally only unhappy in wanting a good title to the
kingdom. The difference between him and his brother, the one possessed, the
other deserved the Crown. And his thoughts farther flatterd him, that it could
not prove hereafter difficult, upon any hansome occasion to persuade the
people, who already thought him worthy, also to think it fit to make him King.

But these his black intentions came not yet to light: and indeed they were so
monstrous, that they would not only have manifested the ugliness of their
shape had they now appeared; but like imperfect and deformd births, been
buried, soon as produced. Cunningly therefore by simulation of a most serious
love to his brother, and publicly ascribing the whole glory of the action to
his direction, he declined suspicion. Being welcomed by the King with all the
demonstrations of joy; who congratulated his own felicity in having with so
little charge and no loss, tamed all the insolency of the Scots, and reduced
Barwick. He therefore to show how much he approved the conditions of the peace,
went solemnly in procession from Saint Stephens Chapel accompanied with the
Queen and a mighty retinue of the greatest Lords into Westminster Hall: where
in presence of the Earl of Angus, the Lord Gray, and Sir James Liddall
Ambassadors extraordinary from Scotland the peace was ratified.

During the war with Scotland, and after the conclusion of this peace, the
King discoverd to the people his natural disposition. Which being bountiful
and courteous, far from the proud state then in practice with the Tyrants of
the East; begot a general affection: and made the subject comparing their
felicity, with the misery of their fathers to bless the present government.
The administration likewise of the Laws being orderly, without violence or
partiality, caused all the former injustice to be cast either upon the license
of war, or the predominancie of some faction: The King absolutely quit, in
opinion. And even from lust, which was reputed his bosom sin, toward the
later end of his life, he was somewhat clear: Either conscience reforming him,
or by continual sacietie grown to a loathing of it: for the abstinence could
not be imputed to age, he at his death not exceeding two and forty. But what
endeard him so much to the affection of the people, and especially to the
Citizens of London, was his being rich by his tribute from France, and
therefore not likely to lie heavy on them: as likewise the so famed bounty of
his hospitality: Two thousand persons being daily served in his Court at
Eltham, where most solemnly he celebrated the feast of the Nativitie. And to
recompense the great love which in both fortunes the Londoners had showed him,
to his last hour he used toward them a particular kindness: Even so much,
that he invited the Lord Major and Aldermen, and some of the principal
Citizens to the Forest of Waltham, to give them a friendly not a pompous
entertainment. Where in a pleasant Lodge they were feasted, the King himself
seeing their dinner served in: and by thus stooping down to a loving
familiarity, sunk deep into their hearts: ordinary slight courtesies, ordered
thus to the best advantage, taking more often even with sound judgments then
churlish benefits. And that the sex he always affected might not be
unremembred, he caused great plenty of Venison to be sent to the Lady
Majoresse and the Aldermens wives.

Thus was the outward face of the Court full of the beauty of delight and
Majesty: while the inward was all rotten with discord and envy. For the
Queen by how much she considerd her self more unworthy the fortune she
enjoyed, by so much she endeavord in the exterior height of carriage, to raise
her self: foolishly imagining pride could set off the humility of her birth.
She was likewise (according to the nature of women) factious: as if her
greatness could not appear clear enough without opposition. And they she
opposed were the chiefest both in blood and power: the weaker she disdayning
to wrestle with, and they fearful to contest with her. But what subjected her
to an universal malice, was the rapine, the necessary provision of her kindred
engaged her to. For they being many and great in title could not be supplied
according to their ambition, but by so common an injury as made her name odious
through the kingdom. Moreover the Lords of her blood, by reason of their
nearenesse to the Kings children being insolent, and in regard of their youth,
indiscreet; frequently ran into those errors which betrayed them to the
public scorn or hatred. Against the Queen (for through her kindred they
aimed at her) opposed the Duke of Gloucester, the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord
Hastings, and others of the most ancient nobility. And to render odious her
and hers, Gloucester laid the death of the Duke of Clarence (which fratricide
himself most barbarously contrived) altogether upon their envy: pretending a
more then ordinary causion for his own safety, least his person might by the
same practice be brought in danger. By which calumny he both cleared his own
reputation, and clouded the fame of a faction he endeavord so much to ruin.
But this side had much the start in opinion and policy, over the other who
were young, and unexperienced: and president of whose Council was a woman.

To compose these quarrels begot the King much trouble: neither could he
without extreme anxietie hear the continual complaints of persons so
considerable both in power in the kingdom, and kindred to his children* not
knowing to how dangerous a height, this discord in time might grow. But to
increase his discontent everyday his jealousy increast concerning King Lewys
his faith who now began to unmaske his intention, and show how much he had
deluded the English. For having ever since Maximilians marriage with Mary
Duchess of Burgundy been upon unkind terms with him: sometimes at open
war, other times in an unfaithful truce, he was now growing to an absolute
peace. And the conditions were whispered contrary to the treaty Piquignie:
which made the King suspicious they two might enter into some league
prejudicall to the honor of the English. For Maximilian having kept Lewys all
the life time of his Lady, from any further incroach upon her territory, and by
his fortune won into opinion with the French, grew to be must desired in the
nearest friendship by them: And he having buried his Duchess (who owed her
death to her modesty, in respect that having broke her Thigh by a fall from a
Horse she denied to expose it to the sight of Surgeons) was willing to stand
upon good terms with France. Knowing how slender and how unfaithful an
obedience those Countries would yield to a Prince, who was to rule by courtesy
since to their natural Lords, they had ever showed themselves insolent and
rebellious. These considerations prepared both sides to peace, and the
conclusion of it to beget a more perfect amity was that the Lady Margaret a
child of two years old, daughter ^o Maximilian and the Duchess of Burgundy
should be affianced to the Dolphin, then upon the age of twelve. So that King
Lewys in the marriage of his son, was ever most disproportionable: the
daughter of England as much too old, as this Lady too young: but indeed his end
was the same with Charles Duke of Burgundy and many other worldly fathers, to
match his son for the best advantage of his profit and convenience.

To confirm the uncertain rumors of this perjurie in King Lewys, the Lord
Howard returned out of France, and made relation, how he saw the Lady Margaret
brought with all pomp and ceremony to Ambois and there married to Charles the
Dolphin: And to heap yet more injuries, not long after the tribute hitherto so
carefully paid, was denied. The French now disclosing the innated malice they
bore the English, and with how little scruple they could dispense with the most
solemn oath, when no apparent danger threatened the crime: For though the
Dolphin when he had attaind to the age of consent, might have broke off this
marriage; and it could have been only termed an act of discourtesie: yet King
Lewys who had sworn to this Article with so much ceremony, cannot be excused
from a most foul impiety.

But what reason of state prevaild with him, who heretofore awed by his fears
had condescended in a manner to compound for his kingdom, thus now to slight
the English is not delivered in history. And it may appear difficult,
considering King Edward was now, if possibly, more absolute in his command at
home, his people better disciplined, and no appearance of an enemy from abroad.
Add to that, his Coffers full increast every year by the tribute from France,
and his reputation high, by the victory lately purchased against the Scots. A
nation though inferior to the French in the riches and extent of territory, yet
in martial courage equal: and in warring with whom, we have found more sweat
and danger. It is therefore hard to know the cause of King Lewys his
proceedings in this injurious way, if we look on our selves only as at home:
But if we consider the state of businesses abroad, we may easily discern his
policy. For now had the French Arts or the change of time quite dissolved all
our confederacies, and left us to maintain with our own arms our own
quarrel. Saint Paul was annihilated, in whose death expired all the
discontents of the factious Nobility in France.

The Duke of Britain by an extreme melancholy (which scarce was reputed
less then madness) was become unfit for government, much less for any great
attempt: And being overcharged by the practices and arms of the French, in a
manner made resignation of his Duchy to the disposition of some officers easy
to be corrupted. And Burgundy (which in the victories of Henry the fifth, had
so much advanced the English enterprises) was by the last league with
Maximilian wholly at the devotion of the French. So that all they who
heretofore had brought us over, were now either reduced to be unprofitable for
our aid; or else become enemies should we renew our ancient quarrel.
Moreover the long ease the King of England had lived in, and the pleasures with
which he appeard altogether fascinated, rendered him to the world nothing
formidable. And King Lewys having with so little difficulty hitherto deluded
him, and retained him in a kind of servile amity, while he threw injuries
thick upon him; was now heightend to a presumption, that the English would
either connive at this affront, or that by some new cunning they might be
appeasd, were the indignity never so much resented. And if the worst should
happen, the French nothing feared the enmity: Considering that King Edward
alone, would be unable to prevail against them seconded by the forces of
Maximilian, whom his daughter now interessed in the war.

These considerations of security to do wrong according to the nature of
wicked Princes, made King Lewys so boldly attempt it: And what was strange in a
man so cunning, he left himself no excuse for the fact, either in the way of
honor or conscience: And scarce in humane policy. Unless his expectation
reached beyond common reason, in thought that Prince Phillip, Son to
Maximilian, and the Duchess (for she was mother only to a son and a
daughter) might chance to die, and thus by the Lady Margaret all those large
countries devolve into the power of France. But how slight soever King Lewys
his opinion was of the English, this breach of faith was no sooner related to
King Edward, but he resolved severely to take revenge.

And calling together all the Counsel and Nobility, who for the suddenness
could be convoked, he to this purpose made a remonstrance of his wrongs and
intentions how to right himself.

My Lords,
THe injuries I have received are divulged every where, and the eye of the
world is fixed upon me, to observe with what countenance I suffer. And I must
confess they are of so strange a nature, that I remain rather amazed, then
enraged: Had I dealt with any Prince not civilized by Laws, or inured to
commerce; I had yet the Religion of so many oaths, and the reason of every
pollitique circumstance so clear, that I could no way have suspected this
foul and foolish breach of faith. But in a Christian King (and who pretends to
be most Christian) I have met with so horrid a perjurie, and so disgraceful to
our Nation; that as all mankind must abhor him as barbarous, so in my own
particular I must neglect the principal office of a Prince, if I omit to
Chastise him. Most of you (my Lords) are witnesses to the solemnity of his
vows, when humbly he declined ruin to his Kingdom: and I to avoid so great
a massacre as the war would have endangerd, condescended to end all
controversies by accord. My clemency is now become my scorn: and I reap
indignities where I sowed favors. For this ungrateful man: Prince I must not
term him, who has by perjury forfeited that sacred title: in contempt of all
Law both humane and divine, denies not only the marriage of the Dolphin to our
daughter, which would have proved so great an honor to his blood and security
to his Kingdom; but even the annual tribute of fifty thousand Crowns; A
slender rent for so large a country, as by our permission he has hitherto
enjoyed.

This contumely I am resolved to punish; and I cannot doubt success;
Almighty God strengthen still his arm, who undertakes a war for justice. In
our expeditions heretofore against the French, what prosperity waited upon the
English Arms, is to the world divulged: and yet ambition then appeard the
chief Counselor to war. Now beside all that right, which led over Edward
the third our glorious Ancestor, and Henry the fifth our Predecessor, we seem
to have a deputieship from Heaven, to execute the office of the supreme Judge
in chastising the impious.

When we were last in France, an innate fear in this false man forced him
down to a sordid purchase of security: How low will a wicked conscience,
(which even makes the valiant, cowardly to tremble) bend him now? Now when an
implacable resolution for revenge sets a far sharper edge upon our Swords.
Now when he has no hypocrisy left undiscovered, nor subterfuge for his former
perjurie, nor Art to gain belief to new dissimulation: Now, when our ears
shall be deaf to all submission, and when our conscience is so well resolved
for the necessity of this war; that mercy will be thought a vicious lenity,
and the most savage cruelty, but an act of justice.

I need not repeat how much age has infirmed him (And indeed I think it was
his dotage committed this so foolish crime) nor yet how hated he is renderd
abroad by his unfaithful dealing, at home by his severe government. The
Commonalty sunk down by his heavy impositions; the Nobility by his proud
neglect, exasprated to desire any innovation. But we want not advantage; in the
justice of our cause, and valor of our people we have enough.

It is confessed our confederacies are quite dissolved: And I rejoice in that
alone we shall undertake this great business: For experience in our last
attempt showed, that Princes of several nations (however they pretend the
same) have still several aims: And oftentimes a confederate is a greater
enemy to the prosperity of a war, then the enemy himself: Envy begetting
more difficulty in a Camp, than any opposition from the adverse Army. Our
Brother of Bungurdy and Uncle of Saint Paul are both dead. How little their
amity advanced us, nay how a just jealousy of their secret practices hindered
our design then on France, you all may well remember. And how in our return
toward England, we had more fear to have been assaulted by their traiterous
weapons, then by any arms from the enemy. But we will spare their memory:
they labored their own safety, not our glory. This I am secure, that as by
death they are rendered unprofitable to us, so likewise not dangerous. And as
for Britain if his weakness disable him to our aid, I am confident it will
continue him a neutrall. Neither is it to be forgot, how securely now we may
leave England rather then heretofore: Considering our so entire friendship with
the Scots: whose hostility was always sharp upon us at home, when we
attempted victory abroad.

But I detain you, by my speech, too long from action. I see the clouds of
due revenge gatherd in your brow, and the lightning of fury break from your
eyes: Which abodes thunder against our enemy. Let us therefore loose no time,
but suddenly and severely scourge this perjured coward to a too late
repentance: and regaine honor to our Nation, and his Kingdom to our Crown.

The Lords resented the affront with an indignation high as the Kings, and
desired that instant preparations might be made for the war. But above all,
the Duke of Gloucester appeard zealous in the quarrel: expressing aloud his
desire that all his estate might be spent, and all his veins emptied in
revenge of this injury. All the Court was presently for the design, and the
whole Kingdom with a fierce appetite desired to arm. So that no language was
heard but martial; and all the gallantry, in new armor or other conveniences
for service. The King most passionatly pursued his determination, and that very
spring resolved to begin the war. But he was diverted on the sudden from
calling King Lewys to a reckoning for this crime; and summond by death to give
a strict account of all his own. Death arrested him, and in the respect of not
many hours, instracted him in more then all the oratory from pulpits had done
for forty years. For soon as he found himself mortally sick, he began to
consider the vanity of all his victories, which with the expense of so much
blood he had purchac'd; and to the heart repented his too hard bargain. He
looked back upon the beauty of his sensual pleasures; and now discernd it
was only fair in the outside, inwardly rotten and deformed. He cast up the
accounts of his tribute both at home and abroad, and all those treasures
gathered either by proscription of his enemies, or exacting from his subjects,
and found himself a banckerout. For till now, he wanted leisure to search
into that which most concernd him: and delighted too much in the pomp and
pleasure of the Inn where he was not to stay, forgot he had a journey, and
unawares was overtaken by night: an endless night, which no day succeedes.

Perceiving his doom inevitable and no hope of the least reprive: he began to
order business as fully as the shortness of the time would license. The great
affair of his soul, and indeed the only that is necessary, he committed to
the mercy of his redeemer: and by the Sacraments then in use with the Church in
England and a real contrition he labord, a full expiation of the crimes and
errors of his life. And as his death is described to us by an excellent author
who lived near his time: Almighty God seems to have struck water even from
the Rock (as by Moses Wand he did for the Israelites) in touching this Prince
to the heart, and forcing a most religious penetence, from a soul obdurate in
sin, as we may conjecture by his life.

The revenge of the injury he received from King Lewys, he referred to the
judgment of heaven, whose work it is to punish perjury. And Lewys suffered
for it according to his demerit: for that son in marrying whom he so busied
his imaginations, and slighted all faith and religion, lived but a short space,
and died issulesse. Not one branch remaining of that great tree, whose root
was in perjurie and dissimulation.

The protection of the King and Kingdom he left to the Lords nearest in
kindred to his children, advising them to amity and concord. By which the
nation would flourish in greatness abroad and safety at home: The young King
be secured from flattery, and instructed in the best discipline for
government: And they themselves live is much honor and felicity, i^ united to
advance the Commonwealth and oppose all foreign danger. Whereas discord would
beget civil war, and that endanger ruin. So that this Christian King like
Christ himself, when he departed bequeathd peace to the world. And had this
doctrine been as zealously followed, as it was uttered; the succeeding time
had not been guilty of so many sad confusions. But for the present a perfect
reconciliation appeared, both sides lovingly embracing, and protesting all
amity in the future. So that with comfort he forsook the world, and may well
be said to have deserved a general applause, in this last scene of his life.

Among his words of farewell at his death, it is worthy observation; that he
solemnly protested his repentance, for obtaining the Crown with so much blood,
as the necessity of the quarrel spilt. Which certainly shows a most singular
piety, considering the indubitable justice of his title: And withal teaches
Princes a new lesson, that the power of sway, great men so superstitiously
adore, is but the Idol of folly and ambition: Whose oracles delude the living,
but on our deathbeds we discern the truth, and hate the irreligion of our
former error.

Concerning the occasion of his death there is much variety in opinion: for by
several authors, it is severally imputed to poison, grief, and surfeit. They
who ascribe it to poison, are the passionate enemies of Richard Duke of
Glocesters memory: Who permit not nature at that time to have been obnoxious
to decay; but make the death of every Prince an act of violence or practice:
And in regard this cruel Lord was guilty of much blood; without any other
argument, condemn him for those crimes, from which he was however actually
most innocent. The French affirm it to have proceeded from grief conceived
upon repudiation of his daughter, and detention of the tribute. But they
looking on our affairs a far off, mistake the shadow for the substance,
desirous perhaps that King Lewys should kill a King of England by a new weapon:
And certainly Lewys did persuade himself that King Edward was slain this way;
and congratulated his wit, much in the accident. But this carries not the least
appearance of probability: Great sorrows kill for the most part suddenly, else
by a languishing decay of nature: whereas King Edward dyed not presently upon
the report; nor yet drew melancholy from this injury, but a brave anger
fierce to seek revenge. Moreover grief has the^ bin observed most powerful
over life; when the disconsolate has no ear to which he may express
himself, and no hope left for remedy: whereas King Edward breathed forth
passions to his Council, and found in them a simpathy both in the sorrow and
the rage: And as for revenge, certainly the state of England was never better
prepared to exact it: The King being a valiant and fortunate leader; the people
inured heretofore to the exercise of Arms, and never so forward to any
quarrel, as against the French, from whom they ever reaped victory and
treasure: And concerning money the strength of an Army, the Exchequer was full
enough, without any burdensome imposition, to begin the war.

It was therefore questionless a surfeit brought this great Prince so suddenly
to his end. For who observes well the scope of his pleasure, finds it to have
been placed much in wantonness and riot, the two mighty destroyers of
nature: And commonly those excesses with which we solace life, we ruin it.
He dyed upon the ninth of April 1483. at his Palace of Westminster: and was
interred at Windsor. Sixtus the fourth being Pope, Frederick the third
Emperor, Fardinand and Isobella King and Queen of Arragon and Castile, John
the second King of Portugal, James the third of Scotland, and Lewys the
eleventh of France. Between whom and King Edward as there was much intercourse
in business, so was there great concurrence in fortune. Both began and ended
their reigns in the same years: both were held in jealousy by the precedent
Kings, Edward by King Henry, Lewys by his father Charles the seventh; both had
titles disputable to the Crown: The house of Lancaster usurpiug against
Edward; the house of England clayming against Lewys. Both were perplexed with
civil war, and both successful: Lewys infested by an insolent Nobility;
Edward by a Saint-like Competitor. Lewys victorious by act, Edward by courage.
Both were rebeld against by their own brothers: Jews by Charles Duke of
Berry, Edward by George Duke of Clarence: And both took a severe revenge,
Lewys freeing himself from so bosom an enemy by poisoning Charles; Edward by
drowning Clarence. Both ended this life with appearance of much zeal: Edward
religiously, Lewys something superstiously. Both left their sons, yet
children to inherit; who dyed issulesse, and left the Crown to their greatest
enemies: Edward the fifth to his Uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester, Charles the
eight to his kinsman Lewys Duke of Orleans.

But who looks upon the lives of these two Princes on the other side; may as
in a table which presents several faces, perceive as great disparitie. But I
am only to give you the picture of King Edward, without flattery or
detraction; which is rare in history: considering authors fashion for the most
part Idaeas in their minds, and according to them, not to the truth of action
form a Pince: which though happily i^ win applause to the writer, is a high
abuse to the reader.

BUt this King was, if we compare his with the lives of Princes in general,
worthy to be ^^^berd among the best. And whom though not an extraordinary
virtue, yet a singular fortune made conspicuous. He was borne at Roane in
Normandy, his father at that time Regent in France. The ^o satall division
between the houses of York and Lancaster with him in a manner having both
their birth and growth: For as he, the faction of his family gatherd strength.
His education was, according to to the best provision for his honor and
safety, in arms: A strict and religious discipline, in all probability
likely to have softened him too much to mercy, and a love of quiet.

He had a great extent of wit, which certainly be owed to nature: That age
bettering men little by learning; which howsoever he had wanted leisure to have
received: The Trumpet sounding still too, loud in his ear, to have admitted
the sober counsels of Philosophy. And his wit lay not in the slights of
cunning and deceit; but in a sharp apprehensition, yet not too much whetted by
suspicion.

In counsel he was judicious, with little difficulty dispatching much: His
understanding open to clear doubts, not dark and cloudie, and apt to create
new. His wisdom looked still directly upon truth, which appears by the
manage of his affairs both in peace and war: In neither of which (as far
as concernd the pollitique part) he committed any maine error. It Is true he was
over-reacht in peace by King Lewys, abused concerning the marriage of his
daughter* In war by the Earl of Warwick when upon confidence of a final
accord he was surpised: But both these misfortunes I impute to want of faith
in his enemies, not of judgment in him. Though to speak impartially, his too
great presumption on the oath of a dissembling Prince* and want of
circumspection, a reconciliation being but in treaty; cannot escape without
reprehension.

His nature certainly was both noble and honest, which if rectified by the
strait rule of virtue, had rendered him sit for example, whereas he is only now
for observation. For prosperity raisd him but to a complacencie in his
fortune; not to a disdain of others losses, or a pride of his own
acquisitions. And when he had most security in his Kingdom, and consequently
most allurements to tyranny, then showed he himself most familiar and
indulgent. An admirable temperance in a Prince, who so well knew his own
strength; and whom the love of riot necessitated to a love of treasure; which
commonly is supplied by oppression of the Subject.

The heavy fine upon Sr. Thomas Cook and displacing the chief justice
blemisheth him with violence, and a vorice. But that severitie, and the other
when he began to look into the Poenall Laws, were but short tempests or
rather small overcastings, during the glorious calm of his government. And
what soever injury the subject endured, was not imputed to the King: But to
Tip^oft Earl of Worcester and some under informers: Or else to the Queen and
her necessitous kindred. The world either judiciously or else favorably
diverting all envy from his memory.

Great judgment in leading his armies, and courage in fighting personally,
speaks him both a daring Soldier, and an expert Commander. And the many
battles he fought, in all which he triumphed, delivers him as much to be
^^mired for his military discipline, as his happy success. Fortune not
deserving to have all his mighty victories ascribed to her gift: Valor and
good conduct share at the least with her in the fate of war. But as in arms
he appears most glorious to posterity, so likewise most unhappy: For all
those bloody conquests he obtaind, were against his own nation; And the
greatest adversaries he over came, near in consanguinitie to him; so that he
may more properly be said to have let himself blood, then his enemies; or
rather for preservation of his own body, to have cut off his principal and
most necessary limbs. For beside those many Princes of the house of Sommerset,
Buckingham, Excester, Oxford, Devonshire, Northumberland, Westmerland,
Shrewsbury, and finally the tree it self, and the only branch, Henry the sixth
and his Son Prince Edward* He slew even the Earl of Warwick and the
Marquess Mountague: Two brothers who having lost their father in his quarrel,
hazarded their lives and those mighty possessions and honors which peaceably
they might have enjoyed, only to advance his title. But this was rather his
fate, then his fault* and into this Sea of blood he saild not voluntarily, but
violently driven by the tempests of his fortune. And for the cruelty laid to
him in the death of the Duke of Clarence, he was certainly wrought to it by
practice and the misinformation of an envious faction in Court: The horror of
which fratricide possessed him to the last hour of his life, frequently
complaining against the unhappy severitie of his justice, and against the hard
nature of his Counselors, who would not interpose one word to him for mercy,
whereby so black a deed might have been prevented. But howsoever we may
wash away much of this blood from his memory* yet there continue many foul
stains upon it: since public mischiefs seldom happen, but that the Prince,
though not actually nocent, as in some degree guilty.

As these so many confusions at home were the misfortune of his time, so was
abroad, that so scandalous loss of the Eastern Empire to the Turk. For
though King Edward were not the occasion of so great ruin to the Christian
Commonwealth, and that this happened before he attained the soveraigntie, his
father being head of the faction; yet the civil wars of England raisd upon
the quarrel which he was soon after to maintain, and the universal division
among Princes of the West gave courage to the Infidells; and denied succors to
the miserable Emperor oppressed by an over potent enemy. Whereby a City was
profaned, in which the Christian faith had flourisht without interruption for
a thousand years. But as the Sea is said to gain in another, if it loses in
this place: So about this time religion, by the singular piety and valor of
Ferdinand and Isabella, won ground upon the Moors in Spain, whence not long
after they were totally and (I hope) for ever expeld.

But when the War licensed the King to attend his government, we find the
administration of Laws just and equal: and many new statutes enacted,
wholesome against diseases crept into the State: So that he appeard dilligent
both to heal up any wound, the tumults of his reign had given the
commonwealth, and provident for the health of future ages. And certainly no
Prince could husband the benefits of peace better for the outward magnificence;
For his glory was much in hospitality, and a pompous celebration of the
principal feasts of our redemption. In which way of bravery settling much of
his happiness; he had been doubtless the most fortunate of any King of the
Norman line, had he not faild in expectation of his daughters marriage.

His buildings were few, but sumptuous for that time, or more properly but
reparations: Which are yet to be seen at the Tower of London, his house of
Eltham, the Castles of Nottingham and Dover: But above all at Windsor, where he
built the new Chapel (finished after by Sr. Riginald Bray Knight of the Order)
and endowed the College with mighty revenues: which he gave not, but
transferd thither: taking from Kings College in Cambridge; and Eaton College
a thousand pound by the year to enrich this at Windsor.

But our buildings like our children are obnoxious to death; and time scorns
their folly, who place a perpetuity in either. And indeed the safer kind of
fate happened to King Edward in both these felicities: His posterity, like his
edifices, lost in other names. For his two sons, before they had survived
their father, the ceremonious time of mourning, were themselves inhumanly
murderd, and as obscurely buried. His eldest daughter the Lady Elizabeth was
married to the Earl of Richmond, known by the name of Henry the seventh:
Whose heir in a strait line not liable to any doubt or question, is his most
sacred Majesty, now glorious in government of this Realm. The younger
daughters were bestowed, one in a monastery, others upon inferior Lords.
Cicily married John Vicount Wells: Anne, Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk:
Briget was professed Nun at Dartford: Mary was contracted to the King of
Denmark, but died before consummation: Margaret died an Infant: Katherine
married William Courtney Earl of Devonshire. But of none of these younger
Princesses at this day remains any thing but their memory: All dying issulesse
but the Lady Katherine, whose posterity faild likewise in the third descent.
Henry her son Marquess of Exceter suffered by attainder in the reign of his
Cosen German Henry the Eight, being not long before designd heir apparent (an
honor fatal in England:) and his son Edward untimely came to his death at
Padua in Italy, in the reign of Queen Mary, by whose favor he had regaind
his fathers honors and possessions. So that all the clear stream from the
spring of York flows in the house of Scotland: The troubled and impure runs
in many veins of the English Gentry. For by the Lady Elizabeth Lucy, he had an
illigitimate Son named Arthur, who by his wives right was Vicount Lile, and
dying without issue Male, left to his three daughters and their posterity some
tincture of the blood royal.

This disease of his blood was the crime which procured both to his government
and memory many hard censures. For though some excuse his lust, as a sin
though black to the eye of heaven, yet no way generally injurious: In regard
the incontinency of one man could not be so diffusive as to wrong a multitude:
Nevertheless who observes the revolutions of Kingdoms, shall find no one
iniquity in Princes so punished. The dishonor of one Lady abused extending the
disgrace of several families, and mighty factions knitting together for
revenge: In the whole stock of injuries none being so cruel to humane nature,
and which with less patience can be dissembled.

His frequent perjurie (a sin which strikes like a Sword with two edges, both
against divine and humane faith) was the crime which renderd him most odious to
the society of man. For impiously he appeard in this to brave heaven,
slighting all solemn covenants made with God: and foolishly preferring before
a holy promise; a little profit, or the satisfaction of his revenge. Which
crime, however for the present it might stand him in some benefit; yet
certainly it might have indangerd him to much loss in all after enterprises,
which depended upon faith. The deaths of Wells and Dimock, of Fauconbridge, of
Sommerset, Lord Prior of St. John's and others, were the wounds perjury gave his
soul, the scarres of which remain yet foul upon his fame. But perhaps he
thought no faith was to be held with an enemy* Or promised, not with intention
of performance: An impious equivocation: but then in practice with his
neighbor Princes both of France and Burgundy: So that the custom may in some
sort seem to privilege the fault.

In his youth he was so uncircumspect, and even when he had the strongest
arguments for jealousy, so overconfident: that it engaged him to extreme
difficulties, and endangerd absolute ruin. But his fortune, almost
miraculously, made up all those breaches, which had been by his carelessness
and presumption laid open: and delighting something wantonly to boast her power
and favor to him, raisd him then highest, when all the world, and almost his
own hopes forsook him. For presently upon the slaughter of his father at the
battle of Wakefield, and the overthrow of his great supporter the Earl of
Warwick at that of Saint Alban: She inthrond him in the Kingdom: Making the
Queen and all the favorers of Lancaster when doubly victorious, retire as
overcome; and the universal acclamations of the people set the regal Diadem
upon his head; whose fathers head at that time, like a Traitors was fixed upon
the Walls of York, scornd with a paper Crown. And afterward when from a
mighty Prince he was become a miserable Exile, forced by the treason of his
chiefest Counselors and powers of his greatest enemy to fly into Burgundy,
where he likewise met with but a dissembled amity: She restored him to what
at first she gave: And whereas his Forces were so weak upon his return into
England; that despayring more, he humbly only desired to be invested in his
fathers Duchy, and vowed never to attempt the Crown: She violently forced it
on him: protesting (by the mouths of the Nobility who resorted to him at
Nottingham) not to afford him safety if he refused the soveraingtie: By which
amorous way of threatening she in a manner wooed him to accept, what he durst
not then hope to recover. And had the appetite of glory more prevailed with
him, then the sense of pleasure, as far as we may conjecture of his fortune;
he might have extended his victories over the world, which are now straightened
with the narrow limits of our Island.

FINIS.

