THE OLD RELIGION: A Treatise, Wherein is laid down the true state of the
difference betwixt the Reformed, and Roman Church; and the blame of this
schism is cast upon the true AVTHORS.

SERVING For the vindication of our innocence, for the setl^ng of wavering
minds for a preservative against Popish insinuations.

By IOS. HALL, B. of Exon.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Nathaniell Butter and Richard Hawkings. 1628.

TO MY NEW, AND DEARLY Affected charge, the Diocese of EXCETER, All Grace
and benediction.
THe truth of my heart gives me boldness to profess, before him, who only
knows it, that the same God, who has called me to the ouer-sight of your
Souls, has wrought in me a zealous desire of your salvation. This desire
cannot but incite me to a careful prevention of those dangers, which might
threaten the disappointment of so happy an end: Those dangers are either
sins of practice, or errors of of Doctrine: Against both these I have
faithfully vowed my utmost endeavors. I shall labor against the first, by
Preaching, Example, Censures; Wherein it shall be your choice to expect either
the rod, or the Spirit of meekness. Against the latter, my Pen has risen up
in this early assault. It has been assured me, that in this time of late
Vacancie, false Teachers, catching the Fore-locke of occasion, have been busy
in scattering the tares of errors amongst you: I easily believe it; since I
know it is not in the power of the greatest vigilancie to hinder their attempts
of evil. Even a full See is no sufficient bar to crafty seducers; Their
suggestions we cannot prevent, their success we may: This I have here
assayed to do; bending my style against Popish Doctrine, with such Christian
moderation, as may argue zeal without malice, desire to win Souls, no will
to gall them. And since the commonest of all the grounds of Romish deceit is
the pretense of their Age, and our Novelty; and nothing does more dazzle the
eyes of the simple, then the name of our forefathers, and the challenge of a
particular recital of our professors before Luthers revolt, I have (I hope)
fully cleared this coast, so as out of the right apprehension of these
differences, my reader shall evidently see the vanity of this cavil, and find
cause to bless God for the safety of his station in so pregnant, and
undeceivable a truth.

For me, I shame not to profess, that I have passed my most, and best hours
in quiet Meditation; wherein I needed not bend mine edge against any
Adversary, but Satan, and mine own corruptions: These controuersorie points I
have rather crossed in my way, then taken along with me; Neither am I ignorant
what incomparably clear beams (in this kind) some of the worthy lights of our
Church have cast abroad into all eyes, to the admiration of present, and future
times; no corner of truth has lain unsearched, no plea vnargued: the wit of man
can not make any essential additions either to our proofs, or answers; But,
as in the most perfect discovery, where Lands and Rivers are specially
descried, there may be some small obscure in-lets reserved for the notice of
following experience; So is it in the business of these sacred quarrels; That
brain is very unhappy which meets not with some trauers of Discourse more
then it has borrowed from another Pen; Besides which, having fallen upon a
method, and manner of Tractation, which might be of use to plain
understandings, the familiarity whereof promised to contribute, not a little,
to the information and settling of weaker souls, I might not hide it from you,
to whose common good I have gladly resolved to sacrifice my self: Let it be
taken with the same construction of love, wherewith it is tendered, and, that
you may improoue this, and all other my following labors to a sensible
advantage, give me leave to impart my self to you a little in this short, and
free preamble.

It is a large body, I know, and full of ordinate variety, to which I now
direct my words; Let me awhile, in these lines, sever them, whom I would never
abide really dis-ioyned.

Ye my dear fellow laborers (as my immediate charge) may well challenge the
first place. It is no small joy to me to expect so able hands, upon whom I may
comfortably unload the weight of this my spiritual care: If fame do not
ouer-speake you, there are not many soyles that yield either so frequent
Flocks, or better fed; Go on happily in these high steps of true
blessedness, and save your selves, and others; To which purpose; Let me
commend to you (according to the sweet experience of a greater Shepherd) two
maine helps of our sacred trade, first, the tender Pastures, and second the
still Waters; By the one, I mean an inuring of our People to the principles of
wholesome Doctrine; By the other, an immunitie from all faction, and
disturbance of the public peace.

It was the observation of the learned King that ever sat hitherto in the
English Throne* that the cause of the mis-carriage of our People into Popery,
and other errors, was, their vngrou^dednes in the points of Catechism; How
should those souls be but carried about with every wind of Doctrine, that
are not well Ballasted with solid informations: Whence it was that his said late
Majesty (of happy memory) gave public order for bestowing the later part of
Gods day in familiar Catechizing; then which, nothing could be devised more
necessary, and behouefull to the Souls of men; It was the Ignorance, and
Ill-disposednesse of some cauillers, that taxed this course, as prejudicial to
Preachings Since, in truth, the most useful of all Preaching is
Catecheticall. This lays the grounds, the other raises the walls, and roof;
this informs the judgment, that, stirs up the affections: What good use is
there of those affections that run before the judgment? Or of those walls
that want a foundation? For my part, I have spent the greater half of my life
in this station of our holy service: I thank God, not vnpainefully, not
unprofitably; But, there is no one thing, whereof I repent so much, as not to
have bestowed more hours in this public Exercise of Catechism; In regard
whereof, I could quarrel my very Sermons, and wish that a great part of them
had been exchanged for this Preaching conference: Those other Divine
discourses enrich the brain and the tongue; this settles the heart; those other
are but the descants to this plain-song; Contemn it not, my Brethren, for the
easy and noted homeliness; The most excellent and beneficial things are
most familiar; What can be more obuious then Light, Air, Fire, Water; Let him
that can live without these, despise their commonnesse: Rather, as we make so
much more use of the Divine bounty in these ordinary benefits, so let us the
more gladly improoue these ready and facil helps to the salvation of many
souls; the neglect whereof breeds instabilitie of judgment, mesprision of
necessary truths, fashionablenesse of profession, frothinesse of discourse,
obnoxiousnesse to all error and seduction. And if any of our people loath this
Manna, because they may gather it from under their Feet, let not their palates
be humored ic this wanton nauseation: They are worthy to fast, that are weary
of the Bread of Angels: And if herein we be curious to satisfy their rouing
appetite, our favor shall be no better then Injurious: So we have seen an
indiscreet Schoolmasters, whiles he affects the thanks of an ouerweening
Parent, mar the progress of a forward Child, by raising him to an higher
form, and Author, ere he have well learned his first rules; whence follows an
empty ostentation, and a late disappointment: Our fidelity and care of profit
must teach us to drive at the most sure, and universal good, which shall
undoubtedly be best attained by these safe and needful ground-workes.

From these tender pastures let me lead you, (and you, others) to the still
Waters; Zeal in the Soul is as natural heat in the body; there is no life of
Religion without it; but as the kindliest heat, if it be not tempered with a
due equality of moisture, wastes it self and the body; So does zeal, if it be
not moderated with discretion, and charitable care of the common good; It is
hard to be too vehement in contending for maine and evident truths; but
litigious and immateriall verities may soon be ouer-striuen for; in the
prosecution whereof, I have often lamented to see how heedlesse too many have
been of the public welfare; Whiles, in seeking for one scruple of truth, they
have not cared to spend a whole pound-weight of precious Peace.

The Church of England, in whose motherhood we have all just cause to pride
our selves, has, in much wisdom, and piety, delivered her judgment
concerning all necessary points of religion in so complete a body of Divinity,
as all hearts may rest in; These we read, these we write under, as professing
not their truth only, but their sufficiency also. The voice of God our
Father, in his Scriptures, and (out of these) the voice of the Church our
Mother in her Articles, is that, which must both guide and settle our
resolutio^s: Whatsoever is besides these, is but either private, or
unnecessary and uncertain: Oh that whiles we sweat and bleed for the
maintenance of these oracular truths, we could be persuaded to remit of our
Heat in the pursuit of opinions: These, these are they that distract the
Church, violate our peace, scandalize the weak, advantage our enemies. Fire
upon the Hearth warmes the body, but if it be mis-placed, burns the house: My
brethren, let us be zealous for our God; Every hearty Christian will power
Oil, and not Water upon this holy flame: But, let us take heed least a blind
self* love, stiff prejudice, and factious partiality impose upon us, in
stead of the causes of God; Let us be suspicious of all New verities, and
careless of all unprofitable; And let us hate to think our selves either
wiser then the Church, or better then our superiors: And if any man think that
he sees further then his fellows, in these Theological prospects, let his
tongue keep the counsel of his eyes; Least, whiles he affects the fame of
deeper learning, he embroyle the Church, and raise his glory upon the public
ruins.

And ye worthy Christians whose souls God has entrusted with our spiritual
Guardianship, be ye alike minded with your teachers; The motion of their
tongues lies much in your ears; your modest desires of receiving needful, and
wholesome truths, shall avoid their labor after frivolous, and quarrelsome
curiosities. God has blessed you with the reputation of a wise, and knowing
people; In these divine matters, let a meek sobriety set bounds to your
inquiries. Take up your time, and hearts with Christ and Him crucified; with
those essential truths which are necessary to salvation; Leave al curious
disquisitions to the Schools, and say of those problemes, as the Philosopher
did of the Athenian shops: How many things are here that we have no need of.
Take the nearest cut ye can, ye shall find it a side way to heaven, ye need
not lengthen it with undue circuitions. I am deceived if (as the times are) ye
shall not find work enough to bear up against the oppositions of professed
hostility, it is not for us to sqander our thoughts and hours upon vse-lesse
janglings; Wherewith if we suffer our selves to be still taken up, Satan shall
deal with us like some crafty cheater, who whiles he holds us at gaze with
tricks of iugling, pickes our pockets.

Dear brethren, what ever become of these worthless driblets, be sure to
look well to the freehold of your salvation. Error is not more busy then
subtle, Superstition never wanted sweet insinuations: make sure work against
these plausible dangers, Suffer not your selves to be drawn into the net by
the common stale of the Church; Know that outward visibilitie may too well
stand with an utter exclusion from salvation. Salvation consists not in a
formalitie of profession, but in a soundness of belief. A true body may be
full of mortal diseases: So is the Roman Church of this day; whom we have long
pitied, and labored to cure in vain; If she will not be healed by us, let
not us be infected by her; Let us be no less ielous of her Contagion, then
she is of our Remedies. Hold fast that precious Truth, which has been long
taught you by faithful Pastors, confirmed by clear evidences of Scriptures,
euinced by sound reasons, sealed up by the blood of our blessed Martyrs; So
whiles no man takes away the Crown of your constancy, ye shall be our Crown
and rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus; To whose all-sufficient grace I
commend you al; and vow my self

Your common Servant in him whom we all rejoice to serve. IOS. EXON.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THe extent of the differences betwixt the Churches. Fol. 1. CHAP. II.
The Original of the differences. Fol. 7. CHAP. III. The Reformed unjustly
charged with novelty, heresy, schism. 14. CHAP. IV. The Roman Church guilty
of this schism. 22 CHAP. V. The newness of the Article of Justification by
inherent righteousness. 27 SECT. II This doctrine proved to be against
Scripture. 36 SECT. III. Against reason. 42
CHAP. VI. The newness of the doctrine of merit 45 SECT. II Against Scripture.
48. SECT. III. Against reason. 50
CHAP. VII. The newness of the doctrine of Transubstantiation. 53 SECT. II
Against Scripture. 62 SECT. III. Against reason. 67
CHAP. VIII. The newness of the Halfe-Communion. 71 SECT. II Against
Scripture. 75 SECT. III. Against reason. 77
CHAP. IX. The newness of the Missall Sacrifice. 79 SECT. II Against
Scripture, 81 SECT. III. Against reason. 84
CHAP. X. The newness of Image Worship. 87 SECT. II Against Scripture. 94
SECT. III. Against reason. 98
CHAP. XI. The newness of Jndulgences and Purgatory. 100 SECT. II Against
Scripture. 108 SECT. III. Against reason. 112
CHAP. XII. The newness of Divine Service in an unknown tongue. 114 SECT. II
Against Scripture. 120 SECT. III. Against reason. 122
CHAP. XIII. The newness of a full, forced Sacramental Confession. 124 SECT.
II Not warranted by Scripture. 129 SECT. III. Against reason. 132 SECT. IV. The
novelty of absolution before satisfaction. 134
CAAP. XIV. The newness of the Romish Invocation of Saints. 136 SECT. II
Against Scripture. 140 SECT. III. Against reason. 146
CHAP. XV. The newness of seven Sacraments. 148 SECT. II Besides Scripture.
152 SECT. III. Against reason. 154
CHAP. XVI. The newness of the Romish Doctrine of Traditions. 156 SECT. II
Against Scripture. 162 SECT. III. Against reason. 66
CHAP. XVII. The newness of the universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome. 169
SECT. II The newness of challenged Infallibility. 177 SECT. III. The newness
of the Popes superiority to Councels. 179 SECT. IV. The new presumption of
Papal Dispensations. 182 SECT. V. The new challenge of Popes domineering over
Kings and Emperors. 185
CHAP. XVIII. The Epilogue both of Exhortation, and Apology. 190
An Advertisement.
COurteous Reader; I shall entreat you where you find some few, either
^iterall, or verbal faults, to have recourse to this following Errata
committed by the Printer, which will be very unpleasing to the Reverend
Author (who is many miles distant from the Press) which errors if you shall
vouchsafe to pardon in this Impression, they shall be more carefully amended in
the next.

N. B.

Errata.
Page 5. in margin, for Probant, read Prolaeus page 9. in marg. for Pierius,
read Prierius. p. 10. l. 8. for angry part, read angry to part. page 11. lin.
7. for profess, read professes. p. 15. in marg. for Haeresia, read Hereses.
p. ibid. in marg. for Bellidanus, read Bellidauus. p. 22. in marg. for Pushius
read Pighius. p. ibid. for Turrectsm read Turrecremat. p. 24. l. 6. for
censures, read censurers. p. 4^. l. 23. for by And, read by faith. And* p. 43.
l. 22. for muddle, read muddie* p. 48. l. 3. for habita, read habitatio. p. 48.
l. 3. for them yielding. read them; yielding. p. 62. l^ 5. for Barengarius,
read Bereng^rius. p. 118. dele that. p. 124. l. vlt. dele not. p. 140. l. 14.
for practices, read practicers. p. 148. l. 5. read mirror. p. 150. l 14. for
unnecessary, read necessary. p. 163. l. 18. for Salonons, read Salomons.

THE OLD RELIGION.
CHAP. I. The extent of the differences betwixt the Churches.
THe first blessing that I daily beg of my God, for his Church, is, Ioh.
14.27.
our Saviors Legacy, Peace: that sweet Peace; which in the very name of it
comprehends all happiness both of estate and disposition. Adrichoni descr.
Hiero fol. fig. 19^.
As that mountain whereon Christ ascended, though it abounded with Palms, and
Pines, and Mirtles, yet it carried only the name of Olives, which have been an
ancient Emblem of Peace: Other graces are for the beauty of the Church; this
for the health and life of it; For how so ever, Faciunt fau^; and v^s^e faciunt
Ecclesias and Marcionitae. Ter tull. aduer. Marcion. l. 4. c 5.
even Waspes have their Combs, and heretics their assemblies (as
Tertullian,) so as all are not of the Church that have Peace; yet so essential
is it to the Church, in Saint Chrysostomes opinion, Ecclesiae nomen consensus,
concordiaeque est Chrysostom. com. in Ep. ad Gal.
that the very name of the Church implies a consent, and concord; No marvel
then if the Church laboring here below, make it her daily suite to her
glorious Bride-grome in heaven, Da pacem, give Peace in our time, O Lord: The
means of which happiness are soon seen, not so soon attained; even that
which Hierome has to his Ruffinus, Sit inter nes vna fides and illico pax
sequetur Hier. aduers. Ruff.
Vna fides; Let our belief be but one, and our hearts will be one.

But since, as Erasmus has too truly observed, Erasm. Epist. l. 20. Paulo
Decimario.
there is nothing so happy in these humane things, wherein there is not some
intermixtures of distemper; 1. Cor. 11.
and S. Paul has told us, there must be heresies, and the Spouse, in Salomons
Song, Cantic. 2. vlt.
compares her blessed husband to a young Heart upon the mountain of Bether; that
is, Division; Yea, rather, Victor. Perser. Afric. l. 5.
as under Gensericus, and his Vandals, the Christian Temples flamed higher then
the Towns; so for the space of these last hundred years, there has been
more combustion in the Church, then in the civil state; My next wish is, that
if differences in Religion cannot be avoided, yet that they might be rightly
judged off, and be but taken as they are. Neither can I but mourn, and bleed,
to see how miserably the World is abused on all hands with prejudice in this
kind: whiles the adverse part brands us with unjust censures, and with loud
clamours cries us down for heretics: On the other side, some of ours, do so
slight the errors of the Roman Church, as if they were not worth our
contention; Spalat. de hist. Eccles. tom. vlt. lib. 7.
as if our Martyrs had been rash, and our quarrels trifling; Others again do
so aggrauate them, as if we could never be at enough defiance with their
opinions, nor at enough distance from their communion. All these three are
dangerous extremities; The two former whereof shall (if my hopes fail me not)
in this whole discourse be sufficiently convinced; wherein as we shall fully
clear our selves from that hateful slander of heresy, or schism, So we shall
leave upon the Church of Rome, an unavoidable imputation of many no less
foul, and enormious, then novel errors; to the stopping of the mouths of
those Adiaphorists, Melanct. Postill. de Baptismo Chri.
whereof Melancthon seems to have long ago prophesied; Metuendum est, etc. It
is to be feared (says he) that in the last age of the world this error will
reign amongst men, that either Religions are nothing, or differ only in words.

Diog Laert.
The third comes now in our way; That which Laertius speaks of Menedemus that
in Disputing his very eyes would sparkle, is true of many of ours, whose zeal
transports them to such a detestation of the Roman Church, Hooker. Eccles.
Pol. l 4.. 3. Comment. in Euang. saepe. Patres nostri and saluberrimam
consuetudinem tenuerunt vt quicquid diuinum ac legitimum, etc. Aug-Neque
propter paleam relinquimus aream Domini, neque propter pisees malos rumpimus
retia domini Aug, Epist. 48 Sic Anabaptistae accusant Paedobaptismum. Papismi
Cliston, contr. Smith. Sic Neariani Trinitatem arguunt and articulum Papae.
Probant^ Fascic^ c. 1.
as if it were all error, no Church; affecting nothing more, then an utter
opposition to their doctrine and ceremony, because theirs; Like as Maldonate
professes to mislike and avoid many fair interpretations, not as false, but
as Caluins: These men have not learned this in Saint Austens School, who tells
us, that it was the rule of the Fathers well before Cyprian and Agrippinus, as
since, that whatsoever they found in any schime or heresy, warrantable and
holy, that they allowed for its own worth, and did not refuse it for the
abettors; Neither for the chafe do we leave the floor of God, neither for
the bad fishes do we break his nets. Rather, as the Priests of Mercury had
wont to say, when they eat their Figs and Honey, (...), etc. All truth is
sweet; it is indeed Gods, not ours, wheresoever it is found, the Kings coin is
current, though it be found in any impure channel.

Nos fatemur sub papatu plurimum esse boni Christiani, imo omne bonum
Christianum; dico insuper and imo vero verum nucleum Christianitatis. Luther.
in Epist. ad 2. pleb. de Anabapt. cit^a Cromero de falsa relig. Lutheran.
For this particular; they have not well heeded that charitable profession of
zealous Luther ( Nos fatemur, etc) We profess (says he) that under the
Papacy there is much Christian good, yea all; etc. I say moreover, that under
the Papacy is true Christianity, yea the very kernel of Christianity, etc.
No man I trust will fear that fervent spirits too much excess of indulgence;
under the Papacy may be as much good, as it self is evil; Neither do we
censure that Church for what it has not; Aliud est credere quod Papa credit,
aliud credere quod est Papae. Prolaeus. ibid. vbi supr.
but for what it has: Fundamental truth is like that Maronaean wine, which if
it be mixed with twenty times so much water holds his strength: The Sepulcher
of Christ was ouer-whelmed by the Pagans with earth and rubbish; Eusebius. de vita
Constantini. l. 3. c. 25.
and and more then so; over it, they built a Temple to their impure Venus; yet
still, in spite of malice, there was the Sepulcher of Christ; and it is a
ruled case of Papinian, Justin. Tit. 1.. 4. Annot. in leg. 12. Tan.
that a sacred place loses not the holiness, with the demolished walls; No
more does the Roman, loose the claim of a true visible Church, by her
manifold and deplorable corruptions; her unsoundness is not less apparent,
then her being; If she were once the spouse of Christ, and her adulteries are
known, yet the divorce is not sued out.

CHAP. II. The Original of the differences.
IT is too true that those two maine Elements of evil (as Timon called them)
Ambition and Covetousness, Magistris vtentes Ambitione and Auaritia Bern, ad
Henric Senonensem.
which Bernard professes were the great Masters of that Clergy in his times,
having palpably corrupted the Christian World, both in doctrine and manners,
gave just cause of scandal, and complaint to godly minds; Quae fuerant vitia,
mores fiunt. Ger^. de negligentia prae^atorum. Ex Seuet. Grauam. Germ.
Which (though long smothered) at last brake forth into public contestation;
augmented by the fury of those guilty defendants, which loved their reputation
more then peace: But yet so, as the complainants ever professed a joint
allowance of those fundamental truths, which discried themselves, by their
bright luster, in the worst of that confusion; as not willing that God should
leese any thing by the wrongs of men, or that men should leese any thing by the
envy of that evil spirit, Matthew. 13.25.
which had taken the advantage of the public sleep for his tares: Shortly
then, according to the Prayers and predictions of many holy Christians, God
would have his Church reformed; How shall it be done? Per disciplinam and
^e^um, nun ^u imsponia. ^en.
Licentious courses (as Seneca wisely) have sometimes been amended by
correction, and fear, never of themselves; As therefore their own president
was stirred up in the Council of Trent, Corrigenda and ^eformanda est
Ecclesiastica disciplina quae iam diu deprauata atque corrup. etc. Orat.
praesid. conc. Trid ses. 11 Prim or dia cuncta Pauida sunt. Cassiod. Luther
offered 95. Conclus. to be Disputed at Wittenb. Io. Tecelius. offers the
contrary Propos. at Francfort. Vid. hist. Conc. Trid. lib. 1. Lutherus, etc.
Ita venio beatissime Pater, etc. Et adhuc prostratus rogo, etc. Epi. ad Leonem*
10 Ibid. Lut. 1 Eckius and Siluester Pierius write ag. Luth. vid. histor. Conc
Trid. Saepe solutisue repestifera. Ser James Hogo strata Dominican Inquisitor
stirs up Pope Leo to capital punishments of Luther and his followers. Ibid
hist. Council.
to cry out of their corruption of discipline; So was the spirit of Luther,
somewhat before that, stirred up to tax their corruption of Doctrine; but, as
all beginnings are timorous, how calmely did he enter, and with what submisse
Supplications did he sue for redress? I come to you (says he) most holy
Father, and humbly prostrate before you, beseech you, that, if it be possible,
you would be pleased to set your helping hand to the work, Entreaties prevail
nothing; The whiles, the importune insolence of Eckius, and the indiscreet
carriage of Caietan (as Luther there professes) forced him to a public
opposition. At last (as sometimes even poisons turn medicinal) the furious
prosecution of abused Authority increased the zeal of truth; Like as the
repercussion of the flame intends it more; And as zeal grew in the plaintiue,
so did rage in the defendant; A primordio iustitiam vim patitur statim vt coli
Deus coepit inuidiam religio sortita est. Tert. Scorpiac. aduers. Gnostic. c. 8.
So as now that was verified of Tertullian (A primordio, etc. From the
beginning righteousness suffers violence, and, no sooner did God begin to be
worshipped, but Religion was attended with envy. The masters of the Pythonisse
are angry part with a gainefull (though evil) guest: Am I become your enemy
because I told you the truth? says Saint Paul, yet that truth is not more
unwelcome, then successful; Bapt. Porta.
For, as the breath of a man that has chewed Saffron discolours a Painted
face, so this blunt sincerity shamed the glorious falsehood of superstition.

Leonis Bulla. Anno 1518.
The proud offenders, impatient of reproof, try what fire and faggot can do
for them; and now according to the old word, Punitis ingenijs gliscit
authoritas.
suppressed spirits gather more authority; as the Egyptian violence rather
adds to Gods Israel. In so much as Erasmus could tell the Rector of Louan,
Erasm. Godesch. Rosemund.
that by burning Luthers books they might rid him from the Li^raries of men,
not from their hearts.

The ventilation of these points dif^used them to the knowledge of the world;
and now, upon serious scanning, Non defuisse magnos Theologos qui non
verebantur affirmare nihil esse in Luthero quin per probatos Authors defendi
possit. Eras. lib. Epist. 15. Godeschalco Rosemund, etc. Theod. Bez* contr.
Andrea^, etc. vid. histor, conc. Trid. l. 1.
it came to this (as that honor of Rotterdam profess ( Non defuisse) that
there wanted not great Di^ines, which durst confidently affirm, that there was
nothing in Luther, which might not be defended by good and allowed Authors.

Nothing does so whet the edge of wit as contradiction; Now, he, who at first,
like the blind man in ^he Gospel (it is Bezaes comparison) saw men like trees,
upon more clear light, sees and wonders at those gross superstitions, and
tyrannies, wherewith the Church of God had been long abused: And ^ow, as the
first Hue and Cry rayseth a whole Country, the world was awakned with the
noise, and startling up, saw, and stood amazed to see its own slavery and
besot^ednesse: Mean while; That God, who cannot be wanting to himself, Hulr.
Zu^ng^^us in Eccl. Zurich. opon^^ se Tratij Sampsoni Mediolan. Francis. Hugo
Constantiens. Episco^us opponit se Zuin glio. ibid. Bullasecunda Leonis Papae.
An. 1520.
rayseth up abettors to his truth; The contention grows, Books fly abroad on
both parts. Straight Bulls bellow from Rome nothing but death, and damnation to
the opposites; Excommunications are thundered out, from their Capitoline powers,
against all the partakers of this (so called) heresy; the flashes of public
Anathemaes strike them down to hell.

The condemned reprouers stand upon their own integrity, call heaven and
earth to record, how justly they have complained, how unjustly they are
censured; in large Volumes defending their innocence; and, challenging an
undeniable part in the true visible Church of God, from which they are
pretended to be eiected; Anna. 1518. Vid. Histor. Council. Trid. l. 1.
appeal, (next to the Tribunal of Heaven) to the sentence of a free general
Council, for their right.

Profer is made at last of a Synod at Trent; but neither free, nor general;
nor such, Tres salui-conductus concessi Protestantibus, sed quam frustra. vid.
Iunij animaduersiones in Bellar.
as would afford (after all semblances) either safety of access, or
possibility of indifferency; That partial meeting (as it was Vid Epist. Epi.
Q^inque Eccles. in histor. Council Trid. Iudicandi potestas apud accusatores
erat. Ruffin. hist. l 1. cap. 17. ^. q. Mu^t^, etc. 3. q. 7. Nullus debet.
Sententia non praesentibus partibus dicta nullius moment^ est Cassiod. de
Amicit. c 5. Nullus ante rectam cognitionem causae debet priuari suo iure.
Rodriguez. Cas. cons. c. 241.
prompted to speak) condems us unheard; right so as Ruffinus reports it in
that case of Athanasius; Iudicandi potestas, etc. The power of judging was in
the accusers; contrary to the rule of their own Law; Non debet, etc. The
same party may not be the Judge, accuser witness; contrary to that just
rule of Theodericus, reported by Cassiodore (Sententia, etc.) The sentence that
is given in the absence of the parties is of no moment. We are still where we
were, opposing, suffering. In these terms we stand, what shall we say then,
if men would either not have deserved, or have patiently endured reproof, this
breach had never been. Woe be to the men by whom this offense comes; For
us, that rule of Saint Bernard shall clearly acquit us, before God, Cum
carpuntur vitia and inde scandalum orituripso sibi scandali causa est qui fecit
quod argui debet, non ille qui arguit. Bernard. ad Hug. de Sancto Vict* Epist.
78.
and his Angels ( Cum carpuntur vitia, etc.) When faults are taxed, and
scandal grows, he is the cause of the scandal, who did that which was
worthy to be reproved not he that reproved the ill doer.

CHAP. III. The reformed unjustly charged with novelty, heresy, schism.
Nos vetera in stauramus, noua non prodimus Eras. Godeschalco, etc.
BE it therefore known to all the World, that our Church is only Reformed, or
Repaired, not made new: There is not one stone of a new foundation laid by us;
Yea, the old walls stand still; Only the ouer-casting of those ancient stones
which the untempered mortar of new inventions, Vide. Fregeu^llij Politic
Reform. An. 1588.
displeases us. Plainly, set aside the corruptions, and the Church is the
same: And what are these corruptions, but unsound adiections to the ancient
structure of Religion; These we cannot but oppose; and are therefore unjustly,
and imperiously eiected; Hence it is that ours is by the opposite styled an
Ablative, Haeresia non tam docent credere, noua, quam vetera non credere: magis
enim heresis in non credendo. Joan. Lensaeus Bellidanus de Christiana libert l.
12. c. 7.
or negative Religion; for so much as we join with all true Christians in all
affirmative positions of ancient faith, only standing upon the denial of some
late and undue additaments to the Christian belief; Or if those additions be
reckoned for ruins: Durand. Ration. lib. 1;
It is a sure rule which Durandus gives concerning material Churches,
applyable to the spiritual; that if the Wall be decayed, not at once but
successively, it is judged still the same Church, and (upon reparation) not to
be reconsecrated, but only reconciled. Well therefore may those mouths stop
themselves, which loudly call for the names of the Professors of our faith,
Fisher. contr. D. White, and D. Featly.
in all successions of times, till Luther looked forth into the World. Had we
gone about to broach any new positive Truths, unseen, unheard of former times,
well and justly might they challenge us for a deduction of this line of
doctrine, from a pedigree of Predecessors; Now, that we only disclayme their
superfluous, and novel opinions, and practices, which have been by degrees
thrust upon the Church of God, retayning inuiolably all former Articles of
Christian faith, how idle is this plea, how worthy of hissing out? Who sees not
now that all we need to do, is, but to show that all those points which we
cry down in the Roman Church, are such, as carry in them a manifest brand of
newness, and absurdity. This proof will clearly justify our refusal; Let
them see how they shall once, before the awful Tribunal of our last Judge,
Accuatio non debet admitti quae non procedit ex charitate 4. qu. 5.
justify their uncharitableness, who cease not upon this our refusal to
eiect, and condemn us.

The Church of Rome is sick; Nec inficior Romans Ecclesiam a prisco suo decore
and splendore non parum diuersam, multisque morbis, and vitijs deformatam.
Cassde Offic. boni vir, etc. Vtilia vero and nolenti ingerenda. Bern. de vita
Solit. Lutherus porrexit orbi pharmacum violentum and amarum; Id quale, quale
sit optarim vt aliquid bonae sanitatis, etc. Eras. Georgio Saxon. Duci. l. 21.
Nouis morbis nouis obuiandum medicamentis. Bern. ep. 161.
Ingenuous Cassander confesses so; (nec inficior, etc.) I deny not (says he)
that the Roman Church is not a little changed from her ancient beauty, and
brightness, and that she is deformed with many diseases, and vicious
distempers; Bernard tells us how it must be dieted; profitable, though
unpleasing, medicines must be poured into the mouth of it; Luther, and his
associates did this office (as Erasmus acknowledges; (Lutherus porrexit)
Luther, says he, gave the World a potion violent, and bitter; what ever it
were, I wish it may breed some good health in the body of Christian people, so
miserably foul with all kinds of evils. Never did Luther mean to take away
the life of that Church, but the sickness; Dulcior est religiosa castigatio,
quam blanda remissio. Ambr. in obit. Theodosser. 6.
Wherein (as Socrates answered to his Judges) surely, he deserved recompense,
in steed of rage; For as Saint Ambrose worthily; (Dulcior est) sweeter is a
religious chastisement, then a smoothing remission.

This that was meant to the Churches health, proves the Physicians disease; so
did the bitterness of our wholesome draughts offend, that we are beaten out of
doors; Non fu^us sed (...). ^aus^^b. ad Per^n. Qui ab Ecclesia and communio
^^, etc. Cyrill, orat. de exitis Animae. Opertebat quidem nihil non far ne
Ecclesiam Deiscinderes. Di^^^. ad Nouat Eusebius. l. S. c. 44. etc.
Neither did we run from that Church, but are driven away, as our late
Sovereign professes by Casaubons hand; We know that of Cyrill is a true
word; Those which sever themselves from the Church, and communion, are the
enemies of God, and friends of Devils; and that which Dionysius said to
Nouatus; Any thing must rather be borne, then that we should rend the Church of
God: Far, far was it from our thoughts, to tear the seamelesse coat; or,
with this precious Oil of Truth to break the Churches head;

Qui statum conturbat Ecclesiae ab eius liminibus arceatur. 2. Epist. Alexand.
Pap.
We found just faults; else, let us be guilty of this disturbance. If now,
choler unjustly exasperated with an wholesome reprehension, have broken forth
into a furious persecution of the gainesayers, the sin is not ours; If we
have defended our innocence with blows, the sin is not ours. Let us never
prosper in our good cause, if all the water of Tyber can wash off the blood of
many thousand Christian souls that has been shed in this quarrel, from the
hands of the Romish Prelacie. Surely, as it was observed of old, that none of
the Tribe of Leui, were the professed followers of our Savior, so it is too
easy to observe, that, of late times, Ingenia generosa doceri capiunt, cogi
non ferunt; cogere tyrannorum est, cogi tantum asinorum. Eras. Rosumdauo. vbi
supra. Cauendum est ne cum r^m dubiam emendare volumus maiora vulnera faciamus.
Alip. Aug. Epist, 239.
this Tribe has exercised the bitterest enmity upon the followers of Christ.
Suppose we had offended in the indiscreet managing of a just reproof; it is a
true rule of Erasmus, that generous spirits would be reclaymed by teaching,
not by compulsion; and as Alipius wisely to his Augustine; Heed must be taken,
least whiles we labor to redress a doubtful complaint, we make greater
wounds then we find. Oh how happy had it been for Gods Church, if this care
had found any place in the hearts of her Governors; who regarding more the
entire preservation of their own honor, then Truth, and Peace, Were all in the
harsh language of war ((...)) smite, kill, burn, persecute: Had they been
but half so charitable to their modern reprouers, as they profess they are
to the foregoing, how had the Church flourished in an vnterrupted unity?
Index Expurgat. Belg. iussu Phil. 2. Antwerp. Offic. Plaut. In Catholicis
veteribus alios plurimos, etc.
In the old Catholic Writers (say they) we bear with many errors, we
extenuate, and excuse them, we find shifts to put them off; and devise some
commodious senses for them; Guiltiness, which is the ground of this favor,
works the quite contrary courses against us: Alas, how are our Writings
racked, and wrested to envious senses, how misconstrued, how perverted, and
made to speak odiously on purpose to work distaste, to enlarge quarrel, to
draw on the deepest censures.

Woe is me, this cruel uncharitableness is it, that has brought this
miserable calamity upon distracted Christendom; Surely, Magdeb, Cent. 2.
as the ashes of the burning Mountain Vesuuius being dispersed far and wide,
bred a grievous Pestilence in the Regions round about; so the ashes that fly
from these unkindly flames of discord have bred a woeful infection, and death
of souls through the whole Christian World.

CHAP. IIII. The Church of Rome guilty of this Schism.
Quae (...) deprauata atque corr^sp^a, ^arum (...) haere^^^m magna ex pa^^
causa origoque ^x^iti^. Ore^, praes, Cone. Trid. sess. 11. Pe^^us Oxon. sum.
council. sub sixto 4. Si authoritas quaer. tur. orbis (...) est vr^^e (...)
fuerit (...) Romae, sieve Eu^^^lij Hic (...) ^gria. (...) d^ctr. fid. Tem. 1 ^ ^
P^s^us. Hierar. Eccl. l. 6.3. Turrect^ (...), and alij Vid. Mart. (...). lib.
4. c. 2.. 6.
IT is confessed by the President of the Tridentine Council, that the
deprauation of discipline and manners of the Roman Church, was the chief
cause and original of these dissensions. Let us cast our eyes upon the
doctrine, and we shall no less find the guilt of this fearful Schism to
fall heavily upon the same heads.

For first; (to lay a sure ground;) Nothing can be more plain then that the
Roman is a particular Church, as the Fathers of Basil well distinguish it, not
the universal; though we take in the Churches of her subordination or
correspondence: This truth we might make good by authority, if our very senses
did not save us the labor,

Secondly, Answer of the Bishop of S. David's Chapl. to Fisher. Nec Papa, nec
Episcopus proprie potest propositionem alihaereticare,
No particular Church (to say nothing of the universal since the Apostolic
times) can have power to make a fundamental point of faith; It may explane or
declare, it cannot create Articles.

Thirdly, Only an error against a point of faith is Heresy.

Fourthly, Those points wherein we differ from the Romanists are they, which
only the Church of Rome has made fundamental, and of Faith.

Fifthly, The reformed, therefore, Gers. An liceat in causis fidei, etc.
being by that Church illegally condemned for those points are not heretics.

He is properly an Heretic, Nil. Thessal. Orat. de dissens. Is proprie
haereticus dicitur qui suo ipsius iudicio condemnatus s^^ sponte seipsum eijcit
ab Ecclesia. Hosius de legitimis Iudicibus rerum, Ecclesias^icarum. l. 2.
(says Hosius), who being convicted in his own judgment, does of his own
accord cast himself out of the Church; For us, we are neither convicted in our
own judgment; nor in the lawful judgment of others; We have not willingly
cast our selves out of the Church, but howeuer we are said to be violently
eiected, by the undue sentence of malice, hold our selves close to the bosom
of the true Spouse of Christ, never to be removed; As far therefore from
Heresy as Charity is from our Censures. Only we stand convicted by the doom
of good Pope Subesse Romano, etc. Extr. de mayor. and obe^. vnam, etc.
Boniface; or S^lu. Prier. Epitom. resp. ad Luther. l. 2. c. 7.
Syluester Prierius. Quicunque non, etc. Whosoever does not rely himself upon
the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and of the Bishop of Rome as the infallible
rule of faith, from which even the Scripture it self receives her force, he is
an Heretic. Whence follows that the Church of Rome condemning and eiecting
those for Heretics which are not, is the author of this woeful breach in the
Church of God.

I shall therefore, I hope, abundantly satisfy all wise and indifferent
Readers, if I shall show that those points which we refuse, and oppose, are no
other then such, as by the confessions of ingenuous authors of the Roman part,
Nilus imputat diuisiones orbis Christiani praesumptioni Romanae Ecclesiae, quae
susceperit in se absque Graecis definire de rebus fidei, and contra sentientes
anathema te ferire. Orat. de dissens. Eccles.
have been (besides their inward falsity) manifest vpstarts; lately obtruded
upon the Church) such as our ancient Progenitors in many hundreds of
successions, either knew not, or received not into their belief, and yet both
lived and dyed worthy Christians. Surely it was but a just speech of Saint
Bernard, and that which might become the mouth of any Pope, or Council; ( Ego
si peregrinum, etc. Ego si peregrinum dogma induxero ipse peccaui, Bern. in
Cant. ser. 30. Cit. Demosth. Annotat. in leg. 12. Tab.
) If I shall offer to bring in any strange opinion; it is my sin: It was the
wise Ordinance of the Thurians, as Diodorus Siculus reports, that he who would
bring in any new Law amongst them to the prejudice of the old, should come with
an halter about his neck into the assembly, and there, either make good his
project, or die. For, howeuer in humane Constitutions ((...), (...). Modest.
Annot. ibid.
etc.) the later orders are stronger then the former; yet, in Divinity, Primum
verum; The first is true, as Tertullians rule is; The old way is the good way,
according to the Prophet; Here we hold us; and because we dare not make more
Articles then our Creedes, nor more sins then our Ten Commandments, we are
indignely cast out.

Let us therefore address our selves roundly to our promised task; and make
good the novelty, and unreasonableness of those points we have rejected; Out
of too many Controversies disputed betwixt us, we select only some principal;
and out of infinite varieties of evidence, some few irrefragable testimonies.

CHAP. V. The newness of the Article of Justification by inherent
righteousness.
TO begin with Justification. Card. de Monte praes. Council. Orat. sua. sess.
11. professes what they meant to have dispatched in 15. days; cost seven
months work. Vnica formalis causa est iu^titia Dei non qua ipsa iustus est,
sed qua nos iustos facit, etc. Council. Trid. sess. 6.
The Tridentine Fathers, in their seven months debating of this point, have
so cunningly set their words, that the error which they would establish, might
seem to be either hid, or shifted; Yet, at the last, they so far declare
themselves, as to determine, that the only formal cause of our Justification
is Gods Justice, not by which he himself is Just, but by which he makes us
just; wherewith being endowed by him we are renewed in the spirit of our
minds, and are not only reputed, but are made truly just, receiving every man
his own measure of Justice, which the Holy Ghost diuides to him, according to
each man's predisposition of himself, Secundum propriam cuiusque dispositionem
and cooperationem. ibid. Si quis dixerit, etc. per eam ipsam for maliter iustos
esse. Vel sola imputatione iustitiae Christi, vel sola remissione peccatorum
etc. anathema sit. Can. 10.11.
and cooperation; And withal, they denounce a flat Anathema to all those, who
shall dare to say that we are formally justified by Christ's righteousness, or
by the sole imputation of that righteousness; or, by the sole remission of our
sins, and not by our inherent Grace diffused in our hearts by the Holy Ghost;
Which terms they have so craftily laid together, as if they would cast an
aspersion upon their adversaries, of separating the necessity of
sanctification from the pretended Justification by faith; wherein all our words
and writings will abundantly clear us, before God and men; That there is an
inherent justice in us, is no less certain, then that it is wrought in us by
the Holy Ghost. For God does not justify the wicked man as such; Nunquam
remittetur culpa quin fimul insundatur iustitia. Bell. l. 2. de Iustificat. c.
13.
but of wicked makes him good; not by mere acceptance, but by a real change;
whiles he iustifies him whom he sanctifies; These two acts of Mercy are
inseparable; Perfecta sunt opera Dei ex Deuter. 32. Bellarm. l. 2. de Iustif.
c. 14. Iustitiam in nobis recipientes vnusquisque suam secundum mensuram quam
Spiritus Sanctus partitur singulis prout vult, and secundum propriam cuiusque
dispositionem. Conc. Trid. vbi supra.
But this Justice being wrought in us by the holy Spirit, according to the
model of our weak receipt, and not according to the full power of the infinite
agent, is not so perfect, as that it can bear us out before the Tribunal of
God.

It must be only under the garment of our elder Brother, that we dare come
in for a blessing; His righteousness made ours by faith, is that whereby we
are justified in the sight of God; This doctrine is that which is blasted with
a Tridentine curse.

Hear now the history of this doctrine of Justification, related by their
Andrew Vega (de Iustif. l. 7. c. 24.) Magna fuit, etc. Some ages since (says
he) there was a great concertation amongst Divines, what should be the
formal cause of our Justification: some thought it to be no created justice,
infused into man, but only the favor and merciful acceptance of God. In
which opinion the Master of Sentences is thought by some to have been: Others
whose opinion is more common, and probable, held it to be some created
quality informing the souls of the just; This opinion was allowed in the
Council of Vienna: And, the Schoole-doctors after the Master of Sentences
delivered this not as probable only, but as certain: Afterward, when some
defended the opposite part to be more probable, it seemed good to the holy
Synod of Trent, thus to determine it. So as, till the late Council of Trent
(by the confession of Vega himself) this opinion was maintained, as probable
only; not as of faith: Forense vocab. Iustif. verbum Iustificandi in alia
significatione vfurpant patres. Chemnit. exam de Iustif. Causa formalis propter
quam homo dicitur iustus coram Deo, Bell. l. 2. de Iustif. c. 1.
Yea, I add, by his leave, the contrary was till then most current.

It is not the Logic of this point, we strive for; It is not the Grammar; it
is the Divinity: What is that whereby we stand acquitted before the righteous
Judge, whether our inherent Justice, or Christ's imputed Justice apprehended by
faith; Yet in the next Chapter he corrects this propter in Chemnitius; and
expresses it by per. l. 2. c. 2. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 2. O miserecordiae
magnitudinem, etc. repenteque iustus apparet. Chrysostom. in Galat. c. 3. Crux
sustulit execrationem fides inuexit iustitiam iustitiam iustitia vero gratiam
spiritus allexit. Ambros. de Jacob. and vita beata. Non operibus iustificamur
sed fide, quoniam carnalis infirmitas, etc. Ibid. c. 6. Non gloriabor quia
men's, etc. Similiter de Cain and Abel. l. 1. c. 9. de fuga, sec. c. 3 and 7.
The Divines of Trent are for the former, all Antiquity with us for the latter.
A just Volume would scarce contain the pregnant Testimonies of the Fathers to
this purpose.

Saint Chrysostom tells us it is the wonder of Gods mercy, that he who has
sinned, confesses, is pardon secured, and suddenly app^ ^st; Just, but how?
The (...) ^ooke away the Curse (says be^ ^ost sweetly. Faith brought in
Righteousness, and Righteousness drew on the Grace of the Spirit.

Saint Ambrose tells us that our carnal infirmity blemisheth our works, but
that the uprightness of our faith couers ours errors, and obtaines our
pardon; And professes that he will glory, not for that he is righteous, but
for that he is redeemed, not for that he is void of sins, but for that his
sins are forgiven him.

Hieron. aduers. Pelag. l. 1. Tunc iusti sumus imperfectos nos, etc.
Saint Jerome tells us then we are just when we confess our selves sinners, and
that our righteousness stands not in any merit of ours, but in the mere
mercy of God; and, that the acknowledgement of our imperfection, is the
imperfect perfection of the Just.

Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 7. ad finem iustus igitur aduocatus noster, etc.
Saint Gregory tells us that our Just Advocate shall defend us righteous in his
judgment, because we know and accuse our selves unrighteous, and that our
confidence must not be in our acts, but in our Advocate.

But the sweet and passionate speeches of Saint Austen, and Saint Bernard
would fill a Book alone; neither can any reformed Divine either more disparage
our inherent Righteousness, Ergo fratres, omnes de plenitudine eius accepimus,
de pl^nitudine miserecordiae, etc. Quid? Remissionem peccatorum vt
iustificaremur ex fide, August. Tract. 3. in Ioannem^
or more magnify and challenge the imputed; It shall suffice us to give a
taste of both:

We have all therefore, Brethren, received of his fullness; Of the fullness of
his mercy, of the abundance of his goodness have we received; What? Remission
of sins that we might be justified by faith; And what more, Grace for Grace;
that is, for this Grace wherein we live by faith, we shall receive another;
says that diuinest of the Fathers; And soon after; Omnes qui ex Adam cum
peccato, peccatores omnes qui per Christum iustificati, iusti non in se, sed in
illo. Nam in se si interroges Adam sunt etc. Ibid. August.
All that are from sinful Adam, are sinners, all that are justified by Christ,
are just, not in themselves; but in him; for in themselves, if ye ask after
them, they are Adam; in him, they are Christ's. And elsewhere; Rejoice in the
Lord, and be glad, O ye righteous: O wicked, O proud men that rejoice in your
selves; Laetamini etc. O qui laetamini in vobis, O impij, O superbi qui
laetamini in vobis; iam credentes in eum qui iustificat impium, etc. Aug. 2.
Enarrat in Psalm. 31. Quis accusauit, etc. Sufficit mihi ad omnem iustitiam
solum habere propitiu^ cui soli peccaui.
now believing in him who justifies the wicked, your faith is imputed to you
for righteousness.

Rejoice in the Lord; Why? Because now ye are just; and whence are ye just?
Not by your own Merits, but by his Grace; Whence are ye just? because ye are
justified.

Who shall lay any thing to the ^harge of Gods Elect? It suffices ^^ee for all
righteousness, that I have that God propitious to me, against whom only I
have sinned; All that he has decreed not to impute unto me, is as if it had
not been; Omne quod etc. Non peccare Dei iustitia est: hominis iustitia
indulgentia Dei, Bern. in Cantic. ser. 23. Et si miserecordia Domini, etc.
Nunquid iustitias meas. Domine memorabor iustitae ^ue soli^es, etc.
Not to sin is Gods Justice, man's justice is Gods indulgence, says Devout
Bernard.

How pregnant is that famous profession of his. And if the mercies of the Lord
be from everlasting, and to everlasting; I will also sing the mercies of the
Lord everlastingly; What, shall I sing of my own righteousness? No Lord, I
will remember thy righteousness, alone; for that is mine too; Thou art made
unto me, of God, righteousness; Non est pallium breue, etc.
should I fear that it will not serve us both? It is no short Cloak, that it
should not cover twain; Et te pariter and me operiet largiter larga and
aeterna iustitia, etc. Bern. sup. Cant. sermon. 61.
Thy righteousness is a righteousness for ever; and what is longer then
eternity? Behold thy large and everlasting mercy will largely cover both
thee, and me, at once; In me it couers a multitude of sins, in thee, Lord,
what can it cover but the treasures of pity, the riches of bounty: Thus he.

What should I need to draw down this Truth through the times of Anselme,
Lombard, Bonauenture, Gerson.

The Manuell of Christian Re^igion set forth in the Provincial Council of
Coleyne, Bellarm. de Iustif. l 2. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 3.
shall serve for ^ll; Bellarmine himself grants them ^erein ours; and they are
worth ^ur entertayning; Qui liber ab omnibus eruditoribus Theologis etiam per
Italiam and Galliam summope^e commendatus fui^, etc. Cass. Consult. Art. 4.
That Book is ^ommended by Cassander, as mar^ellously approved by all the
lear^ed Divines of Italy, and France, ^s that, which notably sets forth the
^umme of the judgment of the Ancients concerning this, and other points of
Christian Religion; ^ Nos dicimus, etc. Nos dicimus hominem per fidem donum
iustificationis tum demum accipere, etc. Enchirid. Colon.
) We say that a ^an does then receive the gift of ^ustification by faith, when
being ^^rrified, and humbled by repen^^nce, he is again raised up by ^^ith;
believing that his sins are ^^rgiuen him for the Merits of Christ; who has
promised remission of sins to those that believe in him; and when he feels
in himself new desires; so as detesting evil, and resisting the infirmity of
his flesh, he is inwardly inkindled to an endeavor of good; although this
desire of his be not yet perfect. Thus they, in the voice of all Antiquity;
and the-then-present Church. Only the late Council of Trent has created this
opinion of Justification a point of faith.

SECT. II. The error hereof against Scripture.
YEt if age were all the quarrel^ it were but light, For, thoug^ newness in
divine Truths is a iu^ cause of suspicion, yet we do no^ so shut the hand of
our munifice^ God, that he cannot bestow upon ^is Church new illuminations in
^ome parcels of formerly-hidden ^erities; It is the charge both of their Canus,
and Caietan, Can. loc. com. l. 7. c. 3. res. haec de Caiet.
that no ^an should detest a new sense of Scripture for this, that it differs
from the ancient Doctors; for God ^ath not (say they) tied exposition ^f
Scripture to their senses.

Yea, Quo iuniores, co perspicaciores. Salmer. in Romans 5. Disput. 51.
if we may believe Salme^on, the later Divines are so much ^ore quick-sighted;
they, like the Dwarf sitting on the Giants ^houlder, ouer-looke him that is
^arre taller then themselves. Haereses non tam nouitas quam veritas reuincit.
Tertull. de Veland. Virgin.
This ^osition of the Roman Church is ^ot more new, then faulty: Not ^^ much
novelty, as Truth con^inceth Heresies, as Tertullian; We ^ad been silent, if
we had not ^und this point (besides the late^esse) erroneous: Erroneous; both
against Scripture, and Reason. A^^inst Scripture, which every where ^acheth,
as, on the one side the ^^perfection of our inherent righteousness, so, on the
other, our perfect Justification by the imputed righteousness of our Savior,
brought home to us by faith.

Job 9.2, 3.
The former Job saw from his dunghill; How should a man be justified before
God? If he will contend with him, he cannot answer one of a thousand; Whence
it is, Prou. 20.9.
that wise Solomon asks, Who can say, My heart is clean; I am pure from
sin: And himself answers; There is not a just man upon earth, Eccles. 7.20.
which does good, and sins not. A truth which (besides his experience) he
had learned of his Father David, Psalm. 141.2.
who could say* Enter not into judgment with thy servant (though a man after
Gods own heart) for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. And i^
thou, Psalm, 130.3.
Lord, should mark iniquities* O Lord, who shall stand?

Esa. 64.6.
For we are all as an unclean thing (we says the Prophet Esaias, including even
himself) and all our righteousness are as filthy rags* And was it any
better with the best Saints under the Gospel? I see (says the chosen Vessel)
in my members, Romans 7.23.
another law warring against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to
the law of sin, which is in my members.

So as in many things we sin all: Iam. 3.2.
And if we say that we have no sin, 1 Ioh. 1, 8.
we do but deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.

The latter, is the sum of Saint Paul's Sermon at Antioch; Acts 13.39.
Be it ^nowne unto you, Men and brethren, that through this man is prea^hed to
you forgiveness of sins; and ^y him all that believe are justified: They are
justified, but how? Freely, Romans 3.24.
^y his Grace: What Grace? Inherent in us, and working by us? No; ^y Grace are
ye saved through faith; Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
and that, not of your selves; it is the ^ift of God. Not of works, least any
man should boast. Works are ours, ^ut this is righteousness of God, Rom 3.22.
which (...) by the faith of Jesus Christ, to all them that believe. And how
does this become ours? By his gracious imputation: Romans 4.5.
Not to him that works, but believes in him who justifies the wicked, is
his faith imputed for righteousness.

Lo; it is not the act, not the habit of faith that Justifies, it is he that
iustifies the wicked, whom our faith makes ours, and our sin his; He was made
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor.
5.21.
Lo, so were we made his righteousness, as he was made our sin. Imputation
does both; It is that which enfeoffes our sins upon Christ, and us in his
righteousness; which both couers and redresses the imperfection of ours. That
distinction is clear, and full; Philip. 3.9.
That I may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith. Saint Paul was a great Saint; he had a righteousness
of his own (not as a Pharisee only, but as an Apostle) but that which he
dares not trust to, but forsakes; and cleaues to Gods: not, that essential
righteousness, which is in God, without all relation to us, nor that habit of
justice which was remaining in him; but that righteousness, which is of God,
Romans 5 1.
by faith made ours. Thus being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. For what can break that peace but our sins?
Romans 8 33. 2 Cor. 5.19. 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 3.28. Romans 4 6. Ad haec vide. Genesis
15.6. Esa. 45.25. Esa. 50.8. Esa. 53.11. Romans 3.20. and 3.26. Romans 3.30. Rom 4
2, 3. Romans 4.9. and 16. Romans 5.9.18.19 Rom 8 1. Romans 10.5, 10. 1 Cor. 4 4. Gal.
2.16. Gal. 3.6. Gal. 3.11.22.24.
and those are remitted; For, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect, it is God that iustifies: And in that remission is grounded our
reconciliation; For God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not
imputing their sins unto them; but contrarily, imputing to them his own
righteousness, and their faith for righteousness. We conclude then, that a
man is justified by And blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered

Let the vain sophistry of carnal minds deceive it self with idle
subtilties, and seek to elude the plain truth of God, with shifts of wit; we
bless God for so clear a light; and dare cast our souls upon this sure
evidence of God; attended with the perpetual attestation of his ancient Church.

SECT. III. Against Reason.
Non maius est creare coelum and terram quam peccatores iustificare. Gers.
Tract. sup. Magnificat. 10.
LAstly, Reason it self fights against them. Nothing can formally make us just
but that which is perfect in it self; How should it give what it has not? Now
our inherent righteousness, at the best, is in this life, Bern. de verbis
Esai. ser. 5.
defective (Nostra siqua est humilis, etc.) Our poor Justice (says Bernard)
if we have any, it is true, but it is not pure: For how should it be pure,
where we cannot but be faulty? Thus he. The challenge is unanswerable.

To those that say they can keep Gods Law, let me give Saint Hieromes answer
to his Ctesiphon; Hieron. ad Ctesiphontem.
Profer quis impleuerit; Show me the man that has done it: For, as that
Father elsewhere, Hieron. de filio prodigo.
In thy sight shall none living be justified; He said not, no man, but, none
living; not Evangelists, not Angels, not Thrones, not Dominions; If thou shall
mark the iniquities even of thine Elect, Bern. in Cantic. ser. 73. Iustitia
actualis imperfecta etc. non desinit tamen esse vera iustitia, and suo quodam
modo perfecta. Bell. de Iustif. l. 2. c. 14.
says Saint Bernard, Who shall abide it? To say now that our actual justice,
which is imperfect through the admixtion of venial sins, cease not to be
both true and (in a sort) perfect justice, is, to say, there may be an unjust
justice, or a just injustice; that even muddie water is clear, or a leprous
face beautiful.

Besides, all experience euinceth our wants: For as it is Saint Anstens true
observation; He that is renewed from day to day, is not all renewed, and so much
as he is not renewed, so much he must needs be in his old corruption; Aug. ad
Hieron. ep. 29.
And, as he speaks to his Hierome, of the degrees of Charity; there is in
some more, in some less, in some none at all; but the fullest measure which
can receive no increase is not to be found in any man, whiles he lives here;
and so long as it may be increased, surely that which is less then it ought,
is faulty; from which faultiness it must needs follow, that there is no just
man upon earth which does good, and sins not; and thence in Gods sight shall
none living be justified. Thus he. To the very last hour our Prayer must be,
Forgive us our trespasses; Our very daily endeavor therefore of increasing our
renouation conuinceth us sufficiently of imperfection; and the imperfection of
our Regeneration conuinceth the impossibility of Justification by such
inherent righteousness.

In short therefore since this doctrine of the Roman Church is both new and
erroneous; Against Scripture and reason; we have justly refused to receive it
into our belief; and for such refusal are unjustly eiected*

CHAP. VI. The newness of the doctrine of Merit.
MErit is next; Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 16. can. 32. si quis etc. augmentum
gratiae, vitam aeternam, and ipsius vitae aeternae consecutionem Anathema sit,
etc.
wherein the Council of Trent is no less peremptory. If any man shall say
that the good works of a man justified do not truly merit eternal life, let
him be Anathema.

It is easy for error to shroud it self under the ambiguitie of words; The
word Merit has been of large use with the Ancient, who would have abhorred the
present sense; with them it sounded no other then Obtaining, O foelix culpa
quae talem meruit habere saluatorem, Ecclesia cauit in benedictione Cerei.
Salm. in 1 Timothy 1. Apostoli a suis ciuibus occidi meruerunt, Aug. in Psalm. 35.
Maiorest mea iniquitas quam vt veniam merear. Genesis 3. Vulg. Tral. vid. Mort.
Appell.
or Impetration; not, as now, earning in the way of condign wages, as if there
were an equality of due proportion betwixt our Works, and Heaven; without all
respects of pact, promise, favor; according to the bold Comment of Sotus,
Tollet, Pererius, Costerus, Weston and the rest of that strain.

Far, far was the gracious humility of the Ancient Saints from this so
high a presumption; Let Saint Basil speak for his fellows; Manet sempiterna
requies, etc. Basil. in Psalm. 114. (...), etc. Veteres omnes summo consensu
tradunt, etc. cassand. Consult. de bonis quaest.
Eternal rest remaynes for those who in this life have lawfully striuen,
((...), etc.) not for the Merits of their deeds, but of the grace of that most
munificent God in which they have trusted: Why did I name one; when they all
with full consent (as Cassander witnesses) profess to repose themselves
wholly upon the mere mercy of God, and merit of Christ, with an humble
renunciation of all worthiness in their own works. Yea that impartial
Author deriues this Doctrine even through the lower Ages of the Schoolmen,
Neque ab hac etc. Scholastici scriptores and recentiores Ecclesiastici, etc.
and later Writers; Thomas of Aquine, Durand, Adrian de Traiecto (afterward
Pope) Clictoueus, and delivers it for the voice of the then present Church;
And, before him, Tho. Wald. tom. 6. sacr. Tit. 1. c. 7. Thomas Wald. praeclarus
Wicklifistarum impugnator. Andr. Vega. l. 7. de Causis Iustif. c. 24.
Thomas Waldensis the great Champion of Pope Martine, against the miscalled
Heretics of his own name, professes him the sounder Divine, and truer
Catholic, which simply denies any such Merit, and ascribes all to the mere
grace of God, and the will of the giver. What should I need to darken the air
with a cloud of witnesses, their Gregory Ariminensis, their Brugensis,
Marsilius, Pighius, Eckius, Ferus, Stella, Faber Stapulensis; Let their famous
Preacher Royard shut up all ( Quid ^gitur is qui Merita praetendit, etc.
Royard. tom. 5. Dominic. 11. post Pentecost.
) Whosoever he be that pretends his Merits, what does he else but deserve Hell
by his Works?

Let Bellarmines Tutissimum est, etc. ground it self upon Saint Bernards
experimental resolution, Periculosa habita est, Perilous is their dwelling
place who trust in their own Merits, perilous, because ruinous; All these and
many more teach this, not as their own doctrine, but as the Churches; Either
they and the Church whose voice they are, are Heretics with us, or we
orthodoxe with them; and they and we with the Ancients.

The novelty of this Roman Doctrine is accompanied with Error; Against
Scripture, against Reason.

SECT. II. Against Scripture.
THat God does graciously accept, and munificently recompense our good works,
even with incomprehensible glory, we doubt not, we deny not; but this, either
out of the riches of his mercy, or the justice of his promise; but that we can
earne this at his hands, out of the intrinsecal worthiness of our acts, is a
challenge too high for flesh and blood, yea, for the Angels of Heaven.

How direct is our Saviors instance of the servant comne out of the field, and
commanded by his Master to attendance. Luc. 17.9, 10.
Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded
him? I trow not; so likewise ye, When ye shall have done all things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants; Unprofitable perhaps (you
will say) in respect of meriting thanks; not unprofitable in respect of
meriting wages; Romans 4.4.
For to him that works is the reward, not reckoned of grace, but of debt:
True; therefore herein our case differs from servants, that we may not look
for Gods reward as of debt, but as of Grace; By grace are ye saved through
faith; Ephesians. 2.8.
neither is it our earning, but Gods gift. Both, it cannot be; For if by grace,
then it is no more of works (even of the most renewed) otherwise grace is no
more grace; Romans 11.6.
but if it be of works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work should be
no more work; Now, Tit. 3.5.
not by works of righteousness which we have done (at our best) but according
to his mercy he saves us; Were our salvation of works, then should eternal
life be our wages, but now; Romans 5.23.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. III. Against Reason.
IN very reason, where all is of mere duty, there can be no merit; for how
can we deserve reward by doing that which if we did not, we should offend? It
is enough for him that is obliged to his task, that his work is well taken:
Now, all that we can possibly do, and more, is most justly due unto God by
the bond of our Creation, of our Redemption; by the charge of his royal Law;
and that sweet Law of his Gospel: Nay, alas, we are far from being able to
compass so much as our duty; In many things we sin all. It is enough that
in our glory we cannot sin; Alex. Pesaut. m. 1.2ae. qu. 4. Artic. 4. disp. 4.
though their Faber Stapulensis would not yield so much, and taxes Thomas for
saying so; with the same presumption that Origin held the very good Angels
might offend; Gloria est gratia consummata. P. Ferius Specim. Schol. Orth. c.
13.
Then is our grace consummate; Till then our best abilities are full of
imperfection; therefore the conceit of merit is not more arrogant, then absurd.

We cannot merit of him whom we gratify not: We cannot gratify ^ man with his
own; All our good ^s Gods already; his gift, his propriety: What have we
that we have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.
Not our Talent only, but the improouement also is his mere bounty; There can
be therefore no place for Merit.

In all just Merit there must needs be a due proportion betwixt the act, and
the recompense. It is of favor if the gift exceed the worth of the service.

Now, what proportion can be betwixt a finite, weak, imperfect obedience
(such is ours at the best) and an infinite, full and most perfect glory;
Pesaut. in. 3. Th. q. 1. art. 2. Valor physicus and entitatiu^^s operum
Christi, etc.
The bold Schools dare say that the natural and entitatiue value of the
works of Christ himself was finite, though the moral^ value was infinite.
What then shall be said of our works, which are like our selves, Absit vt
iusti vitam aeternam expectent sicut pauper eleemosynam. Ruard. Tap. ex Artic.
Colon. Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 2.
mere imperfection; We are not so proud that we should scorn (with Ruard.
Tapperus) to expect Heaven as a poor man does an Alms; rather, (according to
Saint Austens charge (Non sit cap^^turgidum, etc.) (Let not the hea^ be proud,
that it may receive a Crown.) We do with all humility, and selfe-deiection
look up to the bountiful hands of that God, who crowns us in mercy and
compassion.

This Doctrine then of Merit being both new and erroneous, has justly merited
our reproof and detestation; and we are unjustly censured for our censure
thereof.

CHAP. VII. The newness of the Doctrine of Transsubstantiation.
THe point of Transsubstantion is justly ranked amongst our highest
differences. Fons Idolomaniarum Transsubstan. Melanct. Ad amicum, 1544.
Boxhorn. Isag. ad concord. l. 3.
Upon this quar^ll, in the very last age, how many ^ules were sent up to
Heaven, in ^he midst of their flames; as if the Sacrament of the Altar had
been sufficient ground of these bloody Sacrifices. Fox Acts and Mon. passim.


The definition of the Tridentine Council is herein beyond the wont) clear,
(...), etc Council. T^^d. de Transsub. c. 4. Ca^. 2.
and express. If any man shall say that in the Sacrament of the sacred
Eucharist, there remaynes still the substance of Bread and Wine, together with
the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and shall deny that marvelous
and singular conversion of the whole substance of Bread into the Body, and the
whole substance of Wine into Blood, the (Species) semblances or shows only of
Bread, and Wine remaining; In Syraxi s^ro ^ran subsia^tiationem de fi^^^it
Ecclesia. Diu satis erat credere, sieve sub pa^e consecra^o, si^e qu^cunque modo
adesse verum corpus Christi, Eras. Annot. in 1 Cor. 7.
(which said Conversion the Catholic Church does most fitly call
Transsubstantiation) let him be accursed. Thus they.

Now let us inquire how old this piece of faith is; In synaxi sero, etc. It was
late ere the Church defined Transsubstantiation (says Erasmus:) For, of so
long it was (says he) held sufficient to believe that the true Body of
Christ was there, whether under the consecrated Bread, or howsoever. And how
late was this? Scotus shall tell us; (Ante Concilium Lateranense) Before the
Council of Lateran, Transsubstantiation was no point of faith; Bellar. de
Euchar. l. 3. c. 23.
as Cardinal Bellarmine himself confesses his opinion, with a (^minime
probandum.) And this Council was in the year of our Lord one thousand two
hundred and fifteen; Let who list, Ibid. Bellar.
believe that this subtle Doctor had never heard of the Roman Council under
Gregory the seventh, which was in the year one thousand seventy nine; or that
other, under Nicholas the second, which was in the year one thousand and
threescore, or that he had not read those Fathers, which the Cardinal had good
hap to meet with; Certainly, his acuteness easily found out other senses of
those Conuersions which Antiquity mentions; Consitente etiam Suarez.
and therefore dares confidently say (wherein Gabriel Biel seconds him) (non
admodum antiquam) that this doctrine of Transsubstantiation is not very
ancient. Surely, if we yield the utmost time, wherein Bellarmine can plead the
determination of this point, Saltem ab annis ^^^^ngentis dog^a ^ranssub. (...)
anathemate ^^b^^tum. Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 21.
we shall arise but to (saltem ab annis quingentis, etc.) Five hundred years
ago; so long, says he, at least was this opinion of Transsubstantiation upon
pain of a curse established in the Church: The Church, but what Church? The
Roman, ywis, not the Greek. That word of Peter Martyr is true, That the Greeks
ever abhorred from this opinion of Transsubstantiation; In so much as at the
shutting up of the Florentine Council, which was but in the year 1539. when
there was a kind of agreement betwixt the Greeks and Latins about the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, Council. Florent. ^^ss. vlt.
the Pope earnestly moved the Grecians that amongst other differences they
would also accord, (de diuina panis Transmutatione,) concerning the divine
Transmutation of the Bread; wherein notwithstanding they departed as formerly,
dissenting; How palpably does the Cardinal shuffle in this business, whiles
he would persuade us, that the Greeks did not at all differ from the Romans
in the main head of Transsubstantiation; but only concerning the
particularitie of those words, whereby that unspeakable change is wrought;
when as it is most clear by the Acts of that Council, related even by their
Binius himself, Se firmiter credere verbis illis Dominicis sacramentum fieri,
Ibid. sess. vlt.
that after the Greeks had given in their answer, that they do firmly
believe that in those words of Christ the Sacrament is made up, (which had
been sufficient satisfaction if that only had been the question) the Pope
vrges them earnestly still, ( vt de diuina panis transmutatione, etc.) that in
the Synod there might be treaty had of the divine transmutation of the Bread;
and when they yet stif^ly denied, he could have been content to have had the
other three Questions of unleavened Bread, Purgatory, and the Popes Power
discussed, wauing that other of Transsubstantiation, which he found would not
abide agitation. Since which time their Patriarch Ieremias of Constantinople,
has expressed the judgment of the Greek Church, Act. Theol. Wittenberg. Ann.
1584.
( Et enim vere) For the Body and Blood of Christ are truly Mysteries; not
that these are turned into man's body, but that (the better preuayling) we are
turned into them yielding a change, but Mystical not Substantial.

As for the Ancients of either the Greek or Latin Church, they are so far
from countenancing this opinion, Whitak. contr. ^ur. l. ^. fol. 220.
that our learned Whitakers durst challenge his Duraeus; Si vel vnum, etc. If
you can bring me but one testimony of sincere antiquity, whereby it may
appear that the bread is transubstantiate into the flesh of Christ, I will
yield my cause. It is true that there are fair flourishes made of a large
Jury of fathers, giving their verdict this way; Ignat. ad Smyr. Iren. l. 5.
cont. haeres. Tertull. de resur. Orig. hom. 5. in diuer. loc. Cyprian. de Coena
Dom. Basil. in reg. breu. q. 172. Greg. Nyssen. in Ca^echet. Cyrill Hierosol.
Cat. mist. 4. Hilar. l. 8. de Trinit. Ambr. de sacr. l. 4. c. 4. and 5 Greg.
Naz. in Epit. Gorgon. Epiph. in Anch. Chrysostom. hom 24. in 1 Cor. Cyril Alex.
Epist* ad Caelesyrium. Aug. in Psalm. 33. (...) ad Hedib. Theodor. dial 3. I.
eoser. 6. de Ieiunio. Damas. l. 4 de fid. orth. Theophylact. in Luc 22. Et
quidem mutatur; Est enim alia elementi natura, Sacramentialia. Eliens. cont.
Bell. Bellar. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 4.
whose very names can hardly find room in a margin. Scarce any of that
sacred rank are missing; But it is as true, that their witnesses are grossly
abused to a sense that was never intended; they only desiring in an holy
excess of speech, to express the Sacramental change that is made of the
elements, in respect of use, not in respect of substance; and passionately to
describe unto us the benefit of that Sacrament in our blessed Communion with
Christ; and our lively incorporation into him.

In so much as Cardinal Bellarmine himself is feign to confess a very high
hyperbole in their speeches (Non est nouum) It is no unusual thing (says he)
with the Ancients, and especially Irenaeus, Hilarie, Nyssen, Cyrill, and
others, to say that our bodies are nourished by the holy Eucharist.

Neither do they use less height of speech (as our learned Bishop has
particularly observed) in expressing our participation of Christ in Baptism,
Bish. Mortons Appell.
wherein yet never any man pleaded a Transsubstantiation.

Neither have their been wanting some of the Classical leaders of their
schools, which have confessed more probability of ancient evidence for
Consubstantiation, then for this change. Certainly, neither of them both
entered ever into the thoughts of those holy men, how ever the sound of their
words have undergone a prejudicial mistaking. Whereas the sentences of those
Ancients against this mis-opinion are direct, punctual, absolute, conuictiue,
and incapable of any other reasonable sense. What can be more choking then
that of their Pope Gelasius above a thousand years since ( Et tamen, Gel^s.
Pap. de duabus Christ. not. Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 4.
etc.) yet there cease not to be the very substance of Bread and Wine? What
can be more plain then that of Saint Augustine. It is not this Body which
you see, August. in Psalm. 98.
that you shall eat, neither is it this Blood which my Crucifiers shall spill,
Non hoc ipsum corpus quod videtis etc. neque hunc ipsum sanguinem, etc.
sacramentum vobis aliquod com. etc. Vbi slagitiam, etc. Aug. de doctrine.
Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
that you shall drink; It is a Sacrament that I commend unto you; which being
spiritually understood, shall quicken you. Or, that other; where a flagitious
act seems to be commanded, there the speech is figurative; as, when he says,
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. it were an horrible
wickedness to eat the very flesh of Christ; therefore here must needs be a
figure understood. Tertull. contr. Marcionem. l. 4. Theoder Dial 2. and 3
(...), etc. Carnale est dubitare quo modo de coelo descendit, etc. and quomodo
possit carnem suam dare ad mandecandum; Haec inquam omnia carnalia, quae
mystica and s^iritaliter intelligenda sunt. Chrysostom. in cap. 6. Joan. hom 46.
What should I urge that of Tertullian (whose speech Rhenanus confesses to
have been condemned after in Berengarius) My Body, that is, the figure of my
Body; That of Theodoret; The mystical signs, after consecration, lose not
their own nature. That of Saint Chrysostom, It is a carnal thing to doubt
how Christ can give us his flesh to eat; when as this is mystically and
spiritually to be understood: And soon after, inquiring what it is to
understand carnally; he thus explicates it; It is to take things simply as they
are spoken, and not to conceive of any other thing meant by them. Simpliciter
vt res dicuntur neque aliud quippiam excogitare, etc. ibid. In iliud si quis
dixerit contra filium him*
This wherein we are is a beaten path, trod with the feet of our holy Martyrs,
and traced with their blood; What should I need to produce their familiar and
ancient Advocates, who have often wearied and worn this bar^. Athanasius,
Contr. Tryphon.
Iustine, Hom. 7. in Leuit.
Origin, De Coena Dom.
Cyprion, In Epitaph. Caesarij, and ad ciues Nazaian.
Nazianzen, L. de Baptis.
Basil, In Esa. 66.
Hierome, Lib. 8. de Trin.
Hillary, In Joan. l. 3. c. 34.
Cyril, Hom. 27.
Macarius, Lib. de Corp. and Sang. etc. Albin. in Ioa ^. c. 6.
Bertram, besides those whom I formerly cited. Of all others (which I have not
found pressed by former Authors) that of our Albinus or Alcuinus, Bedaes
learned Scholar (who lived in the time of Charles the Great) seems to me
most full and pregnant. Hoc est ergo, this is therefore to eat that flesh, and
to drink that blood to remain in Christ and to have Christ remaining in us;
so as he that remaynes not in Christ, and in whom Christ remains not, without
doubt does not spiritually eat his flesh, although carnally and visibly he
chew the Sacrament of his Body and Blood with his teeth: Dentibus premat, etc.
but rather he eats and drinks the Sacrament of so great a thing, unto his
own judgment, because he presumed to come unclean unto those Sacraments of
Christ, which none can take worthily but the clean; Thus he.

Neither is this his single testimony, Sicu^ etiam a^te nos intellexerunt
homines Dei. Ibid.
but such as he openly professes the common voice of all his Predecessors:
And a little after, upon those words The flesh profits nothing; he adds;
The flesh profits nothing, if ye understand the flesh so to be eaten as
other meat, as that flesh which is bought in the Shambles. This is the
ordinary language of Antiquity, whereof we may truly say as the Disciples
did of Christ, Ioh. 16.29.
Behold now thou speak plainly, and speak no Parable. At last, ignorance
and misunderstanding brought forth this Monster of opinion, which superstition
nursed up, but fearfully and obscurely, and not without much scope of contrary
judgments; till after Pope Nicholas had made way for it in his proceedings
against Barengarius (by so gross an expression as the Gloss is feign to put a
caveat upon) Anno 1060. the Laterane Council authorized it for a matter of
faith, Anno 1215.
Anno 1215.

Thus young is Transsubstantiation; Let Scripture and Reason show how erroneous.

Transsubstantiation. SECT. II. Against Scripture.
WEre it not that men do wilfully hoodwinke themselves with their own
prejudice, the Scripture is plain enough; For the mouth that said of bread,
John 6.55.
This is my Body, said also of the same body, My flesh is meat indeed, long
before there can be any plea of Transsubstantiation; John 6.51.
And I am the bread that came down from Heaven; so was he Manna to the Jews
as he is bread to us; And, Saint Paul says of his Corinths, 1. Cor. 12.27.
Ye are the body of Christ; yet not meaning any transmutation of substance.

And in those words wherein this powerful conversion is placed, he says
only, This is, not, Mat. 26.26.
this is transsubstantiate; and if whiles he says, This is, Mark 14.21.
he should have meant a Transsubstantiation, then it must needs follow, that
his Body was transsubstantiate before he spoke; for This is, implies it
already done. He adds, This is my Body; His true natural humane Body was
there with them, took the Bread, brake it, gave it, eat it; if the Bread were
now the Body of Christ, either he must have two bodies there, or else the
same body is by the same body taken, broken, eaten, and is (the while)
neither taken, nor broken, nor eaten; Luc. 22.19.
Yet he adds, which is given for you; This was the body which was given for
them, betrayed, crucified, humbled to the death; not the glorious body of
Christ, which should be capeable of ten thousand placcs at once, both in
Heaven, and Earth; invisible, incircumscriptible: Lastly, he adds, Do this in
remembrance of me; Remembrance implies an absence; neither can we more be
said to remember that which is in our present sense, then to see that which is
absent.

Besides, that the great Doctor of the Gentiles tells us that after
consecration, 1. Cor. 11.26.
it is bread which is broken and eaten; neither is it less then five times so
called after the pretended change.

Shortly; Christ as man was in all things like to us except sin; Heb. 2.17.
and our humane body shall be once like to his glorious body. The glory
which is put upon it shall not strip it of the true essence of a body; and if
it retain the true nature of a body, it cannot be at the same instant both
above the Heavens, and below on Earth, in a thousand distant places. He is
locally above, Acts 3.21.
For the heavens must receive him till the times of the restitution of all
things; He is not at once in many distant places of the earth, for the Angel
even after his Resurrection, says, He is not here, Mat. 28.6.
for he is risen.

SECT. III. Transsubstantiation against Reason.
Never did, or can reason triumph so much over any prodigious Paradoxe, as it
does over this. In so much as the Patrones of it are feign to disclaim the
sophistry of reason, and to stand upon the suffrages of faith, and the plea of
Miracles. We are not they, Aug. de vtil. cred. c. 14.
who with the Manichees, refuse to believe Christ unless he bring reason; We
are not they, who think to lade the Sea with an egge-shell; to fadome the
deep Mysteries of Religion with the short reach of natural apprehension;

We know there are wonders in Divinity fit for our adoration, not fit for our
comprehending; But withal we know, that if some Theological truths be above
right reason, yet never any against it; for all verity complyes with it self,
as springing from one and the same Fountain; (...).


This opinion, therefore, we receive not; Quod cum affi^matur negatur
impossible and ^t implicat contradictio^^^ Ca^^^n in ^^p^^c. contra^^^.
not because it transcends our conceit, but because we know it crosses both
true Reason and faith; It implies manifest contradiction, in that it referres
the same thing to it self in opposite relations; so as it may be at once
present and absent' near and far off, below and above. It destroys the truth
of Christ's humane body, Spatia locorum toll corpuribus Aug. Ep. 57.
in that it ascribes quantity to it, without extension, without localitie;
turning the flesh into spirit; and bereauing it of all the properties of a true
body; those properties which (as Nicetas truly) cannot so much as in thought
be separated from the essence of the body; Nicetas. In Nazianz. Orat. de
Pontec. quidam ne cogitatione (...), etc. Sic and Aug. Toll ipsa corpora
qualitatibus, etc. Nam sivere sectionem and partitionem diuina natura
reciperet, etc. Cyrill. Alex. Tom 2. dialog. de Trin. lib* 2.
In so much as Cyril can say if the Deity it self were capeable of partition,
it must be a body, and if it were a body it must needs be in a place, and
have quantity and magnitude; and thereupon should not avoid circumscription.

It gives a false body to the Son of God making that, every day, of bread,
by the power of words, which was made once of the substance of the Virgin, by
the Holy Ghost.

It so separates accidents from their subjects, that they not only can subsist
without them, but can produce the full effects of substances; so as bare
accidents are capeable of accidents; so as of them substances may be either
made, or nourished.

Resp. ad Epist. viri docti.
It utterly overthrows (which learned Cameron makes the strongest of all
reasons) the nature of a Sacrament; in that it takes away, at once, the sign,
and the Analogy betwixt the sign, and the thing signified; The sign, in that
it is no more bread, but accidents; the Analogy, in that it makes the sign to
be the thing signified;

Lastly, it puts into the hands of every Priest, power to do, every day, a
greater Miracle, then God did in the Creation of the World, for in that, the
Creator made the Creature; but in this, the Creature daily makes the Creator.

Since then this opinion is both new, and convinced to be grossly erroneous
by Scripture, and reason, justly have we professed our detestation of it; and,
for that, are unjustly eiected.

CHAP. VIII. The newness of the Halfe-Communion.
THe novelty of the Halfe-Sacrament, or dry Communion, delivered to the
Laity, is so palpable, as that the Patrones of it, in the presumptuous
Council of Constance, Constant. Synod. sess. 13.
profess no less. Licet Christus, etc. Although Christ (say they) after his
Supper, instituted, and administered this venerable Sacrament under both kinds
of Bread, and Wine, etc. (Licet in primitiua, etc.) Although in the Primitive
Church, this Sacrament were received by the faithful under both kinds; (Non
obstante, etc.) Yet, Inter alia, propter periculum effusionis. Io. de burgo. 4.
partis cap. 8.
this custom for the avoiding of some dangers, and scandalls, was upon just
reason brought in, that Laickes should receive only under one kind; And those
that stubbornely oppose themselves against it, shall be eiected, and punished as
Heretics. Now this Council was but in the year of our Lord God, one
thousand, four hundred fifty three. Yea, but these Fathers of Constance, how
ever they are bold to control Christ's Law by Custom, Ibid.
yet they say it was ( consuetudo diutissime obseruata) a custom very long
observed;

True; but the full age of this ( Diutissime) is openly and freely calculated
by their Cassander. Cassand. consult. de vtraque spec. sacr. etc.
(Satis constat) It is apparent enough that the Western, or Roman Church, for
a thousand years after Christ, in the solemn and ordinary Dispensation of
this Sacrament, gave both kinds of Bread, and Wine to all the members of the
Church. A point, which is manifest by innumerable ancient Testimonies, both of
Greeks, and Latins; and this they were induced to do, by the example of
Christ's institution. Quare non temere, etc. It is not therefore (says he)
without cause, that most of the best Catholics, and most conversant in the
reading of Ecclesiastical Writers, are inflamed with an earnest desire of
obtaining the Cup of the Lord; that the Sacrament may be reduced to that
ancient custom and use, which has been for many Ages perpetuated in the
universal Church. Thus he; We need no other Advocate.

Yea, their Vasquez draws it yet lower, Negare non, etc. We cannot deny that
in the Latin Church there was the use of both kinds, and that it so continued
until the days of Saint Thomas, which was about the year of God 1260.

Thus it was in the Roman Church; but as for the Greek; the World knows it
did never but communicate under both kinds. These open Confessions, spare us
the labor of quoting the several testimonies of all Ages; Else it had been
easy to show how in the Lyturgy of Saint Basil and Chrysostom, the Priest was
wont to pray, Liturg. Basil. and Chrysostom.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to give us thy body, and thy blood, and by us to thy
people. Vid. Cassand. consult. vbi supra.
How in the Order of Rome the Archdeacon taking the Chalice from the Bishops
hand confirms all the receivers with the blood of our Lord. In Epist. ad
Philadelph.
And from Ignatius his ((...)) One cup distributed to all; to have descended
along, through the clear records of S. Cyprian, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine,
Leo, Gelasius, Paschasius and others to the very time of Hugo and Lombard, and
our Halensis; And to show, how S. Lib. 1 Ep. 2.
Cyprian would not deny the blood of Christ to those, that should shed their
blood for Christ: How S. Lib. de Coena dom.
Austen (with him) makes a comparison betwixt the blood of the legal
sacrifices, which might not be eaten, and this blood of our Saviors
sacrifice, Quaest. in Leuit. 57. Great. decret. de Consecrat. did. 2. c. 12.
comperimus.
which all must drink.

But, what need allegations to prove a yielded truth? so as this haluing of the
Sacrament is a mere novelty of Rome, and such a one, Diuisio vnius eiusdem
mysterij non sine grandi sacrilegio potest peruenire.
as their own Pope Gelasius sticks not to accuse of no less then sacrilege;

SECT. II. Half Communion against Scripture.
NEither shall we need to urge Scripture; when it is plainly confessed by the
late Councels of Lateran and Trent, that this practice varies from Christ's
institution; Etsi. Christus Dominus, etc. non tamen illa institutio and
traditio eo tendunt vt omnes Christi fideles statuto domini ad vtramque speciem
accipiendam astringantur, etc. Council. Trid. sess. 5. sub Pio Anno 1562 cap. 1.
Yet the Tridentine Fathers have left themselves this evasion, that, howeuer
our Savior ordained it in both kinds, and so delivered it to his Apostles,
notwithstanding he has not by any command enjoined it to be so received of
the Laity; Not considering that the charge of our Savior is equally
universal in both; To whom he said, Take and eat, to the same also he said,
Drink ye all of this; So as by the same reason, our Savior has given no
command at all unto the Laity to eat, or drink; and so this blessed Sacrament
should be to all Gods people (the Priests only excepted) arbitrarie and
unnecessary: But the great Doctor of the Gentiles is the best Commenter upon
his master, who writing to the Church of God at Corinth, 1. Cor. 1.2.
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, with all that in every place
call upon the name of Jesus Christ; Nihil differt sacerdos a subdito quando
fruendum est mysterijs, Chrysostom.
so delivers the institution of Christ, as that in the use of the Cup he makes
no difference; Six times conioyning the mention of drinking with eating; and
fetching it in with an ((...)) equality of the manner, and necessity of both,
charges all Christians indifferently (Probet seipsum) Let every man examine
himself, 1. Cor. 11.28.
etc. and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

SECT. III. Half Communion against reason.
IN this practice, reason is no less their enemy; Though it be but a man's
testament, yet if it be confirmed, Gal. 3.15.
no man disanulleth it, (says S. Paul.) How much less shall flesh and blood
presume to alter the last will of the Son of God; and that in so material a
point, as utterly destroys the institution. For as our learned Bishop of
Carlisle argues truly; Half a man is no man, Doct. White cont. Fisherum.
Half a Sacrament is no Sacrament.

And as well might they take away the bread, as the cup; both depend upon the
same ordination: It is only the command of Christ that makes the bread
necessary: the same command of Christ equally enioynes the cup; both do
either stand, or fall upon the same ground.

The pretense of concomitancie is so poor a shift, that it hurts them rather,
for if by virtue thereof the body of Christ is no less in the wine, then the
blood is in the bread, it will necessarily follow, that they might as well hold
back the bread, and give the cup; as hold back the cup, and give the bread:

And could this mystery be hid from the eyes of the blessed Author of this
Sacrament? Will these men be wiser then the wisdom of his Father? If he knew
this, and saw the wine yet useful, who dares abrogate it, and if he had not
seen it useful, why did he not then spare the labor and cost of so
needless an element?

Lastly, the blood that is here offered unto us, is that which was shed for us;
that which was shed from the body, is not in the body, in vain therefore is
concomitancie pleaded for a separated blood.

Shortly then, this mutilation of the Sacrament being both confessedly late,
and extremely injurious to God and his people; and contrary to Scripture and
reason, is justly abandoned by us; and we for abandoning it unjustly censured.

CHAP. IX. The newness of the Missall Sacrifice.
IT sounds not more prodigiously, that a Priest should every day make his God,
then that he should sacrifice him. Antiquity would have as much abhorred the
sense, as it has allowed the word. Nothing is more ordinary with the Fathers,
then to call Gods Table an Altar, the holy Elements an Oblation, Macarium in
altar insult ass, mensam domini euertisse, Socrat. l. 1. c. 10^ Chrysostom. in Ps.
95.
the act of Celebration an Immolation, the Actor a Priest. S. Chrysostom
reckons ten kinds of Sacrifice, and at last (as having forgotten it) adds the
eleventh; All which we well allow; Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 2. can. 1. Verum,
proprium propitiatorium, etc.
and indeed many Sacrifices are offered to God in this one; but a true, proper,
propitiatory Sacrifice for quick and dead, (which the Tridentine Fathers
would force upon our belief) would have seemed no less strange a Soloecisme
to the ears of the Ancient, then it does to ours. Saint Augustine calls it a
Designation of Christ's offering upon the Cross. In lib. sent. Prosp. Hom. 17.
ad Hebr.
Saint Chrysostom (and Theophylact after him) a Remembrance of his Sacrifice:
Emissenus a daily celebration in mystery of that which was once offered in
payment; Prece mystica consecratur nobis in memoria dominicae passionis. Lomb.
sent. l. 4. d. 12.
and Lombard himself, a memorial and representation of the true Sacrifice
upon the Cross: That which Cassander cites from Saint Ambrose or Chrysostom,
Cassand. consult. de sacrificio. Et Ibidem, hoc autem sacrificium exemplar est
illius. Chrysostom. vbi supra.
may be in stead of all. In Christ is the Sacrifice once offered able to give
salvation; What do we therefore? Do we not offer every day? Surely, if we
offer daily, it is done for a recorbation of his death: This is the language
and meaning of Antiquity, Si qu^s dixerit Missae Sacrificium antum esse laudis
and tiarum actionis, etc. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
the very same which the Tridentine Synod condemns in us. If any man shall
say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, or a bare commemoration of the Sacrifice offered upon the Cross,
let him be accursed^

SECT. II. Sacrifice of the Mass against Scripture.
HOw plain is the Scripture; whiles it tells us that our High Priest needs
not daily, as those High Priests (under the Law) to offer up sacrifice, first
for his own sins, then, for the peoples; Heb. 7.27.
For this he did once, when he offered up himself. The contradiction of the
Trent-Fathers is here very remarkable: Christ (say they) who on the altar of
the Cross offered himself in a bloody Sacrifice, Co^ Tri^. sess. 6 cap. 2.
is now this true Propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass made by himself: He is
one and the same Sacrifice, and one and the same offerer of that Sacrifice, by
the Ministry of his Priests, who then offered himself on the Cross; So
then, they say, that Christ offered up that Sacrifice then, and this now: Saint
Paul says he offered up that Sacrifice and no more. Saint Paul says our High
Priest needs not to offer daily Sacrifice. They say these daily Sacrifices must
be offered by him; Saint Paul says that he offered himself but once, for the
sins of the people. They say he offers himself daily for the sins of quick
and dead: And if the Apostle in the spirit of prophecy foresaw this error,
and would purposely fore-stall it, he could not speak more directly, Heb.
10.10.
then when he says, We are sanctified through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ, once for all. And every High Priest stands daily ministering
and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never take away sins;
Verse 11, 12.
But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, Verse 13, 14.
for ever sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting till
his enemies be made his footstool: For by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.

Now let the vain heads of men seek subtle euasions in the different manner
of this offering, Sola offerendi ratione diuersa. Ibid. Council. Trid
bloody then, unbloody now; The Holy Ghost speaks punctually of the very
substance of the act; and tells us absolutely, there is but one Sacrifice once
offered by him in any kind; Else the opposition that is there made betwixt the
Legal Priesthood and his, should not hold, if, as they, so he had often
properly and truly sacrificed.

That I may not say they build herein what they destroy; for an unbloody
Sacrifice, in this sense, can be no other then figurative, and commemoratiue.
Is it really propitiatory? Heb. 9.12.
Without shedding of blood there is no remission. If therefore sins be remitted
by this Sacrifice, it must be in relation to that blood, which was shed in his
true personal Sacrifice upon the Cross; and what relation can be betwixt
this and that, but of representation and remembrance; Cassand. Consult. de
sacrif.
in which their moderate Cassander fully rests?

SECT. III. Missall Sacrifice against reason.
IN reason, there must be in every Sacrifice (as Cardinal Bellarmine grants)
a destruction of the thing offered; and shall we say that they make their
Savior to crucify him again? Bell. l. 1. de Missa, cap. 2.
No, but to eat him; For ( Consumptio seu manducatio quae sit a sacerdote) The
consumption or manducation which is done of the Priest is an essential part of
this Sacrifice; (says the same Author;) For in the whole action of the Mass,
there is (says he) no other real destruction but this:

Suppose we then the true humane flesh, blood, and bone of Christ, God and man,
really and corporally made such by this Transsubstantiation, Whether is more
horrible to crucify, or to eat it?

By this rule it is the Priests teeth, and not his tongue, that makes Christ's
body a sacrifice:

By this rule it shall be ( hostia) an host, when it is not a Sacrifice; and a
reserved host is no Sacrifice, howsoever consecrated. And what if a mouse, or
other vermin, Io* de Burg 4. partis c. 8. de Ministratione Euch. Salmer. Tom.
8. Tract. 29. An Euchar. sit proprie sacrificium
should eat the Host (it is a case put by themselves) who then sacrifices? To
stop all mouths; Laics eat as well as the Priest, there is no difference in
their manducation, but Laics sacrifice not; And (as Salmeron vrges) the
Scripture distinguishes betwixt the Sacrifice and the participation of it; 1.
Cor. 10.8.
Are not they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? And in the
very Canon of the Mass, Vt quot quot, etc. the prayer is, that all we which
in the participation of the Altar have taken the sacred body and blood of thy
Son, etc. Wherein it is plain, says he, that there is a distinction betwixt
the Host, and the eating of the Host.

Lastly, sacrificing is an act done to God; if then eating be sacrificing, The
Priest eats his God to his God; Quorum Deus venture. Whiles they in vain study
to reconcile this new-made Sacrifice of Christ already in heaven, with ( Iube
haec perferri) Command these to be carried by the hands of thine holy Angels to
thine high Altar in Heaven, in the sight of thy divine Majesty: We conclude,
That this proper and propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, as a new, unholy,
unreasonable sacrifice is justly abhorred by us, and we for abhorring it
unjustly eiected.

CHAP. X. Newness of Image Worship.
AS for the setting up, and worshipping of Images, we shall not need to
climb so high, as Arnobius, or Origin, or the Council of Eliberis, Anno 305.
Or to that fact and history of Epiphanius, Epist. Epiphan. Inter opera Hierom.
etc.
(whose famous Epistle is honored by the Translation of Hierome) of the
picture found by him in the Church of the village of Anablatha, though out of
his own Diocese; how he tore it in an holy zeal; and wrote to the Bishop of
the place, Quae contra religionem nostram veniunt, etc.
beseeching him that no such pictures may be hanged up, contrary to our
religion; Though (by the way) who can but blush at Master Fishers evasion, that
it was sure the picture of some profane Pagan, When as Epiphanius himself
there says it had ( Imaginem quasi Christi, vel sancti cuiusdam;) the Image,
as it were of Christ, or some Saint: Surely therefore the Image went for
Christ's, or for some noted Saints; neither does he find fault with the
irresemblance, but with the Image; as such:

Biblioth. Patr. ^om. 9.
That of Agobardus is sufficient for us; (Nullus antiquorum Catholicorum) None
of the ancient Catholics ever thought, that Images were to be worshipped, or
adored; They had them indeed, but for historie-sake; To remember the Saints by,
not to worship them.

Greg Epi^t. l. 9. Epist. 9. Indict. 4
The decision of Gregory the Great (some six hundred years after Christ) which
he gave to Serenus Bishop of Massilia, is famous in every man's mouth, and pen:
(Et quidem quia eas adorari vetuisses, etc.) We commend you (says he) that
you forbade those Images to be worshipped; but we reprove your breaking of
them; adding the reason of both; For that they were only retained for history
and instruction, not for adoration; which ingenuous Cassander so comments upon,
Cassand. Consult. 2^. Artic. de cultu Imag.
as that he shows this to be a sufficient declaration of the judgment of the
Roman Church in those times. (Videlicet ideo haberi picturas, etc.) That Images
are kept not to be adored and worshipped, but that the ignorant by beholding
those pictures might, as by written records, be put in mind of what has been
formerly done, and be thereupon stirred up to piety; And the same Author
tells us, that (Sanioribus scholasticis displicet etc.) the sounder Schoolmen
disliked that opinion of Thomas Aquine, who held that the Image is to be
worshipped with the same adoration, which is due to the thing represented by
it; reckoning up Durand, Holcot, Biel. Not to spend many words in a clear
case. What the judgment and practice of our Ancestors in this Island was,
concerning this point, appears sufficiently by the relation of Roger Houeden
our Historian; Rog. Houeden. Part. Annal 1. Anno 792. fol. 3
Who tells us that in the year 792. Charles the King of France sent into this
Isle, a Synodall Book directed unto him from Constantinople, wherein there
were diverse offensive passages; but especially this one, that by the unanimous
consent of all the Doctors of the East, and no fewer then 300. Bishops, it was
decreed, that Images should be worshipped (quod Ecclesia Deiexecratur) (says
he) which the Church of God abhorres. Against which error, Albinus (says he)
wrote an Epistle maruellously confirmed by authority of divine Scriptures; and
in the person of our Bishops and Princes exhibited it together with the said
Book unto the French King; This was the settled resolution of our
Predecessors; And if since that time prevailing superstition have incroached
upon the ensuing succession of the Church, ((...)) Let the old rules stand, as
those Fathers determined: Away with novelties.

But, good Lord, how apt men are to raise or believe lies for their own
advantages? Vspergensis, Vid. Binium in vita Constantini P.
and other friends of Idolatry, tell us of a Council held at London, in the
days of Pope Constantine, Anno 714. wherein the worship of Images was
publicly decreed; the occasion whereof was this: Egwin the Monk, (after made
Bishop) had a vision from God, wherein he was admonished to set up the Image
of the Mother of God, in his Church. The matter was debated; and brought before
the Pope in his See Apostolic; There, Egwin was sworn to the truth of his
vision. Thereupon Pope Constantine sent his Legate Boniface into England; who
called a Council at London; wherein, after proof made of Egwins visions,
there was an act made for Image Worship. A figment so gross, that even their
Baronius and Binius fall foul upon it, with a (facile inducimur, etc.) we are
easily induced to believe it to be a lie. Their ground is, that it is destitute
of all testimony of Antiquity; and besides, that it does directly cross the
report of Beda, who tells us that our English, together with the Gospel,
received the use of Images from their Apostle Augustine; and therefore needed
not any new vision for the entertainment thereof. Let us inquire then a little
into the words of Beda; Beda Eccles. hist. Angl. l. 1. c. 25. etc.
At illi (but they, Augustine and his fellows) non daemoniaca etc. came armed
not with the power of Devils, but of God, bearing a silver Cross for their
Standard, and the image of our Lord and Savior painted in a Table, and singing
Letanies both for the salvation of themselves, and of them whom they came to
convert. Thus he.

This shows indeed, that Augustine and his fellows brought Images into
England, unknown here before; (A point worthy of good observation) but how
little this proves the allowed worship of them, will easily appear to any
reader, if he consider, that Gregory the first and Great was he, that sent
this Augustine in England, whose judgment concerning Images is clearly
published by himself to all the world in his forecited Epistle, absolutely
condemning their adoration; Augustine should have been an ill Apostle, if he
had herein gone contrary to the will of him that sent him. If withal he shall
consider, that within the very same centurie of years, the Clergy of
England, by Albinus Bedes Scholar, sent this public declaration of their
earnest disauowing both of the doctrine and practice of Image Worship.

SECT. II. Image Worship against Scripture.
AS for Scripture. We need not to go further then the very second
Commandment; the charge whereof is so inevitable, that it is very ordinarily
(doubtless, in the guiltiness of an apparent check) left out in the
deuotionall Books to the people. Azorius Institut. l. 9. c. 6. cites for this
opinion. Alex. p. 3. q. 30. memb. 3. art. 3. Albert. 3. d. 9. art. 4. Bonauent.
3. d. 9 1. q. Richard. 3. d. 9. art 2. q 1. Palud. 3. d. 9. q. 1. Marsil. 3. q.
8. Henriq. quod^ lib. 10 q. 6. Cent. 2. c. 5.
Others, since they cannot raze it out, would feign limit it to the Jews,
pretending that this precept against the worship of Images was only Temporal,
and Ceremonial, and such as ought not to be in force under the Times of the
Gospel;

Wherein they recall to my thoughts that which Epiphanes the son of Carpocrates
answered, When his lust was checked with the command of (Non concupisces).
True, said he, that is to be understood of the Heathen, whose Wives and
Sisters we may not indeed lust after.

Some more modest spirits are ashamed of that shift, and fly to the distinction
of Idols and Images; a distinction, without a difference; of their making, not
of Gods; Of whom we never learned other, (...). sept. simulachr. verse. Acts
7.41. and 15.20. 1. Cor. 12.2. 1. John 5.21.
then that as every Idol is an Image of something so every Image worshipped
turns Idol: The Language differs, not the thing it self:

To be sure, God takes order for both, Ye shall make you no Idol, Leuit.
26.1. Deuteronomy 16.22. Esaias 42.17. and 45.16. Mich 5.13. Abac. 2.18, 19. Zach. 10 2.
Esaias 2 8. and 3^.22. and 41 7 and verse 22, 23, 24 29. and Esaias 44.12. Ier.
7.18 and 8.9. and 10.8. Ezec. 6.3. and 13 and 20.28.32. Ezec. 23.27. Ose 8.4,
5. Mic. 1.7.
nor graven Image, neither rear you up any standing Image, neither shall you
set up any Image of stone in your Land to bow down to it;

Yea, as their own vulgar turns it, Non facies tibi, etc. statuam, Thou shall
not set thee up a Statue which God hates. The Book of God is full of his
indignation against this practice.

We may well shut up all with that curse in Mount Geresim, Cursed be the man
that makes any graven, Deuteronomy. 27.15.
or molten Image, an abomination unto the Lord; the work of the hands of the
craftsman, and puts it in a secret place. And all the people shall say,
Amen. Surely, their Durandus after he has cited diverse Scriptures against
Idols, as Exodus 20. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 4. Numb. 21. etc. at last concludes,
Durand. Ration. l. 1. c. 3. Ex his and similibus anthoritatibus reprobatur
^imius imaginem vsus.
Ex his and similibus, etc. By these and the like authorities is condemned the
too much use of Images.

Now because many eyes are bleared with a pretense of worshipping these, not as
Gods, but as resemblances of Gods friends; Let any indifferent man but read the
Epistle of Jeremy (Baruch 6.) (canonical to them, though not to us) and
compare the estate and usage of those ancient Idols, with the present Images of
the Roman Church, and if he do not find them fully paralleld, let him
condemn our quarrel of injustice.

But we must needs think them hard driven for Scripture, when they run for
shelter under that Text, which professedly taxes them, (...), etc. In
illicitis Idolorum cultibus, says Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 4.3. We turn it well
abominable Idolatries. Greg. Val. l. 2. Apol. de Idol. c. 7. Neque absurd
profecto putaueris. B. Patrum insinuauisse cultum aliquem simulachrorum rectum
esse, etc. contra Herbrandum.
In unlawful Idolatries; speaking of the Gentiles; Therefore, says Valentia,
there is a lawful worship of Idols. As if that were an Epithete of favor,
which is intended to aggrauation; So he that should call Satan an unclean
Devil should imply that some Devil is not unclean; or, deceiuable lusts,
some lusts deceitlesse; or hateful wickedness, some wickedness not hateful;
The man had forgot that the Apostle spoke of the heathenish Idolatry; wherein
himself cannot plead any color of lawfulness: May this therefore befrend
them to call Idolatry abominable, the Scripture is theirs; neither can they
look for ^^y other countenance from those sacred monuments.

SECT. III.
WHat need we seek any other reason of Gods prohibition then his will: And
yet God himself has given abundant reason of his prohibition of Images
erected to himself.

Esaias 40.18.
To whom will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him. Ye saw
no manner of similitude in the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb. Deuteronomy.
4.15.
It is an hie injury to the infinite and spiritual nature of God to be
resembled by bodily shapes; Esaias 42.8. Si quis puram creaturam propter
quamcunque excellentiam colit cultu and honor maiori quam puro humano, culius
hic iam accedit ad cultum religiosum and per cons. ad diuinum Spalat. de Rep.
Eccl. l. 7. c. 12.
And, for the worship of Images erected to himself, or his creature. I am the
Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, nor my praise
to molten Images. The holy jealousy of the Almighty will not abide any of his
honor divided with his creature; and what ever worship more then mere humane
is imparted to the creature, sets it in riualitie with our Maker.

The man is better then his picture; Sed neque Elias adorandus est, etiamsi in
viuis sit, neque Ioannes adorandus, etc. Epiphan. cont. Collyrid. her. 79. Acts
10 26. Revel 19.10. Diog. Laert.
and if religious worship will not be allowed to the person of man, or Angel,
how much less to his Image; Not to man; Saint Peter forbids it; Not to Angel,
himself forbids it. What a madness then is it for a living man to stoop unto
a dead stock; unless (as that Cynicke had wont to speak unto statues) to use
himself to repulses?

This courtesy was too shameful in the Pagans of old, how much more
intolerable in Christians: And as for that last shift of this unlawful
devotion, that they worship not the Image, but, by it, the person represented;
Haec a Paganis afferri solebat, Per illa colitur Deus Less. de Iure, etc. de
relig. l. 2.36. dub. Cassand. Cons. Art. 21.
This (says Cassander, out of the evidence of Arnobius and Lactantius, to whom
he might have added Saint Augustine) was the very evasion of the old Heathen;
( Nec valebat tunc illa ratio) Neither would this color then serve, how can it
hope now to pass and find allowance?

The doctrine therefore and practice of Image Worship, as late as erroneous, is
justly rejected by us; who according to Saint Ieroms profession, Nos non dico
Martyrio reliquias etc. Hier. ad Riparium.
worship not the relics of Martyrs, nor Sun, nor Moon, nor Angels, nor
Archangels, nor Cherubim, nor Seraphin, nor any name that is named in this
world, or in the world to come; and unjustly are we hereupon eiected.

CHAP. XI. The newness of Indulgences and Purgatory.
NOthing is more palpable then the novelty of Indulgences, or pardons, as they
are now of use in the Roman Church; the intolerable abuse whereof, His^^^*
Council. Tr^^. l. 1.
gave the first hint to Luthers inquiry; Pope Leo had gratified his sister
Magdalene with a large Monopoly of German pardons; Aremboldus her Factor was
too covetous, and held the market too high: The height of these ouerrated wares
caused the chapmen to inquire into their worth; They were found as they are,
both for age and dignity; for age so new, as that Cornelius Agrippa, De'vanit.
scient. c. 61. De Invent. rep. lib. 8. c. 1. Dies Indulgentiam referuntur ad
poenitentias pro vita iniunctas. Gers. reg. moral.
and Polydore Virgil, and Machiauell (and who not?) tells us Boniface the
eighth, who lived Anno 1300. was the first that extended Indulgences to
Purgatory, the first that devised a Iubilee for the full utterance of them;
The Indulgences of former times were no other then relaxations of Canonical
Penances, which were enjoined to heinous sinners; whereof Burchard the Bishop
of Worms set down many particulars, about the 1020. For example, if a man had
committed wilful murder, he was to fast forty days together, in bread and
water, (which the common people calls a Lent) and to observe a course of
penance for seven years after; Now these years of penance, and these Lents
were they, which the pardons of former times were used to strike off, or abate,
according as they found reason in the disposition of the Penitent; which may
give light to those terms of so many Lents and years remitted in former
Indulgences. But that there should be a sacred treasure of the Church, wherein
are heaped up piles of satisfactions of Saints, whereof only the Pope keeps
the keys, and has power to dispense them where he lists, is so late a
device, that Gregory of Valence is forced to confess, that not so much as
Gratian, or Peter Lombard (which wrote about 400. years before him) ever made
mention of the name of Indulgence;

Well therefore might Durand and Antonine grant it not to be found either in
the Scriptures, Greg. de Val. and Bellar. l. 2. de Indulgent.
or in the writings of the ancient Doctors; and our B. Fisher goes so far in
the acknowledgement of the newness hereof, that he has run into the censure
of late Jesuits.

Just and warrantable is that challenge of learned Chemnitius, Chemn. Exam. de
Indulgen. c. 4.
that no testimony can be produced of any Father, or of any ancient Church,
that either such doctrine, or practice of such Indulgences was ever in use,
until toward one thousand, two hundred years after Christ. Talium
indulgentiarum: Some there were in the time immediately foregoing; but such as
now, they were not. Besides, Eugenius his time which was too near the Verge;
Ibid.
for the words of Chemnitius are For well-neere a thousand two hundred years.
(Per annos ferme mill ducentos) Bellarmine instances in the the third
Council of Lateran, about the year 1116. wherein Pope Paschal the second gave
Indulgences of forty days to those which visited the threshold of the
Apostles; but it must be considered, that we must take this upon the bare word
of Conradus Vrspergensis. Secondly, that this Indulgence of his is no other but
a relaxation of Canonical penance.

For he adds, which Bellarmine purposely concealeth ( ijs qui de capitalibus,
etc.) to those that should do penance for capital sins, he released forty
days penance; So as this instance helps nothing; neither are the rest, which
he has raked together within the compass of a few preceding years, of any
other alloy.

Neither has that Cardinal offered to cite one Father for the proof of this
practice; the birth whereof was many hundred years after their expiration; but
cunningly shifts it off with a cleanly excuse, Bellar. lib. 2. de Indulgent. c.
17.
Neque mirum, etc. Neither may it seem strange if we have not many ancient
Authors, that make mention of these things in the Church, which are preserved
only by use, not by writing: So he: He says, Not many authors; he shows not
one: And if many matters of rite have been traduced to the Church without
notice of pen, or press; yet, let it be shown what one doctrine, or practice
of such importance (as this is pretended to be) has escaped the report, and
maintenance of some Ecclesiasticke Writer, or other, and we shall willingly
yield it in this; Till then, we shall take this but for a mere color, and
resolve that our honest Roffensis deals plainly with us; who tells us, Quam
diu nulla fuerat de Purgatorio cura, etc. So long as there was no care of
Purgatory, no man sought after Indulgences; for upon that depends all the
opinion of pardons; If you take away Purgatory, wherefore should we need
pardons? Since therefore Purgatory was so lately known, and received of the
whole Church, who can marvel concerning Indulgences, that there was no use of
them in the beginning of the Church. Indulgences then began, after men had
trembled somewhile at the torments of a Purgatory; Thus their Martyr, not
partially for us, but ingenuously out of the power of truth professes the
novelty of two great Articles of the Roman Creed; Purgatory and Indulgences.
Indeed, both these now hang on one string; Although there was a kind of
Purgatory dreamed of, Aug. Enchir. c. 69. De Ciuit. Dei, l. 21. c. 26.
Quicquid sit quod illo significatur sum Abbrabae confess. l. 9 c. 3. Sermon. de
Temp. 232. Qui cum Christo regnare non meruerit, cum diabolo absque dubitatione
peribit etc. ibid. and the like De civitate Dei, l. 21. cap. 25. Cypr. contra
Demetrian. ad finem. Hic etiam nobis est. prompta medela, Post autem clausa est
omnis medicina salutis.
before their pardons came into play: That device peept out fearfully from
Origin; and pulled in the head again, as in Saint Austens time, doubting to
show it; Tale aliquod, etc. That there is some such thing (says he) after
this life it is not utterly incredible, and may be made a question: And
elsewhere. I reprove it not, for it may perhaps be true. And yet again, as
retracting what he had yielded, resolves; Let no man deceive himself my
brethren, there are but two places, and a third there is none: Before whom
Saint Cyprian is peremptory; Quando istinc excessum fuerit; When we are once
departed hence, there is now no more place of repentance, no effect of
satisfaction; Here is life either lost, or kept; Naz. Car. de rebus suis. Carm.
1. fig. 13. c. Ambros. orat. de obitu Theodos. ad medium, etc.
And Gregory Nazianzens verse sounds to the same sense. And Saint Ambrose can
say of his Theodosius, that being freed from this earthly warfare; Fruitur nunc
luce perpetua, etc. he now enioyes everlasting light, during tranquillity,
and triumphs in the troops of the Saints. But, what strive we in this? We
may well take the word of their Martyr, our Roffensis for both: And true
Erasmus for the ground of this defense; Eras. Epist. l. 20. Hier. Agathio.
( Mirum in modum etc. They do maruellously affect the fire of Purgatory,
because it is most profitable for their Kitchins.

SECT. II. Indulgences and Purgatory against Scripture.
THese two then are so late comne strangers, that they cannot challenge any
notice taken of them by Scripture; Neither were their names ever heard of in
the language of Canaan; yet the Wisdom of that all-seeing Spirit, has not
left us without preuentions of future errors, in blowing up the very grounds
of these humane devises.

The first and main ground of both is the remainders of some temporal
punishments to be paid after the guilt, and eternal punishment remitted: The
driblets of venial sins to be reckond for, when the mortal are defraied.
Hear what God says, Esaias 43.25.
I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and
will not remember thy sins. Lo, can the Letter be read that is blotted out?
Can there be a back-reckoning for that which shall not be remembered?

I have done away thy Transgressions as a Cloud: Esaias 44.22.
What sins can be less then transgressions? What can be more clearly
dispersed then a Cloud?

Wash me, Psalm. 51.7.
and I shall be whiter then snow: Who can tell where the spot was, when the
skin is rinced?

If we confess our sins, 1. John 1.9.
he is faithful to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Lo, he cleanses us from the guilt, and forgiues the
punishment:

What are our sins but debts? Mat. 6.12.
What is the infliction of punishment, but an exaction of payment? What is our
remission, but a striking off that score? And when the score is struck off,
what remaynes to pay? Remitte debita; Forgive our debts is our daily Prayer.

Our Savior tells the Paralitick, Thy sins are forgiven thee; Mar. 2.5.
In the same words implying the removing of his disease; the sin be gone,
the punishment cannot stay behind: We may smart by way of chastisement, after
the freest remission, not by way of reuenges; for our amendment, not for Gods
satisfaction.

The second ground is a middle condition betwixt the state of eternal life and
death; of no less torment for the time, then Hell it self; whose flames may
burn off the rust of our remaining sins; the issues where-from are in the
power of the great Pastor of the Church: How did this escape the notice of our
Savior?

(...), etc^ John 5.24.
Verify, verily I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and comes not into judgment (as the
Vulgar it self turns it) but is passed from death unto life;

Behold a present possession, and immediate passage, no judgment interuening,
no torment;

How was this hid from the great Doctor of the Gentiles, who putting himself
into the common case of the believing Corinthians, professes; We know, 2. Cor.
5.1.
that if once our earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

The dissolution of the one is the possession of the other; here is no
interposition of time, of estate.

The wise man of old could say. The souls of the righteous are in the hand of
God; Wisd. 3.1.
and there shall no torment touch them. Upon their very going from us they are
in peace. Verse 3.
((...)) as Saint John heard from the heavenly voice; Revel. 14.13.
From their very dying in the Lord is their blessedness.

SECT. III. Indulgences against Reason.
IT is absurd in reason, to think that God should forgive our Talents, and
arrest us for the odd farthings; Neither is it less absurd to think, that
any living soul can have superfluities of satisfaction; when as all that man
is capable to suffer, cannot be sufficient for one; (and that the least) sin of
his own; the wages whereof is eternal death. Or, Collegia clericorum and
conuentus religiosorum aspergunt and incensant corpus Papae, and absoluunt.
Sacr. Cerem.
that those superfluities of humane satisfaction should piece up the infinite,
and perfitly meritorious superabundance of the Son of God; Or that this
supposed treasure of divine and humane satisfactions; should be kept under the
key of some one sinful man; Or that this one man who cannot deliver his own
soul from Purgatory, no not from hell it self, should have power to free
what others he pleases from those fearful flames; to the full
Iaole-deliuerie of that direful prison: which though his great power can do,
yet his no less charity will not, does not.

Or that the same pardon which cannot acquit a man from one hours toothache,
should be of force to give his soul ease, from the temporary pains of
another world.

Lastly, guilt and punishment are relatiues; and can no more be severed then a
perfect forgiveness, and a remaining compensation can stand together.

This doctrine therefore of Papal Indulgences, as it led the way to the
further discovery of the corruptions of the degenerated Church of Rome, so it
still continues justly branded with novelty and error, and may not be
admitted into our belief; and we for rejecting it are unjustly refused.

CHAP. XII. The newness of Divine Service in an unknown tongue.
THat Prayers and other Divine offices should be done in a known tongue,
understood of the people, Cai^t. in 1. Cor. 14. Ex hac Paul^ doctrina h^betur
quod ^^eli^s ad aedis^^ation. in Ecclesiae est orationes publicas quae audiente
po^u^^ dicantur dici lingua communi clericis and po^ulo quam dici Latin. Lyr.
ibid. Council. Later. Anno 1215.
is not more auailable to edification (as their Caietan liberally confesses)
then consonant to the practice of all antiquity; In so much as Lyranus freely,
In the Primitive Church, blessings and all other services were done in the
vulgar tongue.

What need we look back so far, when even the Lateran Council, which was
but in the year 1215. under Innocent the third, makes this decree. Quoniam in
plaerisque, Because in many parts within the same City and Diocese, people
are mixed of diverse languages having under one faith diverse rites and fashions,
we strictly command, that the Bishops of the said Cities or Diocesses provide
fit and able men, who according to the diversities of their rites and languages
may celebrate divine services, and administer the Sacraments of the Church to
them, instructing them both in word and example. Cardinal Bellarmines evasion
is very gross. That in that place Innocentius and the Council speak only
of the Greek, and Latin tongue: For then (says he) Constantinople was newly
taken by the Romans, by reason whereof there was in Greece a mixture of Greeks
and Latins; in so much as they desired that in such places of frequence two
Bishops might be allowed for the ordering of those several Nations. Whereupon
it was concluded, that since it were no other then monstrous to appoint two
Bishops unto one See; it should be the charge of that one Bishop to provide
such under him as should administer all holy things to the Grecians in Greek,
and in Latin to the Latins. For who sees not that the Constitution is
general, Plaerisque partibus, for very many parts of the Christian world, and
(Populi diuersarum ling^arum) People of sundry languages; not as Bellarmine
cunningly, (diuersae linguae) of a diverse language: And if these two only
languages had been meant, why had it not bin as easy to specify them, as to
intimate them by so large a circumlocution? This Synod is said to be
universal, comprehending all the Patriarchs; seventy seven Metropolitans, and
the most eminent Divines of both East and West Churches; to the number of at
least 2212. persons, or, as some others, 2285. besides the Ambassadors of all
Christian Princes of several languages; Now shall we think that there were
in all their Territories and Jurisdictions no mixtures of inhabitants, but
only of Grecians and Romans? or, that all these Fathers were careless of the
rest? Especially, since the end which they profess to propose unto themselves
herein, is the instruction of the people, of what nation or language soever;
which end, as it was never meant to be limited to two sorts of people, so
could it never be attained without this liberty of language fitted to their
understanding: To which may be added, that the Greeks and Latins, of all
other, had the least need of this provision, since it was famously known that
they had their several services already of received and current use, before
this constitution was hatched.

Neither, is it of any moment, which he adds, that in Italy it self this
decree was not extended to the use of vulgar tongues; for that it is evident
that Saint Thomas (who lived soon after) composed in Latin the Office of the
feast of Corpus Christi; not in the Italian; Thom. Aquinin^ Cor. c. 4.
although the same Aquinas confesses that that the vulgar tongue of Italy at
that time was not Latin; For, what child cannot easily see, that if their
great Doctor would write an office for the public use (as is intended) of the
whole Church; he would make choice to write it in such a language as might
improve it to the most common benefit of all the Christian world? not confining
it to the bounds of a particular Nation; Besides what was the Italian (in those
times especially) but a broken and corrupt Latin differing more in Idiome and
termination, then in the substance of speech: That which Radeuicus about the
year 1170. records for the voice of the people, in the election of Pope
Victor, Papa Vittore Sancto Pietro l'elege, makes good no less; for what such
difference is betwixt this, and Papam Victorem Sanctus Petrus elegit; So as
this instance does nothing at all infringe that just decree of the Roman
Fathers. Howsoever, that observation of Erasmus is true, and pregnant to this
purpose, Nec lingua vulgaris populo subtracta est, sed populus ab e a recessit.
Eras. declarat. ad Censur. Purif. tit. 12. sect. 14. Bed histor. l. 1.
(Nec lingua vulgaris ande.) Neither was the vulgar tongue (i. the Latin)
withdrawn from the people, but the people went off from it.

And as for our Ancestors in this Island; Our venerable Bede witnesses, that
in England the Scriptures were read by them in five languages, according to the
number of the books wherein the Law of God was written, namely English,
Scottish, British, Pictish, and Latin; which says he in meditation of the
Scriptures is made common to all the rest. A point which the said Author
specifies for a commendation of the well-instructednesse of those people, not,
as purposing to intimate that the use of the Latin did thrust out the other
four; for, he there tells us that in all four they did not only search, but
confess, and utter the knowledge of the highest truth. This restraint then is
not more new then envious and prejudicial to the honor of God, and the souls
of men.

SECT. II. Against Scripture.
AS for Scriptures. Were this practice so old as it is pretended; Longaeuae
(...) non (...) ritas (...) con^uet, etc
the rule is (Longaeuae consuetudinis, etc.) the authority of an ancient
custom is not to be slighted, so long as it is not against the Canons:
Nothing can be more against the Canons of the blessed Apostle, then this; who,
did he live in these our days, and would bend his speech against the use of a
language not understood in Gods service, could not speak more directly, more
punctually, then he does to his Corinths. How does he tell us, that the
speaking in a strange tongue edifies not the Church, 1. Cor. 14.5, 6
profits not the hearers; produces a necessary ignorance of the thing spoken;
Makes me a Barbarian to him that speaks, Verse 9.
and him that speaks a Barbarian to me.

How does he require him that speaks in an unknown tongue to pray that he
may interpret. Verse 11.
And if he must pray that he may do it; Verse 13.
how much more must he practice it, when he can do it?

How does he tell us that in a strange languaged prayer the understanding is
unfruitful. Verse 14.
Verse 19.
That it is better to speak five words with understanding, that we may teach
others, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Verse 23.
That those which speak with strange tongues are but as mad men to the
unlearned, or unbelievers.

SECT. III. Against reason.
IN which Scriptures (besides authority) the Apostle has comprised
unanswerable, and conuincing reasons against this Romish abuse; Amongst the
rest is intimated that utter frustration of the use of the tongue in Gods
service: For it is a true rule which Salmeron cites out of Lactantius (Nihil
valet ex se etc. Salmeron in illa vos estis sal terrae. Ex Lactanctio.
) That thing is to no purpose which auailes not unto the end whereto it serves:
Silence does as much express the thought, as a language not understood: In
this sense is that of Laurentius too well verified, Laurent. Presbyt. Pisanus,
Paradox. Euangelic.
Sacerdos imperitus mulier sterilis: A Priest unable to express himself is as
a barren woman; incapable of bringing forth children to God: Quid prodest fons
signatus?
As good no tongue as no understanding; What good does a Well sealed up, as
Ptolome said of the Hebrew Text.

Wherefore do we speak, if we would not be understood: It was an holy
resolution of Saint Augustine, that he would rather say Ossum in false Latin,
to be understood of the people, then Os in true, not to be understood: This
practice, howeuer it may seem in it self slight and unworthy of too much
contention, yet in regard of that miserable blindness and mis-deuotion, which
it must needs draw in after it, it is so heinous, as may well deserve our
utmost opposition: The vnauoydablenesse of which effects has carried some of
their Casuists into an opinion of the vnnecessarinesse of devotion in these
holy businesses; so as one says, He that wants devotion sins not; Another,
I^c. Graph. decis. aur. Sylu quaest. 80. Artic. 9.
Though it be convenient that the Communicant should have actual devotion,
yet it is not necessary: Alas, what service is this which poor souls are
taught to take up with; which God must be content to take from hoodwinkt
suppliants? This doctrine, this practice, thus new, thus prejudicial to
Christians, we bless God that we have so happily discarded; and for our just
refusal are unjustly eiected.

CHAP. XIII. The newness of forced Sacramental Confession.
Council. Trid. Si quis dixerit in Sacram. Poenitentiae ad remissionem, etc.
Anath. etc. Sess. 14. Gloss. Great. de Poenit. did. 5. c. In poenitentia.
Graeci solummodo Deo confitendum dicunt. de poenit. d. 1.
THe necessity of a particular, secret, full, Sacramental Confession of all
our sins to a Priest; upon pain of Non-remission, is an Act or Institution of
the Roman Church, For, as for the Greek Church it ownes not either the
doctrine, or practice. So the Gloss of the Canon Law directly; Confessio apud
Graecos, etc. Confession is not not necessary amongst the Grecians; unto whom
no such Tradition has been derived.

That Gloss would tell us more; Multa alia and magni ponderis emendata sunt.
In notis ibid.
and so would Gratian himself, if their tongues were not clipped by a guilty
expurgation. But in the mean time the Gloss of that Canon (hitherto allowed)
plainly controules the Decree of that late Council; For if the Necessity of
Confession be only a Tradition, and such a one, as has not been deduced to
the Greek Church, then it stands not by a Law of God, which is universal; not
making differences of places, or times; like an high-eleuated Star which has
no particular aspect upon one Region.

That there is a lawful, commendable beneficial use of Confession was never
denied by us; but to set men upon the rack, and to strain their souls up to
a double pin, of absolute necessity (both praecepti and medij) and of a strict
particularitie; and that by a screw of Ius diuinum, Gods Law, is so mere a
Roman novelty, that many ingenuous Authors of their own have willingly
confessed it.

Bellar. de poenit. l. 3. c. 1. In Annot. Hier. ad Ocean. In notis Tertull. de
poenitent. etc.
Amongst whom Cardinal Bellarmine himself yields us, Erasmus, and Beatus
Rhenanus, two noble Witnesses; Whose ioynt-Tenet he confesses to be,
Confessionem secretam, etc. That the secret Confession of all our sins is not
only not instituted, or commanded Iure Diuino, by Gods Law; but that it was not
so much as received into use in the Ancient Church of God. To whom he might
have added, out of Maldonates account (omnes decretorum, etc.) all the
Interpreters of the Decrees, and amongst the Schoolmen, Scotus.

We know well those sad and austere Exomologesis, which were publicly used in
the severe times of the Primitive Church: whiles these took place, what use
was there of private? These obtained even in the Western or Latin Church,
till the days of Leo; about 450. years. De presbyt. poenitentiarijs, vide
Socrat. l. 5. c. 19.
In which time they had a grave public Penitentiarie for this purpose.
Afterward (whether the noted inconveniences of that practice, or whether the
cooling of the former fervor occasioned it) this open Confession began to
give way to secret; which continued in the Church, but with freedom, and
without that forced and scrupulous strictness which the later times have put
upon it. Beat. Rhenan. Argum. in Tert. de poenitentia.
It is very remarkable which learned Rhenanus has (Caeterum Thomas ab Aquino,
etc.) But (says he) Thomas of Aquine and Scotus (men too acute) have made
confession at this day such, Argentoratum, etc.
as that Ioannes Geilerius a grave and holy Divine, which was for many years
Preacher at Strasburgh, had wont to say to his friends, that according to their
rules it is an impossible thing to confess; Adding, that the same Geilerius
being familiarly conversant with some religious Votaries, both Carthusians and
Franciscans, learned of them, with what torments the godly minds of some men
were afflicted, by the rigor of that confession, which they were not able to
answer; and thereupon he published a book in Dutch, entitled The sickness of
confession. The same therefore which Rhenanus writes of his Geilerius, he may
well apply unto us; Itaque Geilerio non displicebat, etc. Geilerius therefore
did not dislike confession, but the scrupulous anxietie which is taught in the
sums of some late Divines, more fit ^^deed for some other place, then for
Libraries. Thus he. What would that ingenuous Author have said, if he had
lived to see those volumes of Cases which have been since published, able to
perplex a world; and those peremptory decisions of the Fathers of the
Society, whose strokes have been with Scorpions, in comparison of the rods of
their Predecessors. To conclude; This bird was hatched in the Council of
Lateran, ( Anno 1215.) fully plumed in the Council of Trent; and now lately
has her feathers imped by the modern Casuists.

SECT. II. Romish Confession not warranted by Scripture.
SInce our quarrel is not with confession it self, which may be of singular
use and behoof; but with some tyrannous strains in the practice of it, which
are the violent forcing and perfect fullness thereof; It shall be sufficient for
us herein to stand upon our negative; That there is no Scripture in the whole
book of God, wherein either such necessity, or such entireness of Confession
is commanded; A truth so clear, that it is generally confessed by their own
Canonists. Did we question the lawfulness of Confession, we should be justly
accountable for our grounds from the Scriptures of God; now that we cry down
only some injurious circumstances therein, well may we require from the
fautors thereof their warrants from God; which if they cannot show, they are
sufficiently convinced of a presumptuous obtrusion:

Indeed, our Savior said to his Apostles, and their successors, Whose sins
ye remit they are remitted, John 20.23.
and whose sins ye retain they are retained. But did he say, No sin shall
be remitted, but what ye remit? Or, no sin shall be remitted by you, but
what is particularly numbered unto you.

James 5.16.
Saint James bids, Confess your sins one to another; But would they have the
Priest shrieue himself to the penitent, as well as the penitent to the Priest?
This act must be mutual, not single.

Acts 19.18.
Many believing Ephesians came and confessed, and showed their deeds. Many, but
not all, not Omnes vtriusque sexus, they confessed their deeds; Some that were
notorious, not all their sins.

Contrarily rather, John 20.21.
so did Christ send his Apostles, as the father sent him, He was both their
warrant and their pattern; But that gracious Savior of ours many a time gave
absolution, where was no particular confession of sins: Only the sight of the
Paralyticks faith fetched from him, Son be of good cheer, Mat. 9.2.
thy sins be forgiven thee; The noted sinner in Simons house, approving the
truth of her repentance by the humble and costly testimonies of her love,
without any enumeration of her sins, heard, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

SECT. III. Against reason.
IN true Divine Reason this supposed duty is needless, dangerous, impossible.
Needless in respect of all sins, not in respect of some; for how ever in the
cases of a burdened conscience, nothing can be more useful, more sovereign,
yet, in all, our peace does not depend upon our lips; Being justified by faith,
Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Dangerous, in respect both of exprobration, as Saint Chrysostom worthily,
Chrysostom. in Ps. 50.
Sayr. Summa Cas. Nauar.
and of infection; for delectabile carnis (as a Casuist confesses) Fleshly
pleasures the more they are called into particular mention, the more they move
the appetire. I do willingly conceal from chaste eyes and ears what effects
have followed this pretended act of devotion, in wanton and unstayed
Confessors.

Impossible, for who can tell how often he offends; He is poor in sin that can
count his stock; and he sins always that so presumes upon his innocence,
as to think he can number his sins: And, if he say of any sin, as Lot of
Zoar, is it not a little one? as if therefore it may safely escape the
reckoning, it is a true word of Isaac the Syrian, Isaac. Sir. presb. Antiochen.
de Contempt. mundi. etc.
Qui delicta etc. He that thinks any of his offenses small, even in so
thinking falls into greater.

This doctrine and practice therefore, both as new and unwarrantable, full of
usurpation, danger, impossibility is justly rejected by us; and we for so
doing, unjustly eiected.

SECT. IV. The novelty of Absolution before Satisfaction.
LEst any thing in the Roman Church should retain the old form, how absurd
is that innovation which they have made in the the order of their penance and
absolution. The ancient course, as Cassander and Lindanus truly witness,
Cassand. consult. Art. de Confess. Lind. Pan^pl. l 4.
was that absolution and reconciliation, and right to the Communion of the
Church was not given by imposition of hands unto the penitent, till he had
given due satisfaction by performing of such penal acts, as were enjoined by
the discreet Penite^tiary; C^ss. ibid.
yea, those works of penance (says he) when they were done out of faith, and
an heart truly sorrowful; and by the motion of the holy Spirit, preventing the
mind of man, with the help of his divine grace, were thought not a little
auailable to obtain remission of the sin, and to pacify the displeasure of
God for sin; Not, that they could merit it by any dignity of theirs, but
that thereby the mind of man is in a sort fitted to the receipt of Gods grace;
But now, immediately upon the Confession made, the hand is laid upon the
penitent, and he is received to his right of Communion, and after his
absolution, certain works of piety are enjoined him, for the chastisement of
the flesh, and expurgation of the remainders of sin. Thus Cassander. In
common apprehension this new order can be no other then preposterous; and (as
our learned Bishop of Carlisle) like Easter before Lent. But for this, Resp. ad
Fisherum.
Ipsi viderint; it shall not trouble us how they nurture their own child.

CHAP. XIV. The newness of the Romish Invocation of Saints.
OF all those errors which we reject in the Church of Rome, there is none that
can plead so much show of Antiquity, Spalat. de Resp. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12. 16.
as this of Invocation of Saints: which yet, as it has been practiced and
defended in the latter times, should in vain seek either example or patronage
amongst the Ancient; How ever there might be some grounds of this devotion
secretly muttered, and at last expressed in Panegyricke forms, yet, until
almost five hundred years after Christ, Rex Jacob. praemonit. ad Principes,
etc.
it was not in any sort admitted into the public service. It will be easily
granted that the blessed Virgin is the Prime of all Saints; neither could it
be other then injurious, that any other of that heavenly society should have
the precedencie of her: Now the first that brought her name into the public
devotions of the Greek Church, Niceph. l. 15. c. 28.
is noted by Nicephorus, to be Petrus Gnapheus, or Fullo, a Presbyter of
Bithynia; afterward the Usurper of the Sea of Antioch, much about 470 years
after Christ; who (though a branded heretic) found out four things (says he)
very useful and beneficial to the Catholic Church; whereof the last was,
Ecclesiae Catholicae commodissima, ibid.
(Vt in omni precatione etc.) that in every prayer the Mother of God should
be named, and her divine name called upon; The phrase is very remarkable
wherein this rising superstition is expressed.

And as for the Latin Church, we hear no news of this Invocation, in the
public Letanies, till Gregory's time, about some 130. years after the former.

And in the mean time, some Fathers speak of it fearfully and doubtfully;
How could it be otherwise, when the common opinion of the Ancients, Ios.
Scalig. Notis in Nouum Test.
even below Saint Austens age did put up all the souls of the faithful,
except Martyrs in some blind receptacles, whether in the Center of the earth,
or elsewhere, where they might in candida expectare diem Iudicij, as Tertullian
has it four several times; And Stapleton himself sticks not to name diverse
of them thus foully mistaken. Stap. l. de author. scr.


Others of the Fathers have let fall speeches directly bent against this
Invocation (Non opus est patronis, etc. Chrysostom. Homil. de poenitentia, hom.
4. Which place, the Margin of the Latin Edition of Venice, set forth by the
authority of the Inquisition, tells us, (and we must believe it) makes nothing
against Invocation of Saints. Vide Ibid.
) There is no need of any Advocates to God, says Saint Chrysostom; and most
plainly elsewhere, Homines si quando etc. If we have any suit to men (says
he) we must fee the porters, and treat with iesters and parasites, and go
many times a long way about; In God there is no such matter; he is exorable
without any of our Mediators, without money, without cost, he grants our
petitions: It is enough to cry for thee with thine heart alone, to power out
thy tears, and presently thou have won him to mercy. Thus he.

And those of the Ancients, that seem to speak for it, lay grounds that
overthrow it; Howsoever it be, all holy Antiquity would have both blushed, and
spit at those forms of Invocation, which the late Clients of Rome have
broached to the world; If perhaps they spoke to the Saints (tanquam
deprecatores, Spalat. l. 7. c. 12. 26. Gul. Altis. in 4. sent. etc. Dea, primas
Coeli, etc. praecipe Angelis vt nos custodiant. In Rosar. Canon. Reg. Anonym.
Diuidunt coram Patre inter se matter and silius pietatis officia, and condunt
inter se reconciliationis nostrae inuiolabile testamentum. Arnold. Carnot. de
laudibus 5. virg. Lud. Viues in Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei l. 8. c. vlt.
vel potius comprecatores) as Spalatensis yields; moving them to be
competitioners with us to the throne of grace, not properly, but improperly, as
Altisiodore construes it; how would they have digested that blasphemous Psalter
of our Lady, imputed to Bonauenture, and those styles of mere Deification
which are given to her; and the division of all offices of piety to mankind,
betwixt the mother and the Son. How had their ears glowed to hear, Christus
orauit, Franciscus exoranit, Christ prayed, Francis prevailed; How would they
have brooked that which Ludouicus Viues freely confesses, Multi Christiani etc^
Many Christians worship ( diuos, diua^que) the Saints of both sexes, no
otherwise then God himself; Or that which Spalatensis professes to have
observed that the ignorant multitude are carried with more entire religious
affection to the blessed Virgin, Nam and plebem rudiorem religiose etc. Et
magis plurimos interne religioso affectu erga Beatam Virg. etc. quam erga
Christum, Spalat. de Re. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12. s. 28.
or some other Saint, then to Christ their Savior. These foul superstitions
are not more heinous then new, and such, as wherein we have justly abhorred to
take part with the practices of them.

SECT. II. Invocation of Saints against Scripture.
AS for the better side of this mis-opinion; even thus much color of
Antiquity were cause enough to suspend our censures (according to that wise
and moderate resolution of learned Zanchius; Ego certe ab Autiquitate non
recedo nisi coactus Zanch. in Coloss.
) were it not that the Scriptures are so flatly opposite unto it; as that, we
may justly wonder at that wisdom, which has provided Antidotes for a disease,
that of many hundred years after, should have no being in the World. The
ground of this Invocation of Saints is their notice of our earthly condition,
and special Devotions; Job 14.20,
And behold thou preuaylest ever against man, and he passes; thou changest his
countenance, and sendest him away; Verse 21.
His sons come to honor and he knows it not, and they are brought low and
he perceives it not, says Job. The dead know nothing at all, Eccles. 9.5,
says wise Solomon; Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now
perished, Verse 6.
neither have they any more a portion for ever, in any thing that is done under
the Sun; No portion in any thing, therefore not in our miseries; not in our
allocutions. If we have a portion in them, for their love and Prayers in common
for the Church, they have no portion in our particularities, whether of want,
or complaint. Esaias 63.16.
Abraham our Father is ignorant of us (says Esaias) and Israel acknowledges us
not. Lo, the Father of the faithful above knows not his own children, till
they come into his bosom; and he that gives them their names, is to them as
strangers; 2. Kings 22.20.
Wherefore should good Josiah be gathered to his Fathers as Hulda tells him,
but that his eyes might not see all the evil which should come upon Jerusalem?

We cannot have a better Commenter, August. de cura pro^n ort. gerend. cap. 13.
then Saint Augustine, If (says he) the souls of the dead could be present
at the affairs of the living, etc. Surely my good Mother would no night
forsake me, whom whiles she lived, she followed both by Land, and Sea; Far
be it from me to think, that an happier life has made her cruel, etc. But
certainly, that which the holy Psalmist tells us, is true; My Father and my
Mother have forsaken me, but the Lord took me up; If therefore our Parents
have left us, how are they present or do interesse themselves in our cares, or
businesses? And if our Parents do not, who else among the dead know what we
do, or what we suffer? Esaias the Prophet says; Thou art our Father, for
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel know us not; If so great Patriarchs were
ignorant, what became of that people, which came from their loins, and which
upon their belief was promised to descend from their stock, how shall the
dead have ought to do either in the knowledge, or aid of the affairs, or
actions of their dearest Suruiuers? How do we say that God prouides mercifully
for them who die before the evils come, if even after their death, they are
sensible of the calamities of humane life, etc.

How is it then that God promised to good King Josiah for a great blessing,
that he should die before hand, that he might not see the evils which he
threatened to that place and people.

Thus that divine Father. With whom agrees Saint Jerome; Hieron. in Eccles. 3.
ad fin.
Nec enim, possumus, etc. Neither can we (says he) when this life shall once
be dissolved, either enjoy our own labors, or know what shall be done in the
World afterward.

But could the Saints of Heaven know our actions, yet our hearts they cannot:
This is the peculiar skill of their Maker, Psalm. 7.10.
Thou art the searcher of the hearts and reins, O righteous God; Psalm. 4^.22.
and 139, 1.4. and 13. Prou. 15 11. and 17.3. and 24.12.
God only knows (abscondita animi) the hidden secrets of the soul. Now, the
heart is the seat of our Prayers. The lips do but vent them to the ears of
men: Moses said nothing, Ier. 21.20. and 17.10. and 20.12.
when God said, Let me alone Moses. O therefore thou that hear the Prayers,
to thee shall all flesh come. 1. Kings 8.39.
Salomons argument is irrefragable; Hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place;
and do, and give to every man according to his ways: whose heart thou
know; For thou, even thou only, know the hearts of all the children of
men.

He only should be implored that can hear; he only can hear the Prayer that
knows the heart:

Yet could they know our secretest desires. It is an honor that God
challenges as proper to himself, to be inuoked in our Prayers; Psalm. 50.14.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.

There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, 1. Tim. 2.5.
the man Jesus Christ. One, and no more, not only of redemption, but of
intercession also; for through him (only) we have access by one Spirit, unto
the Father; and he has invited us to himself; Ephesians. 2.1^.
Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden.

SECT. III. Against reason.
HOw absurd therefore is it in reason, when the King of heaven calls us to him,
to run with our petitions to the Guard or Pages of the Court? Had we to do
with a finite Prince, whose ears must be his best informers, or whose will to
help us were justly questionable, we might have reason to present our suits by
second hands; But since it is an Omnipresent and Omniscious God with whom we
deal, from whom the Saints and Angels receive all their light, and love to his
Church, how extreme folly is it to sue to those Courtiers of Heaven, and not to
come immediately to the Throne of Grace? That one Mediator is able (and
willing also) to save them to the utmost, Heb. 7.25.
that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

Besides, how uncertain must our devotions needs be, when we can have no
possible assurance of their audience; for who can know that a Saint hears him?
That God ever hears us, we are as sure, as we are unsure to be heard of
Saints: Nay, we are sure we cannot be all heard of them: For what finite
nature can divide it self betwixt ten thousand Suppliants at one instant, in
several regions of the world, much less impart it self whole to each? Either
therefore, we must turn the Saints into so many Deities, or we must yield
that some of our prayers are unheard; And whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

As for that heavenly glass of Saint Gregory's, wherein the Saints see us, and
our suits (confuted long since by Hugo de Sancto Victore) it is as pleasing a
fiction, Hugo de Sancto Vict. de sacr. l 2
as if we imagined therefore to see all the corners of the earth, because we
see that Sun which sees them. And the same eyes that see in God the particular
necessities of his Saints below, see in the same God such infinite grace and
mercy, for their relief, as may save the labor of their reflecting upon that
divine miroir in their special intercessions.

This doctrine therefore and practice of the Romish invocation of Saints, both
as new and erroneous, against Scripture and reason, we have justly rejected;
and are thereupon eiected as unjustly.

CHAP. XV. The newness of seven Sacraments.
Summa Caranzae, etc.
THe late Council of Florence indeed insinuates this number of seven
Sacraments, as Suarez contends: But the later Council of Trent determines it,
Council. Trid. Cess 7. Can. 1.
Si quis dixerit aut plura, etc. If any man shall say, that there are either
more, or fewer Sacraments then seven, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, etc, or that
any of these is not truly and properly a Sacrament, Let him be Anathema.

It is not more plain that in Scripture there is no mention of Sacraments,
then that in the Fathers there is no mention of seven. Cardinal Bellarmines
evasion, that the Scripture and Fathers wrote no Catechism, is poor and
ridiculous; No more did the Councels of Florence and Trent, and yet there the
number is reckoned and defined.

So as the word Sacrament may be taken (for any holy, significant rite) there
may be as well seventy as seven; So strictly as it may be, and is taken by
us, there can no more be seven, then seventy. This determination of the
number is so late, that Cassander is forced to confess, Cassand. Consult. Art.
13. de numero sacr.
Nec temere, etc. You shall not easily find any man before Peter Lombard, which
has set down any certain and definite number of Sacraments. And this
observation is so just that upon the challenges of our writers, no one author
has bin produced by the Roman Doctors, for the disproofe of it, Luther de
capti^^t. Babyl. I^ loc. com. Cass^^ l. ibid. Thus all Antiquity runs upon
two. ^em recognit. (...). A^ 2 tertull de (...) Milit. and (...) 2. Epist. 1.
(...) August, etc.
elder then Hugo, and the said Master of Sentences. But, numbers are
ceremonies. Both Luther, and Philip Melancthon profess they stand not much
upon them; It is the number numbered (which is the thing it self mis-related
into that sacred Order) that we stick at. There we find that none but Christ
can make a Sacrament; for none but he who can give grace, can ordain a sign
and seal of Grace; Now it is evident enough, that these adscititious
Sacraments were never of Christ's institution. So was not confirmation, as our
Alexander of Hales, and Holcot; so was not Matrimony, Suar. Tom. 4. disp. ^9.
s. 2. Vid Mort. Ap^ell. l. 2. c. 26.. 5.
as Durand; So was not Extreme Unction, as Hugo, Lombard, Bonauenture,
Halensis, Altisiodore, by the confession of their Suarez. These were ancient
rites, but they are new Sacraments; All of them have their allowed, and
profitable use in Gods Church, though not in so high a nature; Except that of
Extreme Unction; which as it is an apish mis-imitation of that extraordinary
course, Marc. 6.13. James 5.
which the Apostolic times used in their cures of the sick, so it is grossly
mis-applyed to other purposes, then were intended in the first institution.
Then it was (Vngebant and sanabant;) the oil miraculously conferring bodily
recovery; but now, (Non nisi in mortis articulo adhibetur) it is not used, but
upon the very point of death, as Caietan and Cassander confess, and all
experience manifests; Franc. Iun. Animadu. in Bellar. l. de verb. Dei. 4.
and by Felix the fourth, drawn to a necessity of address to eternal life.

SECT. II. Seven Sacraments beside Scripture.
NOt to scan particulars, which all yield ample exceptions, but to wind them
all up in one bottom; Whosoever shall look into the Scripture shall find it
apparent, that as in the time of man's innocence, there were but two Sacraments,
the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge; So, before, and under the Law (how
ever they had infinite rites) yet in the proper sense, they had but two
Sacraments; the same in effect with those under the Gospel; The one, the
Sacrament of Initiation, which was their Circumcision; Paralleld by that
Baptism which succeeded it; The other, the Sacrament of our holy Confirmation,
that spiritual meat and drink which was their Paschall Lamb and Manna, and
water from the rock; prefiguring the true Lamb of God, and bread of life, and
blood of our redemption. The great Apostle of the Gentiles, that well knew the
Analogy, has compared both; Moreover, brethren, 1. Cor. 10.1.
I would not have you ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea; Verse 2, 3.
And all were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea; And all did eat the same
spiritual meat, Verse 4. etc.
and all did drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that
spiritual Rock, that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. What is this
in any just construction, but that the same two Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, which we celebrate under the Gospel, were the very same with
those, which were celebrated by Gods ancient people, under the Law; They two,
and no more; Hoc facite (Do this) is our warrant for the one; and Ite
baptizate, etc. and Go teach and baptize, for the other: There is deep silence
in the rest.

SECT. III. Against reason.
IN reason it must be yielded, that no man has power to set to a seal, but
he whose the writing is; Sacraments, then, being the seals of Gods gracious
evidences, whereby he has conveyed to us eternal life, can be instituted by
no other, then the same power that can assure and perform life to his
creature. In every Sacrament therefore must be a divine institution and
command of an element that signifies, of a grace that is signified, of a word
adjoined to that element, of an holy act adjoined to that Word: Where these
concur not, there can be no true Sacrament; and they are palpably missing in
these five Adiections of the Church of Rome.

Lastly; The Sacraments of the new Law (as Saint Austen often) flowed out of
the side of Christ; None flowed thence, but the Sacrament of water, which is
Baptism, and the Sacrament of blood in the Supper; Whereof the Author says,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. The rest
never flowing either from the side, or from the lips of Christ, are as new and
mis-named Sacraments justly rejected by us, and we thereupon as unjustly
censured.

CHAP. XVI. The newness of the Doctrine of Traditions.
THe chief ground of these, and all other errors in the Church of Rome,
Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
is the ouer-valuing of Traditions; which the Tridentine Synod professes to
receive, and reverence with no less pious affection, In his rebus de quibus
nihil certi flatuit scriptura diuina, mos populi Dei vel instituta maiorum pro
lege tenenda sunt. August. Epist. 86.
then the Books of the Old, and New Testament; and that, not in matter of
Rite, and History only, but of faith and manners also; Wherein, as they are
not un willing to cast a kind of imputation of imperfection upon the written
Word; so they make up the defects of it, by the supply of unwritten Traditions;
to which indeed they are more beholden, for the warrant of the greater part of
their super-added Articles, then to the Scriptures of God:

Both which, are points so dangerously envious, as that Antiquity would have
abhorred their mention: Neither is any thing more common with the holy Fathers
of the Church, then the magnifying the complete perfection of Scripture, in all
things needful, either to be believed, or done.

What can be more full and clear, Aug. l. 2. de doctrina Christ. c. 9 In his
quae aperte posita sunt in Scriptura inueniuntur illa omnia quae continent
fidem moresque viueundi. Bell. l. 4. de verb. Dei. 6.11.
then that of Saint Austen, In his quae aperte, etc. In these things, which are
openly laid forth in Scripture, are found all matters that contain either
faith, or manners.

Cardinal Bellarmines elusion is not a little prejudicial to his own cause.
He tells us, that Saint Austen speaks of those points, which are simply
necessary to salvation for all men; All which he acknowledges to be written by
the Apostles; But besides these, there are many other things (says he) which
we have only by Tradition; Will it not therefore hence follow, that the common
sort of Christians need not look at his Traditions? That commonly men may be
saved without them? that Heaven may be attained, though there were no
Traditions; Who will not now say, Let me come to Heaven by Scripture, go you
whither you will by Traditions? To which add, that a great, yea, the greater
part (if we may believe some of their own) of that which they call religion,
is grounded upon only Tradition; if then Tradition be only of such things as
are not simply unnecessary to salvation, then the greater part of their
mis-named Religion, must needs be yielded for simply unnecessary to all men:
And if we may be saved without them, and be made Citizens of Heaven, how
much more may we without them, be members of the true Church on Earth? As for
this place, Saint Augustines words are full, and comprehensiue, expressing all
those things, which contain either faith, or manners, whether concerning
Governors, or people: If now, they can find out any thing, that belongs not
either to belief, or action, we do willingly give it up to their Traditions,
but all things which pertain to either of those, are openly comprised in
Scripture.

What can be more direct, then that of holy Athanasius? Athanas. l. 4. cont.
Gent. Initio (...), etc. Sufficient per se vertit Nannius. Tert. lib. aduers.
Hermogenem.
(...), etc. The holy Scriptures inspired by God, are in themselves
all-sufficient to the instruction of truth; and, if Chemnitius construe it, All
truth, this needs not raise a cavil; The word signifies no less; for if they
be all-sufficient to instruction, they must needs be sufficient to all
instruction in the truth intended; Tertullian professes openly, Adoro
Scripturae pleni^udinem, etc. I adore the fullness of Scripture; Let the skill
of Hermogenes show where it is written; if it be not written, let him fear
that woe which is pronounced against those, that add or detract. Thus he. Who
can but fear that the Cardinal shifts this evidence against his own heart?
For (says he) Tertullian speaks of that one point. That God created all
things of nothing, and not of a pre-existent matter, as Hermogenes dreamed;
now, because this truth is clearly expressed in Scripture, therefore the
fullness of Scripture, as concerning this point is adored by Tertullian; And
for that Hermogenes held an opinion contrary to Scripture, he is said to add
unto Scripture, and to incur that malediction; Now, let any reader, of common
sense, judge, whether the words of Tertullian be not general; without any
limitation; and if the first clause could be restrained, the second cannot;
Scriptum esse doceat etc. Whatsoever therefore is not written, by this rule may
not be oberuded to our belief; Neither does he say, If it be written against;
but, If it be not written; and his challenge is (nusquam legi) that the words
are no where read, as if this were quarrel enough, without a flat
contradiction to what is read.

So as the Cardinals gloss merely corrupts the Text; How easy were it for me
to tire my reader, with the full suffrages of Origin, Cyprian, Chrysostom,
Basil, Cyrill, Epiphanius, Hierome, Ambrose, Theodoret, Hilarie, Vincentius
Lirinensis, and in a word with the whole stream of Antiquity, which though
they give a meet place to Traditions of Ceremony, of history, of
interpretation, of some immateriall verities, yet reserve the due honor to the
sacred monuments of Divine Scriptures. Our learned Chemnitius has freely
yielded seven sorts of Traditions, such as have a correspondence with, or an
attestation from the written word, the rest, we do justly (together with him)
disclaim, as unworthy to appear upon that awful Bench, amongst the inspired
Penmen of God.

SECT. II. Traditions against Scripture.
IT is not to be imagined that the same word of God, which speaks for all
other truths, should not speak for it self; how fully does it display it is
own sufficiency and perfection. 2. Tim, 3.16.
All Scripture (says the Chosen Vessel) is given by inspiration of God; and
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. Profitable, Bellar. de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 10.
says the Cardinal, but not sufficient; Many things may avail to that end
whereto they suffice not; So meat is profitable to nourish, but without
natural heat it nourishes not: Thus he. Hear yet what follows. 2. Tim.
3.17.
That the man of God may be perfited, and thoroughly furnished unto all good
works. Lo it is so profitable to all these services, that thereby it perfects
a Divine; much more an ordiarie Christian: That which is so profitable, as to
cause perfection, is abundantly sufficient, and must needs have full perfection
in it self; That which can perfect the teacher, is sufficient for the learner.
The Scriptures can perfect the man of God, both for his calling in the
instruction of others, and for his own glory. 2. Tim. 3.15.
Thou have known the Scriptures from a child (says Saint Paul to his
Timothy) which are able (not profitable only) to make thee wise unto salvation,
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. It is the charge therefore of the
Apostle, not to be wise above that which is written: The same with wise
Salonons, The whole word of God is pure: Add thou not unto his words, Prou.
30.5, 6.
lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a lier. Lo, he says not, Oppose not
his words, but, Add not to them: Even addition detracts from the majesty of
that Word; For the Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7, 8.
converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the
simple. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.

As for those Traditions which they do thus lift up to an unjust competition
with the written Word, our Savior has before hand, humbled them into the
dust: In vain do they worship me, Matthew. 15.9.
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men; Making this a sufficient
cause of abhorring both the persons, and the services of those Jews, that they
thrust humane Traditions into Gods chair, and respected them equally with the
institutions of God. Cardinal Bellarmine would shift it off with a distinction
of Traditions; These were such, says he ( quas acceperant a recentioribus,
etc.) as they had received from some later hands, whereof some were vain, some
others pernicious, not such as they received from Moses and the Prophets: And
the Authors of these rejected Traditions he cites from Epiphanius to be R.
Akiba, R. Epiphan. in haeres. Ptolom. Hieron. in c. 8. Isa. Et in Epist. ad
Algas. q. 10.
Judah, and the Asamoneans; from Hierome, to be Sammai, Hillel, Akiba. But this
is to cast mists before the eyes of the simple: For who sees not that our
Saviors challenge is general, to Traditions thus advanced, not to these, or
those Traditions: And, where he speaks of some later hands, he had forgotten,
that our Savior upon the mount tells him ((...)) That these faulted Traditions
were of old. Matthew. 5.21, 27, 33.
And that he may not cast these upon his Sammai and Hiliel, let him remember
that our Savior cites this out of Esaias (though with some more cleernesse of
expression) who far ouerlooked the times of those pretended Fathers of
mis-traditions. That I may not say, how much it would trouble him to show any
dogmaticall Traditions, that were derived from Moses and the Prophets; in
parallel whereof, let them be able to deduce any Evangelical Tradition from
the Apostles, and we are ready to embrace it with all observance. Shortly, it
is clear that our Savior never meant to compare one Tradition with another,
as approving some, rejecting others, but with indignation complains, that
Traditions were obtruded to Gods people, in a corriualitie with the written
word; which is the very point now questioned.

SECT. III. Traditions against reason.
EVen the very light of reason shows us that as there is a God, so, that he
is a most wise, and most just God; needs therefore must it follow, that if this
most just and wise God will give a Word whereby to reveal himself and his will
to mankind, it must be a perfect Word; for, as his wisdom knows what is fit
for his creature to know of himself, so his justice will require nothing of
the creature, but what he has enabled him to know and do; Now then, since
he requires us to know him, to obey him, it must needs follow that he has
left us so exquisite a rule of this knowledge and obedience, as cannot admit of
any defect, or any supplement. This rule can be no other then his written
Word; therefore written, that it might be preserved entire, for this purpose,
to the last date of time: As for orall Traditions, what certainty can there be
in them? What foundation of truth can be laid upon the breath of man? How do
we see the reports vary, of those things, which our eyes have seen done? How
do they multiply in their passage, and either grow, or dye upon hazards?

Lastly, we think him not an honest man, whose tongue goes against his own
hand; How heinous an imputation then do they cast upon the God of truth; which
plead Traditions derived from him, contrary to his written Word? Such,
apparently, are the worship of Images, the mutilation of the Sacrament,
Purgatory, Indulgences, and the rest which have passed our agitation. Since
therefore the authority of Romish Traditions is (besides novelty) erroneous;
against Scripture and reason, we have justly abandoned it, and are thereupon
unjustly condemned.

As for those other dangerous and important innouations, concerning Scriptures,
their Canon enlarged, their faulty version made authentical, their fountains
pretended to be corrupted, their mis-pleaded obscurity, Serious Disswasiue,
etc.
their restraint from the Laity, we have already largely displaid them in
another place.

CHAP. XVII. The newness of the universal Head-ship of the Bishop of Rome.
THose transcendent Titles of Head-ship, and Universality, which are
challenged to the Bishop, Haereseos matter est principatus cupiditas, Chrysostom.
in Gal. 5.
and Sea of Rome, are known to be the vpstart brood of noted ambition. Simple
and holy Antiquity was too modest, either to require, or tolerate them. Who
knows not the profession of that holy Martyr in the Council of Carthage;
(Neque enim, etc.) There is none of us, Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum
Episcoporum se constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem
suos, adigit. Orat. Cypr. in Syn. Greg. Epist. l. 4. Epist. 32. and 34.
that makes himself a Bishop of Bishops; or by a tyrannous fear compels his
Underlings to a necessity of obedience; But perhaps, at Rome it was otherwise;
Hear then with what zeal their own Pope Gregory the Great, inueighs against
the arrogance of John Bishop of Constantinople, for giving way to this proud
style; His Epistles are extant in all hands; so clear and conuictiue, Et lib.
6. Ep. 24.
as no art of Sophistry can elude them; wherein he calls this title (affected
by the said John, and Cyriacus, after him,) a new name, a wicked, profane,
insolent name, Nouum, scelestum, profanum, etc. Et lib. 4. Epist. 38.39. etc.
the general plague of the Church, a corruption of the Faith, against Canons,
against the Apostle Peter, against God himself; as if he could never have
branded it enough.

And least any man should cavil that this style is only cried down in the
Bishops of Constantinople, which yet might be justly claymed by the Bishops of
Rome; Gregory himself meets with this thought, and answers beforehand;
Nunquam pium virum huiusmodi titulis vsum esse, etc. nullum praedecessorum
meorum, etc.
Nunquam pium virum, etc. that never any godly man, never any of his
Predecessors used those Titles; and, more then so, that whosoever shall use
this proud style, he is the very forerunner of Antichrist. If in a foresight
of this usurpation, Gregory should have been hired to have spoken for us,
against the Pride of his following Successors; he could not have set a keener
edge upon his style. Consonant whereto, it is yet extant in the very Canon Law
(as quoted by Gratian out of the Epistle of Pope Pelagius the second)
Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur; Pelag. 2. omnibus
Episcopis illicite a Ioanne and Decret. p. 1. did. 99. c. 4. Nullus, etc.
Not the Bishop of Rome himself may be called Universal;

Yet how famously is it known to all the World, that the same Gregory's next
Successor, save one, Boniface the third, obtained this title of universal
Bishop from the Emperor Phocas; which the said Emperor gave him in a spleen
against Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople, Baron. An. 606.
for delivering Constantina the Wife of Mauritius and her Children; or (as some
others relate it) upon a worse occasion: And accordingly, was this haughty
title communicated by the same power to the Sea of Rome, and by strong hand
ever since maintained.

This qualification their Register Platina confesses, Plat. in vita Bonif. 3.
was procured not without great contention. And Otho Frisingensis fully and
ingenuously writes thus. Gregorius migra^it ad dominum, etc. A quo, etc. vt
ipsius authoritate, etc. Otho Frising. l. 5. c. 8.
Gregory departed hence to the Lord; After whom (the next save one) Boniface
obtained of Phocas, that by his authority the Roman Church might be called
the head of all Churches; For at that time the Sea of Constantinople (I
suppose, because of the seat of the Empire translated thither) wrote her self
the first. Thus their Bishop Otho: Now if any man shall think that hence it
will yet follow, that the Sea of Rome had formerly enjoyed this honor, how
ever the Constantinopolitan for the present, shouldred with her for it; Let him
know the ground of both their challenges, which (as it was supposed by Otho)
So, is fully (for the satisfaction of any indifferent judgment) laid forth in
the General Council of Chalcedon. Council. 5. Gener. Act. 15.
The same (say those Fathers) we determine of the privileges of the most holy
Church of Constantinople, called New Rome: For the Fathers have justly
heretofore given privilege to the Throne of old Rome, because that City was
then the Gouernesse of the world; and upon the same consideration were the
hundred and fifty Bishops (men beloved of God) moved to yield equal
privileges to the Throne of new Rome, rightly judging, that this City, which
is honored with the Empire, and Senate, and is equally privileged with old
Rome the then Queen of the world, should also in Ecclesiastical matters be
no less extolled and magnified. Thus they. And this act is subscribed,
Bonifacius Presbyter Ecclesiae Romanae statui and subscripsi. I Boniface
Presbyter of the Church of Rome have so determined and subscribed; (Et caeteri
etc.) And the rest of the Bishops of diverse Provinces and Cities subscribed.
What can be more plain? This headship of the Bishop was in regard of the Sea;
and this headship of the Sea was in regard of the preeminence of the City;
which was variable, according to the changes of times, or choice of Emperors.
But Binius wrangleth here; Can we blame him when the freehold of their Great
Mistress is so nearly touched? This act (says he) was not Synodicall, Sever.
Bin. in notis Council. Chalced.
as that which was closely and cunningly done, in the absence of the Popes
Legates, and other Orthodox Bishops, at the instance of Anatolius, Patriarch of
Constantinople, an ambitious man, by the Eastern Bishops only. How can this
plea stand with his own confessed subscription? Besides that their Caranza in
his Abridgement, Caranz. Epitom. Council.
shows, that this point was long and vehemently canuassed in that Council,
between Lucentius and Boniface, Legates of the Roman Church, and the rest of
the Bishops; and at last, so concluded, as we have related; Seeds Apostolica
Nobis praesentibus humiliari non debet. Ibid.
not indeed without the protestation of the said Legates, Nobis praesentibus
ande. The Apostolic See must not in our presence be abased: Notwithstanding,
this act then carried; and, after this, Pope Simplicius succeeding to Hilarious
made a decree to the same purpose, Constantinopolitano, Episcopo damnato
Ecclesia^um omnium primam esse Romanam, Caranz. Epit.
not without allusion to this contention for precedencie, that Rome should take
place of Constantinople: Yea, so utterly unthought of was this absolute
Primacie and headship of old; as that when the Roman Dition was brought down
to a Dukedom, and subjected to the Exarchate of Rauenna, the Archbishop of
Rauenna, upon the very same grounds, stuck not (as Blondus tells us) to
strive with the Bishop of Rome for prioritie of place. So necessarily was the
rising or fall of the Episcopal Chair annexed to the condition of that City,
wherein it was fixed.

But in all this, we well see, what it is that was stood upon; an arbitrable
precedencie of these Churches, in a prioritie of order; and according
thereunto, the Bishop of Rome is determined to be primae sedis Episcopus,
Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 20. De^r. p. 1. d. 99. (...) pri^^^eg^um concessum a
Iustiniano. S^ncimus senior^ Rome Papam primum esse omnium sacerdo^^m. Praerog.
ante alios refidendi. Cod. de sacr^s. Eccl. decernimi^s.
the Bishop of the first See. A style, which our late learned Sovereign
professed with Justinian not to grudge unto the modern Bishops of that See;
But as for a Primacie of Sovereignty over all Churches, and such an Headship,
as should inform, and enliue the body, and govern it with Inf^uentia vitae.
Capistran. Inf^uentia regiminis. August. Triumph.
infallible influences, it is so new, and hateful, as that the Church in all
ages has opposed it to the utmost; neither will it be endured at this day by
the Greek Church, notwithstanding the colorable pretense of subscription
hereunto, by their dying Patriarch Joseph of Constantinople, Bin. in Council.
Florent.
in the late Florentine Council, and the letters of union subscribed by them,
Anno 1539.

Yea, so far is it from that, as that their Emperor Michael Paleologus, for
yielding a kind of subjection of the Eastern Bishops to the Roman, would not
be allowed the honor of Christian burial, as Aemilius has recorded. P.
Emyl. hist. Gall.
And in our time Basilius the Emperor of Russia (which challenges no small
part in the Greek Church) threatened to the Popes Legate (as I have been
informed) an infamous death, and burial, if he offered to set foot in his
Dominions, out of a jealous hate of this usurpation.

SECT. II. The newness of challenged Infallibility.
THe particularities of this new arrogation of Rome are so many, that they
cannot be pent up in any strait room. I will only instance in some few.

The Popes infallibility of Judgment is such a paradoxe, as the very
Histories of all times, and proceedings of the Church does sufficiently
convince. For, to what purpose had all Councels been called; even of the
remotest Bishops, to what purpose were the agitations of all controuersall
causes in those Assemblies (as Erasmus justly observes) if this opinion had
then obtained? Or how came it about that the sentences of some Bishops of Rome
were opposed by other Sees; by the Successors of their own, by Christian
Academies, if this conceit had formerly passed for current with the World; How
came it to pass, that whole Councels have censured, and condemned some Bishops
of Rome for manifest Heresies, if they were persuaded, before hand, of the
impossibility of those errors: Not to speak of Honorius, Multi Pontifices in
errores and haereses lapsi esse leguntur Council. Basil. in Ep. Synod.
of Liberius* and others; the Council of Basil shall be the voice of common
observation; Multi Pontifices, etc. Many Popes (say they) are recorded to have
fallen into errors and heresies: Either all stories mock us, or else this
parasiticall dream of impeccancie in judgment, is a mere stranger: and his
disguise is so foul, Auentin. l. 7.
that it is no marvel if (Errare non possum) (I cannot err) seemed to
Eberhardus, Bishop of Saltzburgh, no other then the suit of an Antichrist.

SECT. III. The newness of the Popes Superiority to General Counsels.
HOw bold and dangerous a novelty is that which Cardinal Bellarmine, and with
him the whole Society, and all the late Fautors of that See (after the
Florentine Synod) stick not to avouch, Bell. l. 2. de Council. c. 17.
Summus Pontifex, etc. The Pope is absolutely above the whole Church, and above
a General Council, so as he acknowledges no Judge on earth over himself:
How would this have relished with those (well near) a thousand Fathers in the
Council of Constance, Council. Constable. Sess. 4. and 5. Caranz. Anno 1415.
who punctually determined thus. Ipsa Synodus, etc. This Synod lawfully
assembled in the Holy Ghost, making a General Council, representing the
Catholic Church militant upon earth, has immediately power from Christ;
whereunto every man, whosoever he be, of what state, or dignity so ever,
although he be the Pope himself, is bound to obey, in those things, which
pertain to faith, or to the extirpation of schism. And fifteen years after
that, Anno 1431.
the General Council of Basil, wherein was President Iulianus Cardinal of
Saint Angelo, the Popes Legate, defined the same matter, in the same words. It
is no marvel if Cardinal Bellarmine, and some others of that strain, reject
these, as unlawful Councels; but they cannot deny, first, that this decree was
made by both of them; Secondly, that the Divines there assembled, were (in
their allowance) Catholic Doctors; and such as in other points adhered to the
Roman Church; in so much as they were the men by whose sentence John Husse, and
Hierome suffered no less then death; and yet even so lately did these numerous
Divines in the voice of the Church, define the superiority of a Council above
the Pope; What speak we of this, when we find that the Bishops of the East
excommunicated in their assembly, Sozom. l. 3. c. 11.
Julius the Bishop of Rome himself, amongst others, without scruple, as
Sozomen reports.

How ill would this doctrine or practice now be endured? In so much as
Gregory of Valence dare confidently say, that whosoever he be that makes a
Council superior to the Pope, fights directly (though unawares) against that
most certain point of faith concerning Saint Peter's, and the Roman Bishops
primacie in the Church.

SECT. IV. The new presumption of Papal Dispensations.
FRom the opinion of this supereminent power has flowed that common course of
Dispensations with the Canons and decrees of Counsels, which has been of
late a great eyesore to moderate beholders. Fr. Victor. Rele^t. de potest.
Papae and Council. page 151.
Franciscus a Victoria makes a woeful complaint of it, professing to doubt
whether in the end of the the year, there be more that have leave by this
means to break the laws, then those that are tied to keep them. Thereupon
wishing (for remedy) that there were a restraint made of those now-boundlesse
Dispensations; and at last, obiecting to himself that such a decree of
restriction would be new, and not heard of in any former Council, he
answers; (Tempore Conciliorum antiquorum, etc.) In the time of the ancient
Councels, Popes were like to the other fathers of those Counsels, so as there
was no need of any act for holding them back from this immoderate license of
dispensing; yea, if we do well turn over the laws, and histories of the
Ancient, we shall find that Popes did not presume so easily, and commonly, to
dispense with decrees of Councels, but observed them as the Oracles of God
himself: Yea, not only did they forbear to do it ordinarily, but perhaps
not once did they ever dispense at all, against the Decrees of Councels; But
now (says he) by little, and little, are we grown to this intemperance of
dispensations, and to such an estate as that we can neither abide our
mischiefs, nor our remedies. Thus that learned Spanyard, in an honest
confession of the degenerate courses of the late Popes from the simple
integrity of their Predecessors.

Pontificalis authoritas a iuramento fid. ^at^s absoluit. decr p. 2 15. q. 6.
^lius. Almain de potest. Eccles. and ^aica c. 12. (...) was the rule of old.
What should I add unto these the presumptuous Dispensations with Vows, and
Oaths, with the Laws of God himself, with the Law of Nature; A privilege
ordinarily both yielded, and defended by flattering Canonists; and that which
meets with us, at every turn, in Hostiensis, Archidiaconus, Felinus,
Capistranus, Triumphus, Angelus de Clauasio, Petrus de Ancorano, Panormitan,
Diatrib. Papa Antichrist. l. 4. cap. 9.
as is largely particularized by our learned Bishop of Dery.

SECT. V. The new challenge of Popes dominering over Kings and Emperors.
I May well shut up this Scene, with that notorious innovation of the Popes
subducing himself from the due obedience of his once-acknowledged Lord, and
Sovereign, and endeavoring to reduce all those Imperial powers, to his
homage, and obedience.

The time was, Greg. lib. 4. Ep. 32. and serenissimis iussionibus obedientiam
praebeo. Ibid.
when Pope Gregory could say to Mauritius, Vobis obedientiam praebere
desidero; I desire to give you due obedience: And when Pope Leo came with cap
and knee, to Theodosius, for a Synod to be called, with Clementia vestra
concedat, as Cardinal Cusanus cites it, from the history; The time was, when
( Nemo Apostolicae etc.) No man did offer to take upon him the steering of the
Apostolic Bark, till the authority of the Emperor had designed him, Hieron.
Balb. de Cor.
as their Balbus out of their own Law. That of Pope Gregory is plain enough,
Ecce serenissimus, Ecce serenissimus dominus Imperator fieri simiam le^^em
iussit, etc. Greg. Epist. 5.
etc. Behold (says he, speaking of his own advancement to the Bishopric of
Rome) our gracious Lord the Emperor has commanded an Ape to be made a Lion;
and surely at his command it may be called a Lion, Qui virtutis ministerium
infirmo commisit, ibid. G^i^ciard. l. 4. Hist. Imperante Carolo domino nostro.
but it cannot be one; so as he must needs lay all my faults and negligences,
not upon me, but upon his own piety, which has committed this Ministry of
power to so weak an Agent.

The time was when the Popes of Rome dated their Apostolic letters with the
style of the reign of their Lords, Paschalis Anno Euangelij 1070. primus
omissis Imperatoris annis sui pontifica^us annos subscripsit. In data.
Apostolatus nostri, Anno 1. Dein Pontificatus. Lib. Sacr. Cerem.
the Emperors; now, ever since Pope Paschal, they care only to note the year
of their own Apostleship, or Papacy.

The time was, when the holy Bishops of that See professed to succeed Saint
Peter in homely simplicity, in humble obedience, in piety, in zeal, in
preaching, in tears, in sufferings; now since, the case is altered; the world
sees, and blushes at the change; for now (Quanta inter solemn and lunam, etc.
Greg. l. 1. de mayor. and obed. ex Innoc.
) Look how much the Sun is bigger then the Moon; so much is the Papal
power greater then the Imperial; Now, Papa est Dominus Imperatoris; Capis^r.
77.
The Pope is the Emperors Lord (says their Capistranus) and the Emperor is
subject to the Pope as his minister or servant, says Triumphus, Aug. Triumph.
q. 44.1. Vide diatr. Derens. Episc. l. 4. c. 3.. 2. Vnde habet Imperator
Imperium nisi a n^bis: Imperator quod habet totum habet a nobis, ecce in
potestate nostra est vt demus illud cui volumus. Hadrian. Epist. apud Auentin.
l. 6 Innoc. 4. in cap. licet. de foro compet.
and lest this should seem the fashionable word of some clawing Canonist only,
hear what Pope Adrian himself says, Vnde habet, etc. Whence has the
Emperor his Empire, but from us? all that he has, he has wholly from us,
Behold it is in our power to give it, to whom we list.

And to the same purpose is that of Pope Innocent the fourth, Imperator est
aduocatus, etc. The Emperor is the Popes Advocate, and swears to him, and
holds his Empire of him.

But perhaps this place is yet too high for an Emperor; a lower will serve;
Lib. sacr. Cerem.
Fit Canonicus, etc. The Emperor is (of course) made a Canon, and brother of
the Church of Lateran.

Etiam Imperator aut rex aquam ad la^andas eius manus far debet; primum item
serculum, etc. ibid. In processionibus, etc. ibid. Stapham equi papalis tenet,
etc. ibid. Sellami^sam eum Pontifice humeris suis aliquantulum portare debet,
Ibid.
Yet lower; He shall be the Sewer of his Holinesses Table, and set on the first
dish, and hold the Basin for his hands.

Yet lower, he shall be the Trainbearer to the Pope in his Walking Processions.
He shall be the Quirie of his Stable, and hold his stirrope in getting up on
his Horse: He shall be, lastly, his very Porter to carry his Holiness on his
shoulder. And all this, not out of will, but out of duty.

Alm. de potest. Eccl.
Where now is Augustus ab Augendo, as Almain deriues him, when he suffers
himself thus diminished. Although there is more wonder in the others
exaltation; Papae! Cassan. 4. part. Consid. 7. C. de libellis 10. did.
Men are too base to enter into comparison with him, His authority is more
then of the Saints in Heaven, says one, yet more, Aug. Triumph. de pot. Ecc.
q. 18 Vid. Derens. vbi supra. Cassan. Glor. mundi 4. part. Cons. 7. Innocent.
and Host. in c. 4. de Transt.
he excels the Angels in his Jurisdiction; says another, yet, more once.
The Pope seems to make one and the same Consistory with God himself; and,
which comprehends all the rest, Tues omnia, and super omnia; Thou art all, and
above all, as the Council of Lateran under Julius.

Oh strange alteration, that the great Commanders of the World should be made
the drudges of their Subjects, that Order and Sovereignty should leese
themselves in a pretense of Piety! That the professed Successor of him that
said, Gold and silver have I none, should thus trample upon Crowns; That a
poor silly Worm of the Earth should raise up it self above all that is
called God, and offer to crawle into the glorious Throne of Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII. The Epilogue both of Exhortation and Apology.
NOt to weary my Reader with more particularities of Innovation; Let now all
Christians know, and be assured, that such change as they sensibly find in the
head, they may as truly (though not so visibly) note in the body of the Roman
Church, yea rather in that soul of Religion, which informs both: And if
thereupon, all our endeavor (as we protest before God, and his holy Angels)
has been, and is, only, to reduce Rome to it self; that is, to recall it to
that original Truth, Piety, Synceritie, which made it long famous through the
World, and happy, how unjustly are we eiected, persecuted, condemned?

But, if that Ancient Mistress of the World shall stand upon the terms of her
honor, and will needs plead the disparagement of her retractations, and the
age and authority of these her Impositions, let me have leave to shut up all,
with that worthy and religious contestation of Saint Ambrose, with his
Symmachus.

That eloquent Patron of Idolatry had pleaded hard for the old Rites of
Heathenisme; and brings in Ancient Rome speaking thus, for her self* Optimi
Principes, etc. Inter Epistolas Ambrosij lib. 2. Epist. 11.
Excellent Princes, the Fathers of your Country, reverence ye my years, into
which my pious Rites have brought me: I will use the Ceremonies of my
Ancestors, neither can I repent me. I will live after mine own fashion,
because I am free. This Religion has brought the World under the subjection of
my Laws; these sacred Devotions have driven Hannibal from our walls, from our
Capitol; Have I been preserved for this, that in mine old age I should be
reproved? Say, that I did see what were to be altered, Sera tamen and
contumeliosa est emendatio senectutis. ibid. Ambros. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 12.
yet late and shameful is the amendment of age. To which that holy Father no
less wittily and elegantly answers, by way of retortion, bringing in Rome to
speak thus, rather. I am not ashamed in mine old age to be a Convert, with all
the rest of the World. It is surely true, that in no age it is too late to
learn. Let that old age blush that cannot mend it self; It is not the
gravity of years, Nullus pudor est ad meliora transire, ibid.
but of manners, that deserves praise. It is no shame to go to the better; And
when Symmachus vrges (Maiorum seruandus est ritus) we must observe the Rites
of our forefathers; Dicant igitur, (says Saint Ambrose) Let them as well say,
that all things should remain in their own imperfect Principles, that the
World once ouer-couered with darkness, offends in being shined upon by the
glorious brightness of the Sun; And how much more happy is it, to have
dispelled the darkness of the soul, then of the body; to be shined upon by
the beams of Faith, then of the Sun. Thus he; most aptly to the present
occasion; whereto did that blessed Father now live, he would doubtless, no
less readily apply it: Nec erubescas mutare sententiam, says Hierome to his
Ruffinus, Never blush to change your mind; Non es tantae authoritatis vt
errasse te pudeat, etc. Hier. Apol. adu. Ruffin.
you are not of such authority as that you should be ashamed to confess you
have erred: Oh that this meek ingenuitie could have found place in that once
famous, and Orthodoxe Church of Christ; how had the whole Christian World been
as a City at unity in it self, and triumphed over all the proud hostilities
of Paganism? But, since we may not be so happy, we must sit down; and
mourn for our desolations, for our divisions. In the mean time we wash our
hands in innocence. There are none of all these instanced particulars (besides
many more) wherein the Church of Rome has not sensibly erred in corrupt
additions to the faith; so as herein we may justly (before heaven and earth)
warrant our disagreement of judgment from her. The rest is their act, and not
ours; we are mere patients in this schism; and therefore go, because we are
driven; That we hold not communion with that Church, the fault is theirs; who
both have deserved this strangeness by their errors, and made it by their
violence; Contrary to that rule which Cato in Tully gives of unpleasing
friendship, they have not ripped it in the seame, but torn it in the whole cloth.

Perhaps, I shall seem unto some, to have spoken too mildly, of the estate of
that debauched Church: There are that stand upon a mere nullitie of her being,
not resting in a bare deprauation; For me, I dare not go so far: If she be
foul, if deadly diseased (as she is) these qualities cannot utterly take of
her essence, or our relations.

Our Divines indeed call us out of Babylon, and we run; so as here is an
actual separation, on our parts; True, but from the corruptions (wherein there
is a true confusion) not from the Church; Their very charge implies their
limitation; as it is Babylon, we must come out of it, as it is an outward
visible Church, Fr. Ian. de Ecclesia.
we neither did, nor would: This dropsy, that has so swollen up the body, does
not make it cease to be a true body, but a sound one. The true Principles of
Christianity, which it maintains, maintain life in that Church; the errors
which it holds, Capitis autem male saniet deliri contagia vitanda sunt, ne and
ipsi artus pestilenti humore labesierent. F. Pic. Mirand. Theor. 23.
together with those Principles, struggle with that life, and threaten an
extinction: As it is a visible Church then, we have not detrected to hold
communion with it (though the contemptuous repulse of so many admonitions have
deserved our alienation) as Babylon, we can have nothing to do with it. Like
as in the course of our life; we freely converse with those men in civil
affairs, with whom we hate to partake in wickedness.

But will not this seem to savor of too much indifferency? What need we so
vehemently labor to draw from either part, and triumph in winning Proselytes;
and give them for lost, on either side, and brand them for Apostates that are
won away; if (which way so ever we fall) we cannot light out of a true visible
Church of Christ? What such necessity was there of Martyrdom, what such
danger of relapses, if the Church be with both.

Let these Sophisters know, that true charity needs not abate any thing of
zeal. If they be acquainted with the just value of truth, they shall not
enquire so much into the persons, as into the cause. What ever the Church be,
if the errors be damnable, our blood is happily spent in their impugnation;
and we must rather choose to undergo a thousand deaths, then offend the
Majesty of God, in yielding to a known falsehood in religion; neither does the
outward visibilitie of the Church abate ought of the heinousness of
mis-opinions, or the vehemence of our oppositions. Were it Saint Peter
himself, if he halt in Iudaizing, Saint Paul must resist him to his face;
neither is his fault less, because an Apostles: Yea, let me say more; Were the
Church of Rome, and ours, laid upon several foundations, these errors should
not be altogether so detestable, since the symbolizing in many truths makes
gross errors more intolerable, as the Samaritan Idolatry was more odious to
the Jews then merely Paganish: Maldon. In. 4. Joan.
If the dearest daughter of God upon earth should commit spiritual whoredom,
her uncleanness is so much more to be hated, as her obligations were greater.
Oh the glorious crowns therefore of those blessed Martyrs of ours, who rather
gave their bodies to be burnt to ashes, then they would betray any parcel of
divine truth.

Oh the woeful and dangerous condition of those souls, which shutting their
eyes against so clear a light, either willingly sit down in palpable
darkness, or fall back from the sincerity of the Gospel into these miserable
enormities both of practice and doctrine. It is not for me to judge them; that,
I leave unto that high and awful Tribunal, before which I shall once appear
with them; but this I dare say, that if that righteous Judge shall punish
either their obstinacy, or relapses with eternal damnation, he cannot but be
justified in his judgments, whiles in the midst of their torments, they shall
be forced to say, Thou, Nehem. 9.33^
O God, art just in all that is befalne us; For thou have done right, but we
have done wickedly.

For us, as we would save our souls, let us carefully preserve them from the
contagion of Romish superstition; Let us never fear that our discretion can
hate error too much; Let us awaken, our holy zeal to a serious and fervent
opposition, joined with a charitable endeavor of reclamation. Shortly, let us
hate their opinions, strive against their practice, pity their mis-guiding*
neglect their censures, labor their recovery, pray for their salvation.

FINIS.

