THE PEACE OF ROME. PROCLAIMED TO All the world, by her famous Cardinal
BELLARMINE, and the no less famous Casuist NAVARRE.

Whereof the one acknowledges, and numbers up above three hundred differences
of Opinion, maintained in the Popish Church. The other confesses near
threescore differences amongst their own Doctors in one only point of their
RELIGION.

Gathered faithfully out of their writings in their own words, and divided into
four Books, and those into several DECADS.

WHERETO IS PREFIXED A Serious Disswasiue from Popery.

By J. H.

LONDON Printed for John Legate. 1609.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN. THE SECOND
JOY, AND Hope of our Times, all happiness.
Most Gracious Prince.
GOD calls your Highness by just inheritance to defend his faith. This divine
royalty accompanies your Princedome in a blessed society: wherein your
challenge is not more true, then your pattern admirable. He that gives you
right to the succession of this claim, gives you such an example, as what
Father ever gave a Son? His scepter has not more defended it, then his Pen: We
bless God and wonder: In this right then, all propugnations of truth are
yours; How much more from him, whose glory it is to have sworn your service?
Yet here, I offer to your Highness not so much any fight of ours against them
of Rome, as theirs against themselves, and therein for us: what can be more
advantage to us, or shame to them? One blow of an enemy dealt to his brother,
is more worth then many from an adverse hand: All our Apologies cannot hurt
them so much, as their own divisions. Behold, here your Highness shall sit
still, and see all the Romish Doctors (after all their brags of peace)
scuffling and grapling together before you: and (which is most worth) in
BELLARMINES own Theater; No adversary can give them more deep wounds, then
their own swords: And if civil discord can give us hope of their ruin, Har.
Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.
ROME cannot stand: Lo these are the men that gloried in their unity, and
vpbraided us (not once) with our dissensions, and have warned the world
(because we differ in one point) not to trust us in any. The confidence of
their secrecy made them peremptory, not either their innocence, or our guilt:
If God have not now opened their own mouths to convince them of bold falsehood,
let them have no accusers. I know the view of this Popish fray could not in
their conceits fall more unhappily into any eyes, then your Highnesses, whom
they grieve to see in this early spring of your age so firmly rooted in the
truth, and before Hannibals years threatening hostility to error. So let your
Highness still move their envy and our joy. So much shall God more love you,
as you hate their abominations: Neither shall it I hope ever be forgotten,
that in their bloody project, your lims also should have flowen up to heaven
with your soul. That God which has reserved you for the second hope and stay
of his Christian world, go on to prosper your gracious proceedings, but
according to the promise of their entrances: that we may be still happy in
your Highness, and you in him for ever. So be it: Yea so it will be: how can
it be that so many and faithful prayers of all Gods faithful ones through the
world should have other success? Amongst the rest are vowed and duly paid to
this purpose, the daily poor devotions of your

Highnesses Unworthy, yet loyal servant IOS. HALL.

A SERIOVS DISSWASIVE FROM POPERY.
To W. D. Revolted, etc.
YOU challenged me for my bold assertion of your manifold divisions, I do
here make it good with usury. Those mouths that say they teach you the truth,
say also (and you have believed them) that they all teach the same. As you
find them true in this, so trust them in the other: For me, I cannot without
indignation see, that in this light of the Gospel, God and his truth should
thus be loosers by you: and that a miserable soul should suffer it self thus
grossly couzened of it self, and glory: Many can write to you with more
profoundnes, none with more sincere feruency, and desire to save you.

I call heaven and earth to record against you this day, that if you relent, or
answer not, your perishing is wilful. We may pity your weakness, but God
shall plague your Apostasy; if you had been bred in blindness, your ignorance
had been but lamentable, now your choice and love of darkness is fearful and
desperate. Alas you can not be condemned without our sorrow and shame: What
should we do? We can but entreat, persuade, protest, mourn, and gage our souls
for yours; if these avail not, who can remedy that which will perish? Hear
this yet (you weak Reuolter) if there be any care left in you of that soul
which you have thus prostituted to error; if you have any regard to that God
whose simple truth you have contemned and forsaken; what is this that has
driven you from us, allured you to them? For Godssake, let me but expostulate a
little ere my silence: Either be convicted or inexcusable: Our badde lives have
set you off; Woe is me that they are no holier; I bewail our wickedness, I
defend it not; Only ask how they live in Italy; if they be not (for the more
part) filthes to the worst of ours, go with them and prosper. Let all
indifferent tongues say, whether that very See whereon your faith depends, even
within the smoke of his Holiness, be not (for vitiousnes) the sink of the
world; we may condemn our selves, their lives shall justify us: But you lift
not to look so far; you see their lives at home, you see ours: The
Comparison is not equal; they take this for the time of their persecution; we
of our prosperity. The stubbornest Israelite, and the most godless Mariner
could call upon God in his trouble: we are all worse with liberty: Look back
and see how they lived in former times while they prospered, No Turks (says
Erasmus) more abhominably: though now at the worst, how many holy Professors
might you find, which would scorn that the most strict Hermit, or austere
Cappucine, should go before them in a gracious life, and in true mortification?
even amongst twelve, there will be one devil: I wish they were so good that we
might emulate them: but for my part, I never yet could know that Papist, which
made conscience of all Gods ten moral laws: Shortly, whatsoever is vpbraided
to us; the truth is pure, though men be unholy; and God is where he was,
whatsoever becomes of men: For you, if you had not fallen to cool affections,
and a loose life, you had been still ours: It is just with God to punish your
secure negligence with error and delusion; and to suffer you thus to loose the
truth, who had lost your care of obedience and first love. And now you do well
to shift off this blame to others sins, which have most cause to accuse your
own.

From manners to look toward our Doctrine: the novelty of our Religion (you
say) has discouraged you: theirs has drawn you with the reverence of her
age. It is a free challenge betwixt us, let the elder have us both: if there be
any point of our Religion younger then the Patriarchs and Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles, the Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive Church, let it be
accursed, and condemned for an vpstart: show us evidence of more credit and
age, and carry it. The Church of Rome has been ancient, not the errors;
neither do we in ought differ from it, wherein it is not departed from it
self. If I did not more fear your wearines then my own, forgetting the
measure of a Praeface, I would pass through every point of difference betwixt
us, and let you see in all particulars, which is the old way; and make you
know, that your Popish Religion does but put on a borrowed visor of gravity
upon this Stage, to outface true antiquity. Yet least you should complain of
words, let me without your tediousnes have leave but to instance in the first
of all Controversies betwixt us; offering the same proof in all, which you
shall see performed in one. I compare the judgment of the ancient Church with
yours, see therefore and be ashamed of your novelty.

First our question is, Whether all those books which in our Bibles are styled
Apocryphal, Especially, To by Judith, wisd. of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus,
Maccabees.
and are put after the rest by themselves, are to be received as the true
Scriptures of God? Hear first the voice of the old Church: To let pass that
clear and pregnant testimony of Melito Sardensis in his Epistle to Onesimus
cited by Eusebius. Let Cyprian or Ruffinus rather speak in the name of all:
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 25. Exposit. Symboli veteris instrumenti primo omnium Mosis
quinque libri. etc*
Of the old Testament (says he) first were written the five books of Moses,
Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie; after these the book of
Joshua the son of Nun, and that of the Judges, together with Ruth; after which
were the four books of the Kings, which the Hebrews reckon but two: of the
Chronicles which is called the book of Days; and of Ezra are two books which
of them are accounted but single, and the book of Esther. Of the Prophets
there is Esaias, Hieremie, Ezekiel and Daniel, and besides, one book which
contains the twelve smaller Prophets. Also Job, and the Psalms of David are
single books: of Solomon there are three books delivered to the Church, the
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of songs. In these they have shut up the number
of the books of the old Testament. Of the new, there are four Gospels, of
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John; the Acts of the Apostles, written by Luke; of
Paul the Apostle fourteen Epistles, of the Apostle Peter two Epistles, of
James the Lords brother and Apostle, one, of Jude one, of John three, Lastly
the Revelation of John. Haec sunt quae patres intra Canonem concluserunt, ex
quibus fidei nostrae assertiones, etc.

Alij libri sunt qui noa Canonici, etc.


These are they which the Fathers have accounted within the Canon; by which
they would have the assertions of our faith made good: But we must know there
are other books, which are called of the Ancients not Canonical but
Ecclesiastical, as the Wisdom of Solomon, and another book of Wisdom,
which is called of Jesus the son of Sirach; In Prologo galeato Tom. 3. p. 6.

Hic prologus Scripturam quasi Galeatu^ principiu^ omnibus libris quos de
Hebraeo, etc.

Vt scire valeamus quicquid extra hos est inter Apocrypha esse ponendum: igitur
sapientia quae vulgo Salomonis inscribitur and Jesus etc. non sunt in Canone,
etc.

Eusebius. li. 6. c. 24 Haud ignora^dum autem fuerit veteris instrum. libros sicut
Hebraei tradunt 22. (...), etc. (...). Haec sunt Apocrypha, Jesus, Sapientia,
Pastor, and Macabaeotum libri, Judith atque Tobia. Hugo Card.


which book of the Latins is termed by a general name Ecclesiasticus: of the
same rank is the book of Toby and Judith, and the books of the Maccabees:
Thus far that Father; so Hierome after that he has reckoned up the same
number of books with us in their order, has these words: This Prologue of
mine (says he) may serve as a well defenced entrance to all the books which I
have turned out of Hebrew into latin; that we may know, that whatsoever is
besides these is Apocryphal: therefore that book which is entitled Salomons
Wisdom, and the book of Jesus the son of Sirach, and Judith, and Tobias and
Pastor are not Canonical: the first book of the Macabees I have found in
Hebrew, the second is Greek: which book (says he) indeed the Church reads
but receives not as Canonical. The same reckoning is made by Origin in
Eusebius, word for word. The same by Epiphanius, by Cyrill, by Athanasius,
Gregory Nazianzen, Damascen: yea by Lyranus, both Hugoes, Caietan, Carthusian,
and Montanus himself, etc.

All of them with full consent rejecting these same Apocryphal books with us.
Now hear the present Church of Rome in her own words, thus: Council. Trident.
Decr. de Canon. script. April. 8 promulg in quart. Sessione. Sacrorum vero
librorum indicem huic decreto adscri bendum censuit, etc.

Sunt autem in fra-scripti Testamenti veteris quinque libri Mosis, etc. Tobias,
Judith, Sapientia Salomonis, Ecclesiasticus, Macab. 2.


The holy Synod of Trent has thought good to set down with this Decree a
just Catalogue of the books of holy Scripture; least any man should make doubt
which they be which are received by the Synod; And they are these
underwritten, Of the old Testament five books of Moses, then Joshua, the
Judges, Ruth, four books of the Kings, two of the Chronicles, two of Esdras
the first and the second, which is called Nehemias, Tobias, Judith, Ester, Job,
the Psalter of David, containing one hundredth and fifty Psalms, the Proverbs
of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, the book of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Esaias, Hieremy, etc. two books of the Macabees, the first and
the second.

Si quis autem libros ipsos integros cum omnibus suis partibus prout in
Ecclesia Catholica legi consueuerunt, and in veteri vulgata latina editione
habentur, pro sacris and canonicis non susceperit, Anathema sit.
And if any man shall not receive these whole books with all the parts of them,
as they are wont to be read in the Catholic Church; and as they are had in the
old vulgar latin Edition; for holy and Canonical, let him be accursed. Thus
she: Judge you now of our age, and say, whether the opinion of the ancient
Church (that is ours) be not a direct enemy to Popery, and flatly accursed by
the Romish.

Pass on yet a little further; Our question is whether the Hebrew and Greek
Originals be corrupted; and whether those first Copies of Scriptures be not to
be followed above all Translations. Hear first the ancient Church with us:
Aug. de Ciuit. dei l. 15. c. 13. Sed quomodo libet istud accipiatur, etc. Ei
linguae potius credatur vnde est in aliam. facta translatio.
But (says Saint Augustine) howsoever it be taken, whether it be believed to
be so done, or not believed, or lastly whether it were so or not so; I hold it
a right course that when any thing is found different in either books (the
Hebrew and Septuagint) since for the certainty of things done there can be but
one truth; that tongue should rather be believed from whence the Translation
is made into another language. Ludoui. Viues ibid.

Hoc ipsum Hieronymus clamat vbique hoc ipsum docet ratio, etc. Sed frustra
bonorum ingeniorum consensus hoc docet.

Hieron. l. 3. com. in Isaiam quod si aliquis dix erit Hebrae os libros postea
a Iudaeis falsatos, etc.


Upon which words Ludouicus Viues (yet a Papist) says thus: the same (says
he) does Jerome proclayme every where, and reason it self teaches it, and
there is none of sound judgment that will gain say it; but in vain does the
consent of all good wits teach this, for the stubburne blockishnes of men
opposes against it. Let Jerome himself then, a greater linguist be heard
speak: And if there be any man (says he) that will say the Hebrew books were
afterward corrupted of the Jews; let him hear Origin, what he answers in
the eight Volume of his explanations of Esaias to this question, that the Lord
and his Apostles which reprove other faults in the Scribs and Pharisees, Sin
autem dixerint post aduentum Domini saluatoris etc Hebraeos libros fuisse
falsatos, cachin number tenere non potero, vt saluator and Apostoli, etc. cap. 6.

Decr. p. 1. did. 9. c. vt veterum Vt veterum librorum fides de Hebaeis
voluminibus examinanda est, ita nouorum graeci sermonis normam desiderat. Ad
Decr. p. 1. d 19. c. 3.

Ad diuina recurre scripta Graeca. Bellar. l. de verb. dei 2. cap. 11.. 3.

Accedit quod patres passim docent ad fontes Hebraeos and Graecos esse
recurrendum: and Hieron in lib. contr. Heluid. and in epist. ad Marcellam etc.


would never have been silent in this, which were the greatest crime that
could be, But if they say that the Hebrews falsified them after the coming of
Christ and preaching of the Apostles, I cannot hold from laughter, that our
Savior and the Evangelists and Apostles should so cite testimonies of
Scripture, as the Jews would afterward deprave them: Thus Jerome. And the
Canon law it self has this determination, that the truth and credit of the
books of the old Testament should be examined by the Hebrew Volumes, of the
new, by the Greek. And Pope Innocentius as he is cyted by Gratian could say,
Have recourse to the divine Scriptures in their Original Greek. The same lastly
by Bellarmines own confession, the Fathers teach every where: As Jerome in his
book against Heluidius, and in his Epistle to Marcella, that the latin
Edition of the Gospels is to be called back to the Greek fountains; and the
latin Edition of the old Testament is to be amended by the Hebrew; in his
Comment upon Zachary, chap. 8. The very same has Austen in his second book of
Christian doctrine, chap. 11.12, 15. and Epist. 19. and elsewhere. This was the
old Religion and ours; now hear the new. The present Church of Rome has thus:
Council. Trid. sess 4.

Sacro sa ncta synodus statuit vt haec ipsa vetus etc pro authentica habeatur.

Bell. de verb. l. 2. c. 11.

Nunc autem fontes multis in locis turbidos fluere, etc. Omnino contendunt
Iudaeos in odium christianae relig. studiose deprauasse ita docet Iac.
Christopolitanus and Canus, etc. Bell. 2. de verb. dei p. 100. So Raynolds in
his refutation. p. 303 Against Isaac Valla, Andradius, Monta etc. Haeretici
huius temporis, odio vulgatae editionis nimium tribuunt editioni Hebraicae etc
omnia examinari volunt ad Hebraeum textu^ que^ non semel purissimu^ fonte^
appellant. Bell. l. 2. de verb. c. 2


The holy Synod decrees that the old vulgar latin Edition in all Lectures,
Disputations, Sermons, Expositions be held for Authentical, says the counsel
of Trent: And her Champion Bellarmine has these words; That the fountain of
the Originals in many places run muddy and impure, we have formerly showed, and
indeed it can scarce be doubted, but that as the latin Church has been more
constant in keeping the faith then the Greek, so it has been more vigilant in
defending her books from corruption. Yea some of the Popish Doctors
mainetaine, that the Jews in hatred of the Christian faith did on purpose
corrupt many places of scripture: so holds Gregory de Valentia, Iacobus
Christopolitanus in his Praeface to the Psalms, Canus in the second book of
his common places. But in stead of all, Bellarmine shall shut up all with these
words; The Heretics of this time in hatred of the vulgar Edition, give too
much to the Hebrew Edition, as Calvin, Chemnitius, Georgius Mayor: All which
would have every thing examined and amended by the Hebrew text, which they
commonly call a most pure fountain: See now whether that which Bellarmine
confesses to have been the judgment of Hierome, Austen, and all the ancient
Fathers be not here condemned by him, as the opinion of the Heretics:
Epiphan. contr Anomaeos. haeres. 76.

Omnia sunt clara and lucida etc.

Basil. in Ascet. or Regul. breviores. quae ambigue, and obscure videntur dici
in quibusdam locis sacrae script. and reg. 267.

Aug. Ep. 3. Non tanta in scripturis difficultate peruenitur ad ea quae
necessaria sunt saluti, etc.

Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. In jis quae aperte in scriptura posita su^t
iuueniuntur illa omnia quae continent fide^ moresque viuendi.

Magnifice and salubriter spirit. sanctus ita script. etc.

De doctr. Christiana, l. 2 c. 4.


Ours was theirs; and theirs is condemned under our names: Judge whether in
this also Popery be not an vpstart.

Yet one step more: Our question is, whether the Scripture be easy or most
obscure, and whether in all essential points it do not interpret it self, so
as what is hard in one place is openly laid forth in another: Hear the
judgment of the old Church and ours: All things are clear and plain and
nothing contrary in the Scriptures; says Epiphanius, Those things which seem
doubtfully and obscurely spoken in some places of Scripture are expounded by
them, which in other places are open and plain, says Basil: What could Calvin
or Luther say more?

There is no so great hardness in the Scriptures to come to those things which
are necessary to salvation, says Austen: In those things which are openly laid
down in Scripture, are found all those things which contain our faith and
rules for our life, says the same Father; who yet again also says thus: The
spirit of God has Royally and wholsomely tempered the holy Scriptures so, as
both by the plain places he might prevent our hunger, and by the obscure he
might avoid our nice slothfulness; for there is (scarce) any thing that can
be fetched out of those obscurities, which is not found most plainly spoken
elsewhere.

And because Bellarmine takes exception at this ( Fere Scarce) compare this
place with the former; and with that which he has in his third, Epistle thus:
Aug. Epist. 3. Modus ipse dicendi quo sancta scriptura etc.
The manner of speech in which the Scripture is contrived, is easy to be
commed to of al; although to be thoroughly attained by few; Those things which
it contains plain and easy, it speaks like a familiar friend without guile
to the heart of the learned and unlearned, etc.

But it inuites all men with an humble manner of speech, Sed inuitat omnes
humili sermon.
whom it does not only feed with manifest truth, but exercise with secret,
having the same in readiness, which it has in secrecy: Thus Austen: To omit
Iraeneus and Origin. Chrysostom (whom Bellarmine says we allege alone for
us) besides many other plain places, writes thus. Who is there to whom all is
not manifest, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de Lazaro Cui non sunt manifesta quae cunque in
Euangel.? etc. quomodo possis intelligere quae ne leuiter quidem inspicere
velis etc sum librum in manus, lege etc.

Citat. ab ipso Bellarm. Apostoli vero and prophetae omnia contra fecerunt
manifesta, claraque: quae prodiderunt, exposuerunt nobis veluti communes orbis
doctores, vt perse quisque discere possi^, ea quae dicuntur, ex sola lectione.
Chry. hom. 3. in Laz. quamobrem opus est conci onatore, omnia sunt plana ex
Scripturis diuinis, sed quia delicatuli estis. etc.

Hom 3. in 2 Thessalonians.


which is written in the Gospel? who that shall hear, Blessed are the meek,
Blessed are the merciful, Blessed are the pure in heart, and the rest, would
desire a teacher to learn any of these things which are here spoken? As also
the signs, miracles, histories are not they known and manifest to every man?
This pretense and excuse is but the cloak of our slothfulness: thou
understand not those things which are written; how should thou understand
them, which wilt not so much as slightly look into them? take the book into
thy hand, read all the history, and what thou know remember, and what is
obscure run often over it. So Chrysostom: yea he makes this difference
betwixt the Philosophers and Apostles: the Philosophers speak obscurely, But
the Apostles and Prophets (says he) contrarily make all things delivered by
them, clear and manifest; and as the common teachers of the world have so
expounded all things that every man may of himself by bare reading, learn
those things which are spoken: yea lastly, so far he goes in this point, as
that he asks, Wherefore needs a preacher? all things are clear and plain
in the Divine Scriptures; but because ye are delicate hearers, and seek
delight in hearing, therefore ye seek for Preachers. You have heard the old
Religion, now hear the new: Bellarmine has these words: Bellarm. l 3. de
verbo c. 1. Necessario fatendum est scripturas esse obscurissimas. Lutherus duo
effugia excogitauit; vnum quod scriptura etiam si alicubi obscura, tamen illud
idem alibi clare proponat, etc. ibid. 2.

Eccius in Enchirid. c. 4. Lutherani contendunt scripturas sacras esse claras.

Duraeus contr. Whitak. li. 6. Rhemists in 2. Pe. 3.16. and in their Praeface
at large, etc.


It must needs be confessed that the Scriptures are most obscure; Here
therefore (says he) Luther has devised two euasions; One that the Scripture;
though it be obscure in one place, yet that it does clearly propound the same
thing in another. The second is, that though the Scripture be clear of it
self, yet to the proud and unbelievers it is hard, by reason of their blindness
and evil affections: so the Lutherans (says Eckius) contend that the
Scriptures are clear and plain: so Duraeus against VVhitakers: so the
Rhemists in their annotations; and generally all Papists. Judge now if all
these forenamed Fathers, and so the Ancient Church were not Lutherans in this
point; or rather we theirs; and yield that this their old opinion by the new
Church of Rome is condemned for heretical: and in all these say upon your
soul, whether is the elder?

Let me draw you on yet a little further: Our question is, whether it be
necessary or fit that all men (even of the Laiety) should have liberty to hear
and read the Scriptures, in a language which they understand. Homili. in 4.
dominic. ab Epiphan. Ambr. ser. 35. Hieron in Psa. Dominus narrabit, and
quomodo narrabit? Non verbo, sedscriptura, in cuius scriptura? in populoru^,
etc. Dominus narrabit in scripturis populoru^ in scripturis sanctis; quae,
scriptura populis omnibus legitur, hoc est vt omnes intelligant, non vt pauci
intelligerent, sed vt omnes. in Psalm. 86.

Omnia quae post ascens. etc quis fidelis vel etiam catechumenus antequam
spiritu^ sanctum baptizatus accipiat, non aequo animo, etc.

Aug. trac. in Io 96. and to the same purpose l. 2 de doct. Chris. c. 8.

Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazar. Semper hortor and hortari non desinam vt non hic
tantu^ attendatis. etc. Ego forensibus causis affixus sum, etc.


Hear first the voice of the old religion: to omit the direct charges of
Gregory Nissen and Ambrose; thus has Jerome upon the Psalms. The Lord will
declare; and how will he declare? Not by word but by writing; In whose writing?
In the writing of his people, etc. Our Lord and Savior therefore tells us, and
speaks in the scriptures of his Princes: Our Lord will declare it to us in
the scriptures of his people, in the holy scriptures: which scripture is read
to all the people; that is, so read as that all may understand; not that a few
may understand, but all.

What faithful man says Augustine (though he be but a Nouice, before he be
baptized and have received the holy Ghost) does not with an equal mind read
and hear all things, which after the ascension of our Lord are written in
Canonical truth, and authority, although as yet he understands them not as he
ought.

But of all other Saint Chrysostom is every where most vehement and direct in
this point: Amongst infinite places, hear what he says in one of his Homilies
of Lazarus.

I do always exhort, and will never cease to exhort you (says he) that you
will not here only attend to those things which are spoken, but when you are
at home, you continually busy your selves in reading of the holy Scriptures;
which practice also I have not ceased to drive into them which come privately
to me: for let no man say, Tush, they are but idle words, and many of them such
as should be contemned: Alas, Vxorem alo and liberos, familiae curamgero etc.
I am taken up with law causes, I am employed in public affairs, I follow
my trade, I maintain a wife and children, and have a great charge to look to;
It is not for me to read the Scriptures, Qui montium vertices occuparunt, etc.
but for them which have cast off the world; which have taken up the solitary
tops of Mountains for their dwellings, which live this contemplative kind
of life continually.

What say thou O man? Quid ais homo? non est tui negotij scripturas
euoluere, etc. Imo tuum magis est quam illorum, etc.
Is it not for thee to turn over the Scriptures, because thou art distracted
with infinite cares; Nay, then it is for thee more then for them; for they do
not so much need the help of the Scriptures, as you that are tossed in the
midst of the waves of worldly business.

And soon after, Neque nunc fieri potest vt quisquam, etc.
Neither can it be possible that any man should without great fruit be
perpetually conversant in this spiritual exercise of reading and straight. Ne
negligamus nobis parare libros, etc.
Let us not neglect to buy our selves books, least we receive a wound in our
vital parts; and after he has compared the books of Scripture to gold, he
adds, But what say they, quid igitur inquiunt, etc.
if we understand not those things which are contained in those books? What
gain we then? Yes surely, Publicani, piscatores, Tabernaculorum opifices,
pastores and Apostoli idiotae illiterati etc.

Note, that which is read in Chrysostom (...), in some better copies is (...)
which signifies Goat-beards, more agreeable to the place.

Vt and famulus, and Vidua mulier, and omnium hominum indoctissimus, exaudita
lectione aliquid lucri vtilitatisque reportet. Hom. in Genesis 29.

Obsecro vt subinde huc veniatis, etc.


though thou do not understand those things which are there laid up, yet by
the very reading much holiness is got: Although it cannot be, that thou
should be alike ignorant of all thou read; for therefore has the spirit
of God so dispensed this word, that Publicanes, Fishers, Tent-makers,
Shepherds and Goat-beards, plain unlettered men may be saved by these books;
least any of the simpler sort should pretend this excuse, That all things which
are said should be easy to discern; and that the workman, the servant, the
poor widow, and the most unlearned of all other, by hearing of the word read,
might get some gain and profit.

And the same Father elsewhere; I beseech you (says he) that you come speedily
hither, and harken diligently to the reading of the holy Scriptures; and not
only when you come hither, but also at home take the Bible into your hands,
and by your diligent care reap the profit contained in it. Lastly, in his
Homilies upon the Epistle to the Colossians; he cries out, Hear, In Coloss.
Hom 9. Audite obsecro seculares omnes, etc.
I beseech you, O all ye secular men, provide you Bibles which are the
medicines for the soul; At least get the new Testament. Now on the contrary,
let the new Religion of Rome speak; first by her Rhemish Jesuits, thus:
Rhemists in their Praeface to their Testament.
We may not think that the Translated Bibles into vulgar tongues were in the
hands of every Husbandman, Artificer, Prentise, Boys, Girls, Mistress,
Maid, Man; that they were sung, played, alleged of every Tinker, Tauerner,
Rimer, Minstrell. The like words of scorn and disgrace are used by Hosius, and
by Eckius, and by Bellarmine de verbo. l. 2. c. 15.

The wise will not here regard (say our Rhemists) what some wilful people do
mutter, Bellar. de ver. l. 2. c. 15. Haeretici huius temporis omnes in eo
conueniunt, vt oporteat scripturas omnibus permittere imo and tradere in sua
lingua: etc.

At Catholica ecclesia, etc.


that the Scriptures are made for all men, etc. And soon after they compare
the scriptures to fire, water, candles, knives, swords, which are indeed
needful, etc. but would mar all if they were at the guiding of other, then
wise men. All the Heretics of this time, says Bellarmine, agree that the
scriptures should be permitted to all, and delivered in their own mother
tongue; But the Catholic Church forbids the reading of the Scriptures by all,
Prohibet ne Passim omnibus sine discrimine concedatur eiusmodi lectio, etc.

Duraeus cont. Whit. l. 6. Si Christianis omnibus vt scripturas seru tentur a
Christo dictum esse intelligis, in magno certe errore etc.

Promiscuae fidelium turbae etc.


without choice: or the public reading or singing of them in vulgar tongues,
as it is decreed in the Council of Trent, Ses. 22 c. 8. and can. 9. If you
think (says Duraeus) that Christ had all Christians to search the Scriptures,
you are in a gross error; For how shall rude and ignorant men search the
Scriptures, etc. And so he concludes, that the Scriptures were not given to the
common multitude of believers.

Judge now what either we say, or these Papists condemn, besides the ancient
judgment of the Fathers: and if ever either Calvin or Luther have been more
peremptory in this matter then Saint Chrysostom, I vow to be a Papist. If ours
be not in this the old Religion, be not you ours.

Basil. Ep. 82. Aug. de vnitate ecclesiae, sieve Epist. cont. Petilianum
Donatistam cap. 2.

Inter nos autem and Donatistas quaestio est, vbi sit ecclesia, quid ergo
facturi sumus? in verbis nostris eam quaesituri, etc


Yet this one passage further, and then no more, least I weary you: Our question
is; Whether the Scriptures depend upon the authority of the Church; or rather
the Church upon the authority of Scriptures?

Hear first the ancient Church, with, and for us: The question is (says Saint
Austen) betwixt us and the Donatists, where the Church is; what shall we do
then? shall we seek her in our own words, or in the words of her head, the
Lord Jesus Christ? I suppose we ought to seek her rather in his words, which
is the truth; and knows best his own body, for the Lord knows who are his;
we will not have the Church sought in our words. And in the same book, Aug.
ibid. c. 16. Vtrum ipsi ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinatum scripturarum
Canonicis libris ostendant, etc. quia nec nos propterea dicimus, etc.
Whether the Donatists hold the Church (says the same Father) let them not
show, but by the Canonical books of Divine scriptures; for neither do we
therefore say they should believe us, that we are in the Church of Christ,
because Optatus or Ambrose has commended this Church unto us which we now
hold; or because it is acknowledged by the Councels of our fellow-teachers, or
because so great miracles are done in it: it is not therefore manifested to be
true and Catholic; but the LORD Jesus himself judged, that his Disciples
should rather be confirmed by the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets:
These are the rules of our cause, these are the foundations; these are the
confirmations.

And upon the Psalms, Aug. in Psa. 69. in illa verba. Omnes qui quaerunt te
etc Ne in ecclesia errares, ne quis, etc.
Least thou should err (says the same Augustine) in thy judgment of the
Church: least any man should say to thee, this is Christ which is not Christ,
or this is the Church which is not the Church; Multi enim di^erunt carnem non
habuisse: ostendit etc.

So Epi. 166 and in Ps. 57. etc. Chrysostom. hom. in Matthew. 49. qui vult cognoscere,
quae sit vera ecclesia Christi, vnde cognoscet nisi etc.


for many, etc. Hear the voice of the Shepherd himself, which is clothed in
flesh, etc. He shows himself to thee; handle him, and see. He shows his
Church, least any man should deceive thee under the name of the Church, etc.
yet Chrysostom more directly thus: He that would know which is the true Church
of Christ, whence may he know it in the similitude of so great confusion, but
only by the scriptures? Now the working of miracles is altogether ceased; yea
they are rather found to be fainedly wrought of them, which are but false
Christians; Whence then shall he know it, but only by the scriptures? The Lord
Jesus therefore knowing what great confusion of things would be in the last
days, therefore commands that those which are Christians, and would receive
confirmation of their true faith, Eckius in Enchirid. c. de ecclesia.

Scriptura non est authentica sine authoritate ecclesiae; Scriptores enim
Canonici sunt membra ecclesiae, vnde haeretico contendere volenti, etc.


should fly to nothing but to the Scriptures; Otherwise if they fly to any
other help, they shall be offended and perish, not understanding which is the
true Church: This is the old faith; Now hear the new, contradicting it, and
us. The scripture (says Eckius a Popish Doctor) is not authentical without
the authority of the Church, for the Canonical writers are members of the
Church; Whereupon let it be objected to an Heretic, that will strive against
the Decrees of the Church, by what weapons he will fight against the Church, he
will say by the Canonical scriptures of the four Gospels, and Paul's Epistles:
Eckius ibidem Scriptura definit in concilio, visum est spiritui sancto etc. rem
tam clare expressam, and definitam ecclesia sua authoritate mutauit, etc Ecce
potestas ecclesiae super scriptura.

Si tollamus authoritate^ praesentis ecelesiae and praesentis concilij, in
dubium reuocari poterunt omnium alioru^ concilioru^ decreta, and tota fides
Christiana, etc. Bell. De effectu sacram. l. 2. c. 25. page 300.

Omnium dogmatum firmitas, etc.

So Pigh. l. 1. de Hier. ec. Stapl. l. 9. Princ. doct. c. 1.


Let it be straight objected to him, how he knows these to be Canonical, but
by the Church: And a while after, The scripture (says he) defined in a
Council, it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, that you abstain from
things offered to Idols, and blood, and strangled: the Church by her authority
altered a thing so clearly defined, and expressed: for it uses both strangled
and blood; Behold the power of the Church is above the scripture: thus Eckius.
And besides Cusanus, Bellarmine says thus: If we take away the authority of
the present Church, and of the present Council (of Trent) all the Decrees of
all other Counsels, and the whole Christian faith may be called into doubt;
and in the same place a little after; The strength of all ancient Councels and
the certainety of all opinions depends on the authority of the present Church:
You have heard both speak, say now, with whom is true antiquity; and on Gods
name detest the newer of both: It were as easy to bring the same, if not
greater evidence for the perfection, and all sufficiency of Scripture; and so
to deliver all the body of our Religion* by the tongues and pens of the
fathers, that either you must be forced to hold them Nouelists with us* or your
selves such against them: Compertum est ab his dam nata vt haeretica in Lutheri
libris, quae in Bernardi Augustinique libris, vt Orthodoxa, imo vt pra
leguntur. Erasm. ep. ad Card. Mogunt. page 401.
How honest and ingenuous is that confession of your Erasmus, who in his
Epistle to the Bishop and Cardinal of Ments, could say, It is plainly found,
that many things in Luthers books are condemned for Heretical, which in the
books of Bernard and Austen, are read for holy and Orthodox.

This is too much for a taste, if your appetite stand to it, I dare promise you
full dishes: Let me therefore appeal to you, if light and darkness be more
contrary then these points of your religion, to true Antiquity: No, no, Let
your authors gloss as they list; Popery is but a young faction, corruptly raised
out of ancient grounds; And if it have (as we grant) some ancient errors,
falsehood cannot be bettered with age; there is no prescription against God and
truth: What we can prove to be erroneous, we need not prove new: some
hundreths of years is an idle plea against the ancient of days.

What can you plead yet more for your change? Their numbers perhaps, and our
handfuls? You heard all the world was theirs, scarce any corner ours: How could
you but suspect a few? These are but idle brags; we dare and can share equally
with them in Christendom: And if we could not; this rule will teach you to
advance Turcisme above Christianity, and Paganism above that: the world above
the Church, hell above heaven: If any proof can be drawn from numbers, He
that knows all, says the best are fewest.

What then could stir you? Our divisions and their unity. If this my following
labor do not make it good to all the world, that their peace is less then
ours, their dissension more, by the confession of their own mouths, be you
theirs still, and let me follow you. I stand not upon the scoldings of Priests
and Jesuits, nor the late Venetian iarres, nor the pragmaticall differences
now on foot, in the view of all Christendom, betwixt their own Cardinals, in
their sacred Conclaue, and all their Clergy, concerning the Popes temporal
power: Neither do I call any friend to be our advocate; none but Bellarmine
and Nauarrus shall be my Orators; and if these plead not this cause enough, let
it fall: See here dangerous rifts and flawes, not in the outward bark only,
but in the very heart and pithe of your religion; and if so many be confessed
by one or two, what might be gathered out of all? and if so many be
acknowledged, think how many there are that lurk in secret, and will not be
confessed? How loath would we be (after all exclamations) that your busy
Jesuits, could rake out so many confessed quarrels out of all our authors, as
I have here found in two of yours? We want only their cunning secrecy in the
carriage of our quarrels: Our few (and slight) differences are blazoned a
broad with infamy and offense, their hundreds are craftily smothered in silence.

Let your own eyes satisfy you in this, not my pen: see now, what you would
never believe.

What is it then, that could thus bewitch you to forsake the comely and
heavenly truth of God, and to dote upon this beastly strumpet? to change your
Religion, for a ridiculous, sensual, cruel, irreligious faction? A Religion
(if we must call it so) that made sport to our plain fore fathers, with the
remembrance of her grauest devotions: How often have you seen them laugh at
themselves, whiles they have told of their creeping crouch, kissing the pax,
offering their candles, signing with ashes, partial shrifts, merry
pilgrimages, ridiculous miracles, and a thousand such May-games, which now you
begin (after this long hissing at) to look upon soberly, and with admiration.

A Religion, whose fooleries very boys may shout and laugh at, if for no more
but this, that it teaches men to put confidence in beads, medals, roses,
hallowed swords, spells of the Gospel, Agnus Dei, and such like idle bables;
ascribing unto them Divine virtue: yea so much as is due to the son of God
himself, and his precious blood. J speak not of some rude ignorants; your
very book of holy Ceremonies shall teach you what your holy fathers do, and
have done. That tells you first with great allowance, and applause, that Pope
Urban the fifth sent three Agnos Dei, to the Greek Emperor, with these verses:
Balsamus and munda cera cum Chrismatis vnda conficiunt Agnum, quod munus do
tibi magnum etc.

Fulgura de caelo, etc.

Peccatum frangit vt Christi sanguis and angit, etc.


Balsame, pure Wax, and Chrismes-liquor clear,
Make up this precious Lamb, I send thee here;
All lightning it dispels, and each ill spri'ght,
Remedies sin, and makes the heart contrite.
Even as the blood that Christ for us did shed:
It helps the child-beds pains; and gives good speed
Unto the birth; Great gifts it still does win
To all that wear it, and that worthy bin:
It quels the rage of fire; and cleanely bore
It brings from shipwreck safely to the shore.


And least you should plead this to be the conceit of some one fantastical
Pope, hear (and be ashamed) out of the same book, Sacr. Cerem. l. 1.

Vt ea, quae in hoc aquarum vasculo, praeparato ad nominis tui gloriam
infundere decreuimus, benedicas: quatenus ipsorum veneratione and honor nobis
famulis tuis crimina diluantur, abstergantur maculae peccatorum, impetrentur
veniae, gratiae conferantur, vt tandem vna cum sanctis and electis tuis vitam
percipere mereamur aeternam.

Fran. a Victoria Ordin. Praedicatorum Sum. sacram. art. 184. p. 104. Sed quid
faciet Confessor cum interrogatur de peccato, etc.


what by prescription every Pope uses to pray in the blessing of the water,
which serves for that Agnus Dei: If you know not, thus he prays: That it
would please thee O God, to bless those things which we purpose to pour into
this vessel of water prepared to the glory of thy name, so as by the worship
and honor of them, we thy servants may have our heinous offenses done away,
the blemishes of our sins wiped off, and there by we may obtain pardon, and
receive grace from thee; so that at the last with thy Saints and elect Children
we may merit to obtain everlasting life. Amen. How could you choose but be in
love with this superstition, Magic, blasphemy practiced, and maintained by
the heads of your Church?

2 A Religion that allows iugling Equivocations, and reserved senses even in
very oaths. Besides all that has been shamelesly written by our Jesuits to
this purpose; Hear what Franciscus Victoria, an ingenuous Papist, and a
learned reader of Divinity in Salmantica, writes in the name of all:

But what shall a Confessor do (says he) if he be asked of a sin that he has
heard in Confession? May he say that he knows not of it? Respondeo secun dum
omnes, quod sic.
I answer according to all our Doctors, that he may; But what if he be
compelled to swear? I say that he may and ought to swear that he knows it
not; for that it is understood that he knows it not besides confession, and so
he swears true. But say, Sed fac quod Iudex aut praelatus ex malitia exigat a
me iuramentum, an sciam in confessione? Respondeo: quod coactus iuretse nescire
in confessione, quia intelligitur se nescire ad reuelandum, aut taliter quod
possit dicere.
that the Judge or Prelate shall maliciously require of him upon his oath,
whether he know it in confession or no; I answer, that a man thus urged may
still swear that he knows it not in confession; for that it is understood he
knows it not to reveal it, or so as he may tell: Who teach and do thus in
another case, judge what they would do in their own. O wise, cunning and
holy periuries, unknown to our forefathers.

A Religion that allows the buying and selling of sins, of pardons of
souls: so as now Purgatory can have no rich men in it, but fools and
friendlesse: Devils are tormenters there (as themselves hold from many
revelations of Bid, Bernard, Carthusian) yet men can command devils, and
money can command men.

A Religion, that relies wholly upon the infallibility of those, whom yet they
grant have been, and may be monstrous in their lives and dispositions; How many
of those heirs of Peter (by confession of their own records) by bribes, by
Whores, by Devils, have climed up into that chair; Yet, to say that those men,
which are confessed to have given their souls to the devil, that they might
be Popes, can err, while they are Popes, is heresy worthy of a stake, and of
hell.

A Religion, that hood-winkes the poor Laity in forced ignorance, least they
should know Gods will, or any way to heaven but theirs: so as millions of
souls live no less without Scriptures, then if there were none: that forbids
spiritual food as poison; and fetches Gods book into the Inquisition.

A Religion, that teaches men to worship stocks and stones, with the same
honor that is due to their Creator: which practice least it should appear to
her simple Clyents, how palpably opposite it is to the second commandment;
they have discreetly left out those words of GODS Law, as a needelesse
illustration, in their Catechismes and Prayer books of the vulgar.

A Religion, that utterly overthrows the true humanity of Christ, while they
give unto it ten thousand places at once, and yet no place: flesh and no
flesh, several members without distinction; a substance without quantity, and
other accidents; or substance and accidents that cannot be seen, felt,
perceived; so they make either a monster of their Savior, or nothing.

A Religion, that utterly overthrows the perfection of Christ's satisfaction:
If all be not paid, how has he satisfied? If temporal punishments in
purgatory be yet due, how is all paid? and if these must be paid by us, how are
they satisfied by him?

A Religion, that makes more scripture then ever God and his ancient Church;
and those which it does make, so imperiously obtrudes upon the world, as if God
himself should speak from heaven: and while it thunders out curses against all
that will not add these books to Gods, regards not Gods curse, If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book.

A Religion, whose patrons disgrace the true Scriptures of God with
reproachful terms, odious comparisons imputations of corruption and
imperfection, and in fine, pin their whole authority upon the sleeves of men.

A Religion, that erects a throne in the Conscience to a mere man, and gives
him absolute power to make a sin, to dispense with it, to create new Articles
of faith, and to impose them upon necessity of salvation.

A Religion, that baffoules all temporal Princes, making them stand bare-foote
at their great Bishops gate, lie at his foot, hold his stirrup, yea their own
Crowns at his Courtesy, exempting all their Ecclesiastical Subjects from
their jurisdiction, and (when they list) all the rest from their allegiance.

A Religion, Papa facit protestationem ante Canonizationem se nihil intendere
facere, quod sit contra fidem aut ecclesiam Catholicam. Aliqui tamen clarissimi
viri dicunt, etc. Quia Papa quodammodo cogebatur ad Canonizandum quendam contra
suam voluntatem. Lib. Sacr. Ceremon.
that has made wicked men Saints, and Saints Gods; Even by the confession of
Papists, lewd and undeserving men have leapt into their Calender: Whence it is,
that the Pope before his Canonization of any Saint, makes solemn protestation,
that he entends not in that business to do ought prejudicial to the glory of
God, or to the Catholic faith and Church: And once Sainted, they have the
honor of Altars, Temples, Inuocations; and some of them in a style fit only
for their maker. I know not whither that blessed Virgin receive more indignity
from her enemies that deny her, or these her flatterers that deifie her.

A Religion that robs the Christian heart of all sound comfort, whiles it
teaches us, that we neither can nor ought to be assured of the remission of
our sins, and of present grace, and future salvation; That we can never know
whether we have received the true Sacraments of God, because we cannot know the
intention of the Minister, without which they are are no Sacraments:

A Religion, that rackes the conscience with the needless torture of a
necessary shrift; wherein the virtue of absolution depends on the fullness of
confession, and that, upon examination and the sufficiency of examination is so
full of scruples (besides those infinite cases of unresolved doubts in this
fained penance) that the poor soul never knows when it is clear.

A Religion, that professes to be a bawd of sin; whiles both (in practice) it
tollerates open stews, and prefers fornication in some cases to honorable
Matrimony, and gently blanches over the breaches of Gods Law with the name of
venials and favorable titles of diminution; daring to affirm that venial
sins are no hinderance to a man's cleanenesse and perfection.

A cruel Religion, that sends poor infants remedilesly unto the eternal
pains of hell; for want of that which they could not live to desire: and
frights simple souls with expectation of fained torments in purgatory; not
inferior (for the time) to the flames of the damned; how wretchedly and
fearfully must their poor Laics needs die: for first they are not sure they
shall not go to hell; and secondly they are sure to be scorched, if they shall
go to heaven.

A Religion, that makes nature vainly proud in being joined by her, as
copartner with God, in our justification, in our salvation: and idly puffed up
in a conceit of her perfection, and ability to keep more laws then God has
made.

A Religion, that requires no other faith to justification in Christians, then
may be found in the Devils themselves: who besides a confused apprehension, can
assent unto the truth of Gods revealed will: Popery requires no more.

A Religion, that in stead of the pure milk of the Gospel has long fed her
starued souls, with such idle Legends, as the reporter can hardly deliver
without laughter, and their abettors not hear without shame and disclamation:
the wiser sort of the world read those stories on winter euenings for sport,
which the poor credulous multitude hears in their Churches, with a devout
astonishment.

A Religion, which (least ought should be here wanting to the doctrine of
devils) makes religious prohibitions of meat, and differences of diet;
superstitiously preferring Gods workmanship to itself and willingly polluting
what he has sanctified.

A Religion, that requires nothing but mere formality in our devotions; the
work wrought suffices alone in sacraments, in prayers: So the number be found
in the chappelet, there is no care of the affection; as if God regarded not the
heart, but the tongue and hands, and while he vndersta^ds us, cared little
whether we understand our selves.

A Religion, that presumptuously dares to alter and mangle Christ's last
institution; and sacrilegiously robbes Gods people of one half of that
heavenly provision, which our Savior left for his last and dearest legacy to
his Church for ever: as if Christ's ordinance were superfluous, or any shaueling
could be wiser then his Redeemer.

A Religion, that depends wholly upon nice and poor uncertainties, and
vnproueable supposals: that Peter was Bishop of Rome; that he left any heirs
of his graces and spirit; or if any, but one in a perpetual and vnfaileable
succession at Rome; That he so bequeathed his infallibility to his chair, as
that whosoever sits in it, cannot but speak true; that all which sit where he
sat, must by some secret instinct, say as he taught; That what Christ said to
him absolutely, ere ever Rome was thought of, must be referred, yea tied to
that place alone, and fulfilled in it: That Linus, or Clemens, or Cletus, the
scholars and supposed successors of Peter, must be preferred (in the Headship
of the Church) to John the beloved Apostle then living: That he whose life,
whose pen, whose judgment, whose keys may err, yet in his pontifical
chair cannot err: That the golden line of this Apostolical succession, in
the confusion of so many, long, desperate Schisms, shamefully corrupt
vsurpa^ions, and intrusions, yielded heresies, neither was, nor can be broken.
Deny any of these, and Popery is no religion: Oh the lamentable hazard of so
many Millions of poor souls that stand upon these slipperie terms, whereof
if any be probable, some are impossible: Oh miserable grounds of Popish faith,
whereof the best can have but this praise, that perhaps it may be true.

A Religion that has been often dyed in the blood of Princes: that in some
cases teaches and allows rebellion against Gods anointed; and both suborneth
treasons, and excuses, pities, honors, rewards the actors.

A Religion, that ouerloades men's consciences with heavy burdens of infinite
unnecessary traditions; far more then ever Moses commented upon with all the
Jewish Masters; imposing them with no less authority, and exacting them with
more rigor, then any of the royal laws of their Maker.

A Religion that cozens the vulgar with nothing but shadows of holiness, in
pilgrimages, processions, offerings, holy water, latin services, images,
tapers, rich vestures, garish altars, crosses, censings, and a thousand such
like (fit for children and fools) robbing them in the mean time of the sound
and plain helps of true piette and salvation.

A Religion, that cares not by what wilful falsehoods it maintains a part: as
Wickliffes blasphemy, Luthers advise from the devil, Tindals community,
Caluins feigned miracle, and blasphemous death; Bucers neck broken, Bezaes
revolt, the blasting of Huguenots, Englands want of Churches and Christendom;
Queen Elizabeth's vnwomanlines, her Episcopal jurisdiction, her secret
fruitfulnes, English Catholics cast in Bears skins to dogs, Plesses
shameful overthrow; Garnets straw, the Lutherans obscene night-reuels; Scories
drunken ordination in a Tavern; the edict of our gracious King James (An. 87)
for the establishment of Popery, our casting the crusts of our Sacrament to
dogs, and ten thousand of this nature, maliciously raised and defended against
knowledge and conscience for the disgrace of those whom they would have hated,
ere known.

A Religion, that in the conscience of her own untruth, goes about to falsify,
and deprave all Authors that might give evidence against her, to outface al
ancient truths, to foist in Gibeonitish witnesses of their own forging: and
leaves nothing unattempted against heaven or earth, that might advantage her
faction, and disable her innocent adversary: Lo this is your choice; if the
zeal of your loss have made me sharp, yet not malicious, not false; God is
my record, I have not (to knowledge) charged you with the least untruth: and if
I have wronged, accuse me: and if I clear not my self, and my challenge, let
me be branded for a slanderer. In the mean time what spiritual frenzy has
overtaken you, that you can find no beauty, but in this monster of errors? It
is to you, and your fellows that God speaks by his Prophet: O ye heavens be
astonished at this, be afraid and utterly confounded, says the Lord, for my
people has committed two evils, They have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, to dig them pits, even broken pits, that can hold no water: what
shall be the issue? Et tu Domine deduces eos in puteum interitus: Thou O God
shall bring them down into the pit of destruction; If you will thus wilfully
leave God, there I must leave you: But (if you had not rather die) return, and
save one; return to God, return to his truth, return to his Church: your
blood be upon my head, if you perish.

ADVERTISEMENTS to the Reader.
UNDERSTAND (good reader) that in all these passages following, I have brought
in C. Bellarm. speaking in his own words, except in some few plain
references, where I mention him in the third person.

2 That the edition of C. Bellarmine which I have followed, and quoted in every
page, is that in octauo (the commonest, I think) set forth at Ingolstadt, from
the press of Adam Sartorius, in the year M.D.XCIX.

3 That all those Authors which thou see named over the head of every
Section, are Papists of note: whose quarrels C. Bellarmine confesses.

4 That such great Doctors could not be singular in their judgments, but must
needs, in all probability, (which yet is not confessed) be attended with many
followers, in every point of variance: every Master has the favor of his own
school: the sides taken by their Scholars is not more secret, then likely.

5 That one Doctor Pappus, a learned German, has undertaken the like task,
but somewhat imperfectly: for of my 303 contradictions he has noted but 237.
the edition followed by him was not the same, and therefore his trust could not
be so helpful to me: Besides, that two or three of Card. Bellarmines works
are since published.

6 That I have willingly omitted diverse small differences, which (if I had
regarded number) might have caused the Sum to swell yet higher.

7 That thou may not look to find all these acknowledged differences,
maine and essential: All Religion consists not of so many stones in her
foundation; it is enough, that deep and material dissensions are intermingled
with the rest; and that scarce any point is free from some.

8 That Card. Bellarmine acknowledges those dissensions only, which fall into
the compass of his own Controversies (if all those:) omitting all others. For
instance: of all those sixty and two differences, in the matter of penance,
which I have here gathered out of Navarre and Fr^a Victoria, he has not
confessed above five or six: So that, by the same proportion, whereas three
hundred and three Contradictions are acknowledged, there cannot but be many
hundreds wittingly by him concealed.

GENESIS 11.7. Venite igitur descendamus, and confundamus ibi linguam eorum, vt
non audiat vnus quis que vocem proximi sui, atque ita diuisit eos Dominus ex
illo loco in vniuersas terras, and cessauerunt aedificare ciuitatem, and
idcirco vocatum est nomen eius Babel, etc.


THE PEACE OF ROME.
LIB. I. FIRST CENTVRY of Dissentions.
DECAD. I.
First, Bellarmine against Nic. Lyra, Carthusian, Hugo, and Thomas Cardinals,
Sixtus Senensis.
THere have not wanted some which have held the seven last Chapters of the
book of Ester, Non defuerunt etiam qui librum quidem, etc.
because they are not in the Hebrewe Text, spurious and counterfeit: In which
opinion was S. Hierom (as is gathered out of his praeface) and following him,
not only before the Council of Trent Nicholas Lyra, Those aditions to Ester,
which we reject as Apocryphal.
Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo, and Thomas de Vio Cardinals, but also since the
said Council Sixtus Senensis in the first and eight book of his Bibliotheca
Sancta.

But that they are sacred and Divine, is sufficiently proved by all those
Decrees of Popes and Councels, and those testimonies of Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin fathers, which we have noted formerly in the fourth chapter of this
book, and so those other chapters which are not in the Hebrew, etc. Bellarmine
in his first book of the word of God, chapt. 7. (See at large his confutation
of Sixtus Senensis in the same place.) page 30.

Secondly, John Driedo against Bellarmine.
Johannes Driedo (a Catholic writer) denies the book of Baruch to be
Canonical, Ex Catholicis, Johannes Driedo etc.
in his first book, the last chapter, at the last argument: But the authority
of the Catholic Church persuades us the contrary, which in the Council of
Trent (the fourth sitting) numbers the prophet Baruch among the sacred books.
Bellarmine the same book, chap. 8. page 41.

Thirdly, Erasmus and Johannes Driedo against Bellarmine.
NOt only Heretics, Nec solum haeretici Pagani and Judaei, etc.
Pagans, Jews, but of Catholic Christians Julius Africanus of old, and of
late, Johannes Driedo in his first book de Script. etc. chap. last, and of
semi-Christians Erasmus in his Scholees upon Hieroms praeface to Daniel, have
rejected the story of Susanna as new, and foisted into the Canon. But
notwithstanding it is certain that all these parts of Daniel are truly
Canonical. Bellarm. the same book chap. 9. page 43.

Fourthly, Caietane a Cardinal, and some other namelesse against Bellarmine.
SOme object that the Church receives those books that Saint Hierome receives,
Ecclesia eoslibros recipit quos B. Hieron.
and refuses those which he rejects, as it appears Distinct. 15. Canon.
Sancta Romana. But Hierome flatly affirms all these five books not to be
Canonical: so reasons Caietane, otherwise a Catholic and a holy Doctor.
Some answer, that Hierome says only that these are not Canonical among the
Jews; but that cannot be, for he mentions also the book of the Pastor,
which was accounted to the new Testament. But I admit that Hierome was of that
opinion, because no general Council as yet had defined of these books; except
only of the book of Judith, which Hierome also afterward received: That
therefore which Gelasius says in the Distinct above cited, is to be understood
of the books of the Doctors of the Church, Origin, Ruffin, and the like; not
of the books of Scripture. Bellarm. ibid. chap. 10. page 53.

Fifthly, Bellarmine against Erasmus, Caietanus.
Nostris temporibus Erasmus.
IN our times Erasmus in the end of his notes upon this Epistle: and Caietane in
the beginning of his Commentaries upon this Epistle have revived and renewed a
question, that has long slept in silence, concerning the Author and authority
of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Bellarmine undertakes to confute their several
reasons, drawn, First, From Hebr. 1.5. compared with 2. Sam. 7.14. Secondly,
From Hebr. 9.4. compared with 1 Kings 8.9. Thirdly, From Heb. 9.20. compared
with Exodus 24.8. Bellarm. ibid. chap. 17. page 77.

Sixthly, Beda, Lyranus, Driedo, Mercator, Sulpitius, Genebrard, Benedictus,
Bellarmine dissenting.
Duae sunt sententie principales, etc.
THere are two principal opinions about the story of Judith: Some would have
that story to have happened after the Babilonish captivity, either in Cambyses
time, so Beda, Lyranus, Io. Driedo; or under Darius Hystaspes, as Gerardus
Mercator; Seuerus Sulpitius refers it to Artaxerxes Ochus: some others hold it
to have been after the captivity; either in Sedecias times, as Gil.
Genebrardus; or Josias, as John Benedictus. But neither of these seems to me
probable enough, says Bellarmine, who confuting all them, places this story
in the reign of Manasses king of Judah. Bellarm. same book, c. 12. p. 58.

Seventhly, Erasmus and Caietane against Bellarm. and all other true
Catholics.
ERasm. in his notes upon these epistles affirms, Erasmus in annotationibus ad
has Epistolas, etc.
that the Epistle of James does not savor of an Apostolic gravity: he
doubts of the second Epistle of Peter. he affirms the second and third
Epistles of John were not written by John the Apostle, but by another: of Iudes
Epistle he says nothing. Caietane doubts of the Authors of the Epistle of
James, of Jude, of the second and third of John, and therefore will have them
to be of less authority then the rest. Bellarmine justly refutes their
opinion, chapter 18. page 86.

Eighthly, Erasmus against all true Catholics.
ERasmus in the end of his notes upon the Revelation, Erasmus in fine
annotationum. etc.

Nec defuerunt olim Catholici qui de huius libri authoritate dubitarent.


seeks out many doubtful conjectures, whereby he would prove this book of the
Revelation, not to be written by John the Apostle. His three reasons are truly
answered by Bellarmine, chap. 19. p. 94.

Ninthly, Genebrardus against Bellarmine.
THE fourth book of Esdras is indeed cyted by Ambrose, in his book de Bono
Mortis; Quartus autem Esdrae, etc.
and in his second book upon Luke; and in the 21. Epistle to Horatian: but
doubtless it is not Canonical: since that it is not by any Council accounted
in the Canon; and is not found either in Hebrew or Greek, and contains in the
sixth chapter very fabulous toys. I wonder therefore what came into Genebrards
mind, that he would have this book pertain to the Canon; in his Chronology,
page 90. Bellarm. chap. 20. page 99.

Tenthly, Iacobus Christopolitanus, Canus against Bellarmine.
His igitur omissis qui Hebraico fonti nimiam puritatem falso attribuunt, etc.
OMitting those therefore which falsely attribute too much purity unto the Hebrew
text, we are to meet with others, which in a good zeal, but I know not
whether according to knowledge, defend that the Jews in hatred of the
Christian Religion have purposely depraved many places of Scripture; so teaches
Jacob Bishop of Christopolis in his praeface to the Psalms, and Canus in his
second book and thirteenth chapter of common places. These Bellarmine confutes
by most weighty arguments, as he calls them, and shows that by this defense the
vulgar Edition should be most corrupt, in 2. book of the word of God, chap. 2.
page 108.

DECAD II.
First, Pagnin, Paulus Forosempron, Eugubius, Io. Mirandulanus, Driedo, Sixtus
Senensis, all together by the ears.
COncerning this vulgar Latin Edition, Non paruae quaestio est, etc.
there is no small question. That it is not Ieromes, is held by Sanctus
Pagninus, in the praeface of his interpretation of the Bible to Clement the
eight, and Paulus Bishop of Forosempronium, in his second book, first chapter
of the day of Christ's passion. Contrarily, that it is Ieromes is defended by
Augustine Eugubinus, and Johannes Picus Mirandulanus in books set out to that
purpose, and by some others. But that it is mixed both of the new and old, is
maintained by Io. Driedo in his second book, chapter 1. and Sixtus Senensis in his
8. book of the holy Library, and the end. Bellarm. 2. book, chap. 9. page 135.

Secondly, Bellarmine against some nameles Authors.
COncerning the Translation of the Septuagint, De postrema, etc.
though I know some hold it is utterly lost, yet I hold rather that it is so
corrupted, that it seems another. Bellarm. 2. book, chapter 6. page 127.

Thirdly, Valla, Faber, Erasmus, and others against Bellarmine.
THat place Romans 1.32. not only Kemnitius, Hunc locum non solum Chemnitius,
sed, etc.
but also Valla, Erasmus, Iacobus Faber and others would have to be corrupted
in the Latin vulgar. Bellarmine confutes them, and would show that their
Latin Translation herein is better then the Greek original. Bellarm. same
book, chap. 14. page 168.

Fourthly, Card. Caietane against Bellarmine.
THomas Caietanus in his Treatise of the Institut. and authority of the B. of
Rome, Thomas Caietanus in tract. de Instit. etc.
chap. 5. teaches, that the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are not the same
with the power of binding and loosing; for that the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven includes the power of order and jurisdiction, and somewhat more: But
this doctrine seems to us more subtle then true; for it was never heard of,
that the Church had any other keys besides those of order, and jurisdiction.
Bellarm. 1. book of the Pope, chapter 12. page 101.

Fifthly, Ioachim, Raymundus, a namelesse Frenchman against all Catholics.
THat there are three eternal spirits, Tres esse spiritus aeternus, etc.
Father, Son Holy Ghost essentially differing, was taught by a certain
Frenchman in Anselmes time; and the same seems to be held by Ioachim the
Abbot, in the year 1190. and Raymundus Lullius, in the year 1270. confuted by
Bellarmine in his first book de Christo. cha. 2. page 37.

Sixthly, Erasmus confuted by Bellarmine.
BEllarmines disputation against the Transsiluani, Sed ocurrunt Arriani
Transsiluani, and Erasmus, etc.
and Erasmus as their patron, concerning the Divinity of Christ, warranted
from diverse places of Scripture. See Bell. l. 1. de Christo. chapter 6. page 72.73.

Seventhly, Bellarmine against Durandus.
THE fourth error is of Durandus in 3. d. 22. q. 3. who taught, Quartus error
est Durandi, etc
that Christ's soul descended not to hell in substance, but only in certain
effects, because it did illuminate those holy Fathers, which were in Limbo:
which opinion to be erroneous (and yet not so ill as Caluins) is proved by
four arguments; and all his objections answered by Bellarm. l. 4. de Christo
chapter 15. page 391.392, etc.

Eighthly, Bonauenture against Thomas
SAint Thomas p. 3. q. 52. Art. 2. teaches, B. Thomas, etc. Docet Christum per
realem, etc.
that Christ by his real presence descended but to Limbus Patrum, and in
effect only to the other places of hell: but it is probable that his soul
descended to all.

Secondly, Saint Thomas seems to say ( p. 3. q. 52. ar. 1.) that it was some
punishment to Christ to be in hell according to his soul, etc. And Caietane (in
act. 2.) says that the sorrows of Christ's death continued in him, til his
resurrection, in regard of three penalties, whereof the second is, that the
soul remained in hell, a place not convenient for it.

But Bonauent. in 3. d. 22. q. 4. says, that Christ's soul while it was in
hell, was in the place of punishment indeed, but without punishment, which
seems to me more agreeable to the Fathers. Bellarm. l. 4 de Christo. c. 16. p.
396.397, etc.

Ninthly, Bellarmine and all other Papists against Lyranus.
NIcolaus Lyranus is not of so great authority that we should oppose him to all
the ancient Fathers and Historians, Nic. Lyranus non tantae autoritatis est,
etc.
which say, that Peter was slain at Rome (not as Lyranus at Jerusalem.)
Bellarm. l. 2. of the Pope of Rome, chapter 10. page 210.

Tenthly, Aeneas Syluius confuted by Bellarmine.
Quod ante Nicenum, etc.
THat speech of Aeneas Syluius (afterward Pope) that before the Nicene Council
each man lived to himself, and there was small respect had of the Bishop of
Rome is partly true, and partly false: It is true that the power of the Popes
was somewhat in those times hindered; but it is not true that there was so
little respect given him. Bellarm. l. 2. de Pontif. c. 17. page: 252.

DECAD. III.
First, Martinus Polonus confuted by Bellarmine.
THE confutation of Martinus Polonus which lived An. 1250. in that story of
Pope Ioane, Quod fabula sit narratio Martini, etc.
delivered from him by Sigebertus, Marianus Scotus, Platina and others. See
Bellarm. l. 3. de Pontif. c. 24. page 464.465, etc.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Valla.
THe sixteenth is Pope Celestinus, Decimussextus est Celest.
whom Laurentius Valla affirms, to have been infected with the heresy of
Nestorius; in his declamation against the Donation of Constantine. But Valla
lies falsely. Bellarm. l. 4. de Pont. c. 10. p. 512.

Thirdly, Darandus and Adrian against Pope Gregory and Bellarmine.
SAint Gregory the first is by Durandus, Gregor. 1. in Epist. 26. ad Johan.
Carahtanum.
in 4. Di. 7. q. 4. accused of error, for that he permitted unto presbiters to
confer the Sacrament of confirmation; which is only by right proper to
Bishops: By reason of which place of Gregory, Adrian in quest, of
confirmation, art. vlt. affirms, that the Pope may err in defining points of
Faith, but in truth, not S. Gregory erreth herein, but Durandus and Adrian.
Bellarm. l. 4. de Pont. c. 10. p. 517.

Fourthly, Gratian, Gerson, Panormitan answered by Bellarmine.
GRatians speech (36. quaest. 2. can. vlt) that Hieromes authority being
defenced by Scripture, crossed a whole general Council; and Panormitans, and
Gersons, Primo ex Gratiano.
that one private man's opinion, if he be furnished with better authorities from
Scripture, is to be preferred to the opinion of the Pope: and that any one
learned man may, and ought in some cases to resist a whole Council. See
confuted, and qualified by Bellar. l. 1. de Council. cap. 16. p. 72.

Fifthly, Pighius, Turrecremata, Caietane, other Popish Doctors against
Bellarmine in five several opinions.
IN this question, Sunt de hac re quinque opiniones, etc.
whether in case of heresy the Pope may be judged and deposed, there are five
different opinions. The first of Albertus Pighius, 4. book of Eccles.
Hierarchy, chapter 8. who holds that the Pope can not be an Heretic, and
therefore can in no case be deposed: which is a probable opinion, but not
certain, and is contrary to the common opinion. The second of Io. de
Turrecremata, 4. B. part 2. c. 20. that the Pope, in that he falls into an
heresy, though inward and secret, is without the Church and deposed of God;
and therefore that he may be judged, that is declared to be deposed ( de facto)
if he yet refuse to yield. But this opinion I cannot allow. The third is in
another extreme, that the Pope neither for secret nor manifest heresy is, or
can be deposed: This Io. Turrecremata in the place forecited confuteth; and
indeed it is an opinion very improbable. The fourth is Caietanes in his Tract
of the authority of the Pope and the Council, chapter 20. and 21. That a Pope which
is manifestly heretical, is not ( ipso facto) deposed, but may and ought to be
deposed by the Church: which opinion in my judgment cannot be defended. Here
therefore Bellarmine defends these positions against Caietane.

1 That every manifest heretic is ipso facto deposed, out of Tit. 3.

2 That a manifest heretic cannot be the Pope.

3 That an heretic loosing faith, and retaining the Character still, is yet
without the Chuch.

4 That the Pope cannot be deposed for ignorance or wickedness.

5 That the Pope may not be deposed by the Church.

The fifth opinion is true, that the Pope being a manifest heretic, ceases of
himself to be Pope and head of the Church: as of himself he ceases to be a
Christian and member of the Church; and therefore that he may be judged and
punished by the Church. Bellarmine 2. b. of 3. Gener. Contro. chap. 30. page
317.

Sixthly, Some namelesse Doctors against Bellarmine.
IT is the opinion of some Catholics, Huc referri potest opinio quorundam
Catholicorum, vt refert Iodoc. Clict. etc.
as Iodocus Clictonaeus reports, that Mahumet was that Antichrist properly
called, because he came about the year 666. as John foretold. But this reason
of theirs is frivolous, Bellarm. third book of the Pope, chap. 3. page 346.

Seventhly, Bellarmine against Bb. Iansenius.
I Cannot enough marvel what Bishop Iansenius meant, Quo loco non possum
satis, etc.
in that he wrote that although it be the opinion of all the ancient, that
Elias shall come, yet that it is not convinced out of that place in
Ecclesiasticus, chap. 48.10. for if it be so as Iansenius says, it follows
that Ecclesiasticus both is, and has written false. Bellarm. in 3. b. c. 6.
page 357.

Eighthly, Dominicus a Soto against Bellarmine.
ONe doubt remains, Vnum superest dubium, Anne, etc.
whether by the cruel persecution of Antichrist, the Christian faith and
Religion shall be utterly extinguished: Dominicus a Soto defends it in 4. book
of sentences, d. 46. q. 1. art. 1. But this opinion in my judgment cannot be
defended. Bellarmine l. 3 chap. 17. page 417.

Ninthly, Gerson, Almaine, Pope Adrian, Hosius, Eckius, etc, Pighius, Thomas
Waldensis, in three contradictory opinions.
COncerning the Popes certainety of judgment, Quatuor tantum remanent
diuersae, etc.
there are four diverse opinions. The first is, that the Pope as Pope may be an
heretic in himself, and may teach others heresy, although he define
something even with a general Council: This is the opinion of all the
heretics of this time, Luther, Calvin, etc.

The second that the Pope as Pope may be an heretic, and teach heresy if he
define without a general Council, and that it has so happened. This opinion
follows Nilus in his book against the Primacy of the Pope. Io. Gerson, and
Almaine: Alphonsus de Castro, and Pope Adrian the sixth, in the quaest. of
confirmation: which opinion is not merely heretical, but is erroneous and
near to heresy.

The third in an other extreme, That the Pope cannot by any means be an
heretic, nor teach heresy, publicly, though he should alone determine any
matter. So holds Albert Pighius B. 4. of Eccles. Hierar. c. 8.

The fourth, That the Pope whether he may be an heretic or no, cannot by any
means define any heretical point to be believed of the whole Church. This,
which is the commonest opinion, holds Thomas 22. quaest. 1. art. 10. Tho.
Waldensis, l. 2. of the Doctr. of faith, chapter 47. Io. de Turrecremata, Io.
Driedo, Caietane, Hosius, Eckius, Io. of Louan, Petrus a Soto, etc. Bellarm. B.
4. of the Pope, chapter 2. page 473.

Tenthly, the Sorbonists and some other concealed Doctors against Bellarmine.
THat prayer of Christ for Peter's faith, that it might not fail, is expounded:
Qui locus tribus modis exponi solet, etc.


1 By the Parisian Divines, That the Lord prayed for his universal Church, or
for Peter as he bore the figure of the whole Church, which exposition is false.

2 Others that live at this day teach; That the Lord in this place prayed for
the perseverance of Peter alone in the grace of God, until the end, confuted
by four arguments.

3 The third exposition is true; That the Lord obtained for Peter two
privileges: One, that he should never loose the true faith, though never so
much tempted; The other, that he as Pope should never teach any thing against
the faith. Bell. b. 4. ch 3. page 477.

DECAD. IIII.
First, Melchior Canus and others, against Pighius, Hosius, Io. Louan,
Onuphrius.
NOt only the heretics, but some Catholic Doctors, Nec solum haeretici.
have held Pope Honorius to have been an heretic, so does Melchior Canus from
the two Epistles of Honorius himself to Sergius, wherein he approoues the
doctrine of the Monothelites: from the 6. Synod, Act. 13. seventh Synod. Act.
last, eighth Synod, Act. 7. From the Epistle of Pope Agatho, from the Epistle
of Pope Leo 2. from Tharasius, Theodorus, Epiphanius the Deacon, Bid, etc. But
in the behalf of Honorius have written Albert Pighius, Hosius, Io. of Louan,
Onuphrius: Bellarm. B. 4. chapter 11. page 519.

Secondly, Alphonsus de Castro against Bellarmine, Celestin Pope against
Innocentius.
ALphonsus de Castro affirms flatly, Tricesimus tertius est Celestinus 3. quem
Alphonsus, etc.
that Pope Celestinus was an heretic; the first Book of here is. chap. 4. for
that he held Matrimony so dissolved by heresy, that he whose wife was proved
heretical, might marry again: Contrary to which is taught by Pope Innocentius
[3. chapter Quanto. of diuorces] and the same is defined in the Council of Trent [
Sess. 4. Canon. 5.] But I answer that neither Celestinus nor Innocentius
determine any certainty of that matter. Bellarm. l. 4. c. 14. page 545.

Thirdly, Pope Nicholas against Pope John, Bellarmine against Turrecremata.
Nicolaus 3. qui in capite Ex^st. de verborum significatione in sexto definit.
POpe Nicholas the third defines, that Christ by his word and example taught
perfect poverty, which consists in the abdication of all our substance; no
power of it being left to a man, either in particular or common; and that such
poverty is holy and meritorious: But Pope John. 20. in his extrauagants teaches
this to be false and heretical: Io. de Turrecremata goes about wholly to
reconcile these two Popes: but in truth, if I be not much deceived, they cannot
be in all things reconciled. Bellarm. b. 4. chap. 14. page 546.

Fourthly, Occam, Adrian, Gerson, Erasmus against Bellarmine.
Johannes 22. Papa a multis reprehenditur.
THat Pope John. 22. was an heretic in teaching that the souls of the blessed
shall not see God till the resurrection, is affirmed by Gul. Occam. Adrian,
Erasmus, Io. Gerson. He thought so indeed, but then it was not heresy, so to
think, because no Council had defined the question, and Io. Villanus reports,
that the day before his death, he partly explaned, and partly recanted his
opinion. Bellarmine same chapter and book. page 548.

Fifthly, Abulensis against Turrecremata.
OF the inward jurisdiction in the Court of conscience; De secunda est quidem
aliqua dissensio inter authors, etc.
there is some dissension amongst our Authors: for Abulensis Jn-defensorio p.
2. c. 63.
holds this power given to all Priests immediately from God, when they are
ordained: now that yet notwithstanding this, every Priest cannot bind or loose
whatsoever Christians, is therefore ordered, because the Church to take away
confusion has divided Diocesses; and subjected one people to one Bishop,
another to another. But Io. de Turrecremata l. 1. Sum. c. 96
teaches that this power is not given of God by the force of ordination, but by
man upon his mere iniunction. Bellarm. B. 4. c. 22. p. 589.

Sixthly, Three ranks of Popish Doctors at variance.
HOw Bishops receive their jurisdiction, Sunt tres de ear Theologorum
sententiae.
there are three opinions amongst our Divines. The first, that as well Apostles
as other Bishops, did, and do receive it immediately from God. So teach
Franciscus Victoria, and Alphonsus de Castro. The second of those that hold,
the Apostles not to have received their jurisdiction from Christ, but from
Peter; and Bishops not from Christ, but Peter's successor. So Io. de
Turrecremata and Dominicus Iacobatius. The third of them, which teach, that the
Apostles indeed received all their authority immediately from Christ; but other
Bishops received it not from Christ, but from the Pope: so holds Caietane,
Dominicus a Soto, Franciscus Vargas, Herbaeus, Gabriell, Bonauenture, Albert,
Durand. and others. Bellarm. B. 4. c. 22. p. 590.

Seventhly, Aug. Triumphus, Aluar. Pelagius, Hostiensis, etc. against Henricus,
Turrecrem. Pighius, Waldensis, etc.
De qua etc. tres inueniuntur auct^rum sententiae etc.
OF the Popes temporal power, are three opinions of authors: First that the
Pope has full power over all the world, both in spiritual things and
temporal. So teach August. Triumphus, Aluarus Pelagius, and many Lawyers,
Hostiensis, Siluester, and others not a few: yea Hostiensis goes further, and
teaches, that all dominion of Infidel Princes, is by Christ's coming
translated to the Church, and rests in the Pope.

The second in another extreme, that the Pope as Pope and by the law of God
has no temporal power, nor can any way rule over secular Princes, and deprive
them of their Prince-dome, though they deserve it. So all the heretics.

The third, which is the mean betwixt both, is the commonest opinion of
Catholic Divines, that the Pope as Pope has not directly and immediately any
temporal power, but only spiritual; yet in respect to his spiritual
jurisdiction, that he has at least indirectly a certain power, and that
supreme, even in temporal things. So teach Hugo, Halensis, Durandus,
Henricus, Driedo, Turrecremata, Pighius, Waldensis, Petrus de Palude, Caietane,
Francis Victoria, Dominicus a Soto, Nicholas Saunders, etc. What Thom. Aquinas
thinks of this temporal power of the Pope, is uncertain. Bellar. l. 5. c. 1.
page 600.

Eighthly, Onuphrius against Bellarmine and Hostiensis.
ONuphrius writes, Onuphrium in libro de comitijs imperialibus contra communem
Historicorum sententiam scripsisse etc.
that the appointment of the Electors of the Roman Empire, was done by
Gregory the tenth, but Innocent. 3. which was before Gregory 10. speaks of
this Institution, and Hostiensis that was likewise before him, says, that
Innocentius speaks of the seven Electors: and Aluarus Pelagius, who lived in
the memory of Gregory 10. reports this to have been the act of Gregory 5.
Bellarm. l. 5. c. 8. p. 633.

Ninthly, Pighius against Bellarm. Pope Celestine, Council of Chalcedon.
Hanc autem originem, etc.
THE beginning of Councels Albertus Pighius in his 6. B. of the heavenly
Hierarchy chapter 1. defends to be altogether humane and devised by natural
reason; But it is more probable that it is Divine, for the Council of
Chalcedon in an Epistle to Leo, and the sixth Synod, Act. 17 and Pope Celestine
in an Epistle to the Council of Ephesus, and the third Council of Toledo,
teach that Councels are imported in those words of Christ, Matthew. 18.
Wheresoever two or three, etc. Bellarm. de council. and Eccles. milit. lib. 1.
c. 3. page 25.

Tenthly, some vn-named Catholics against Bellarm. Turrecremata, Canus.
SOme Catholics hold, Secundo abqui Catholici obij, etc.
that all Bishops are not Judges in Councels, for then (say they) the Pope
should be bound, who is president in the Council, to follow the greater part
of Bishops; but this is false, as appears in the practices of Damasus and Leo.

I answer first, that perhaps it never fell so out, that the Pope should
follow the lesser part in the Council, when they have given their voices
without all fraud. Secondly I say, that the President of the Council, as
President, must follow the greater part of the voices; but the Pope not as
President, but as the chief Prince of the Church, may recall and retract that
judgment. So Io. de Turrecremata [ lib. 3. c. 6.3.] and Canus [ lib. 5. c. 5]
Bellarm. ibid. chapter 18. p. 81.

DECAD. V.
First, Bellarmine against some Catholics namelesse.
THat particular Councels confirmed by the Pope cannot err in faith, Concilia
particularia, etc.
and manners, there are some Catholics that deny: which as yet are not by
the Church condemned for Heretics: But surely it is rash, erroneous, and
near to heresy, to affirm that particular Councels confirmed by the Pope may
err. Bellarmine, l. 2. chapter 5. p. 114.

Secondly, Alanus Copus against Bellarmine.
IT is a very uncertain thing, Rem esse incertissimam, etc.
what was decreede of Images in the Council of Francford; for the ancient
authors agree not with themselves: by reason of this confusion, Alanus Copus in
his fourth and fifth Dialogue, teaches, that in that Synod of Francford the
heretical Council of Constantinople was only condemned: the Nicene not only
not condemned, but confirmed: which opinion I wish to be true, but I suspect it
to be false. Bellarmine ibid. chap. 8. page 137.

Thirdly, Bellarmine against Vega.
SOme answer, Respondent quidam, vt Vega, etc.
as Vega in the Council of Trent [b. 3. c. 39.] that any Council is lawful,
if held by the faithful, not for that Historians witness so, but because the
Council it self defines so of it self; for they use ever in the beginning
of their act, so to determine their meeting lawful, and in the Holy Ghost. But
sure this answer is not found; for first the ancient Councels had not wont to
witness so of themselves. Secondly, either it appears to us, that the
Council is a lawful one; or it appears not: if it do appear, such a Decree
is in vain, if it do not appear, we shall as well doubt of that Decree, as
of the Council. Bellarmine same book, cap. 9. page 148.

Fourthly, Parisienses against Caietane: Turrecremata and Bellarmine against
Canus.
OF general Councels there are diverse opinions amongst us. De Concilijs
vnuersalibus, etc.
First the Divines of Paris, and all those which teach, that the Council is
above the Pope, think that lawful general Councels cannot err, even before
the confirmation of the Pope. Contrary to these, teach others, as Caietane [in
Apolog.] Io. Turrecremata, P. 2. c. 21
[ lib. 3. cap. 32.33, 34.]

But when Councels define something with the consent of the Popes Legates, not
having had full instruction: what authority they have, is still in controversy.
But I think such a Council may err, before the popes own confirmation.
Canus and others hold the contrary. Bellarm. l. 2. c. 11. p. 153.

Fifthly, Bellarmine against Gratian.
GRatian did. 19. affirms, Gratianus did. etc.
that the decretall Epistles of popes ought to be numbered amongst the
Canonical Scriptures, and Di. 20. he says, that the Canons of Councels are of
the same authority with Decretall Epistles; and pope Gregory in his first B.
Epist. 24. says, he reuerences the four first Councels, as the four
Evangelists. I answer first, that Gratian was deceived by a depraved copy,
which he followed, etc. As for Gregory, I answer that his ( As) does not
signify equality, but similitude. Bellarm. l. 2. c. 12. page 161.

Sixthly, Three ranks of Popish Divines dissenting.
IN this question, De proposita quaestione tres etc.
Whether the pope be above the Council, I find three opinions of our Doctors.
First, that the Council is above the pope: so affirm all the heretics of this
time: and the same is taught by Card. Cameracensis, Io. Gerson, Jacob. Almaine,
and some others: Also Nicol. Cusanus, Card. Panormitanus, and his Master the
Cardinal of Florence, and Abulensis in cap. 18. of Matthew, q. 108. This
opinion has two grounds.

1 That the Pope is not properly the head of the whole Church, gathered
together.

2 That the supreme power of the Church is as well in the Council, as in the
Pope; but in the Council principally, immediately, and immoueably: And in the
defense of this point, these Authors again differ from themselves, whiles some
hold this power formally and subiectiuely in the Pope; and finally in the
Church. Others will have it formally and principally in the Church; and
instrumentally in the Pope.

Second opinion is of some Canonists, which will have the Pope above the
Council, and that he cannot upon constraint be judged by any; but that he may
subject himself (if he will) to the Council. So teaches the Gloss. in
Canon. Nossi, etc.

The third is the more common opinion, That the Pope is so above the Council,
that he cannot subject himself unto the judgment thereof; if we speak of a
coactiue sentence: So all the old Schoolmen hold; Albert, Thomas, Bonauenture,
Richard Paludanus In 4. d. 19.
, so 3. p. tit. 22. c. 10.
Antoninus, L. 2. c. 93. etc
Turrecremata, De planctu Ec cle. l. 1. c. 93.
Al. Pelagius, Iacobatius, Caietane, Pighius, Turrianus, and Saunders, and many
other there mentioned. Bellarmine, l. 2. c. 13. page 166.

Seventhly, Council of Basil against Eugenius, and Leo, Popes.
THat which the Council of Basil defined of the authority of the Council
above the Pope, Quae autem definiuit.
was never by any Pope allowed. Pope Eugenius first did professedly reject it:
then Pope Leo the tenth, in the last Council of Lateran. Sess. 11. as also the
whole Church, which ever held Eugenius (who by the council of Basil was
deposed) for the true Pope. Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 19. page 186. where Io.
Gerson is by him confuted.

Eighthly, Driedo against Bellarm. and Canus.
THe Author of the book de Dog. Eccl. c. 74. openly says, Author libri de
Eccl.
that Nouices in Religion dying before their baptism cannot be saved: but this
seems ouerhard: Melchior Canus holds they may be saved; because though they be
not of the christian Church, yet they are of that Church, that comprehends all
faithful ones, from Abel to the end of the world. But this satisfies not: I
answer, that this rule, No man without the Church can be saved, is to be
understood of those which neither indeed, nor in defire are of the Church.
Bellarmine, lib. 3. cap. 3. page 159.

Ninthly, Bellarmine against Alphonsus de Castro.
ALphonsus de Castro [in his second book of the just punishment of heretics,
Haereticos and Apostatas baptiz. Alphonsus, etc.
chap. 34.] teaches that heretics and Apostates, if once baptized are members
and parts of the Church, although they openly profess false Doctrine: which
opinion, as it is plainly false, so may easily be refuted. Bellarm. l. 3. c.
4. p. 196.

Tenthly, Alphonsus and others against Bellarmine.
Deschismaticis, etc.
SOme Catholics doubt concerning Schismatics, whether they be of the Church:
yea Alphonsus de Castro flatly affirms them to be of the Church; but it is
easy to show the contrary out of Scriptures and traditions of the Fathers.
Bellarmine, l. 3. c. 5. where also he holds the definition which pope Nicholas
gives of the church to be imperfect. p. 200.203.

DECAD. VI.
First, Catechism. Romans Waldensis, Turrecremata, etc. against some namelesse
Papists.
THat persons excommunicate are not of the church, De excommunicatis quod in
Eccles. etc.
is taught by the Catechism of Rome, by Tho. Waldensis, Io. de Turrecremata,
Io. Driedo, and some others. The contrary is defended by others: whose three
objections are answered by Bellarmine. Bellarm. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 205.

Secondly, Bellarmine against some not named Papists.
FOr answering of that place of Austen l. 2. against Cresconius, Propter haec
loca etc.
that notorious wicked men are not of the Church; not only Brentius and Calvin
heretics, but some Catholics, feign two Churches, and they do but feign them
indeed; for neither Scripture nor Austen ever mention more then one. Bellarm.
l. 3. c. 9. p. 229.

Thirdly, Bellarmine against Turrecremata.
THat close Infidels, Restant infideles occulti, etc.
that have neither faith nor any other Christian virtue, yet externally for
some temporal commodity, profess the Catholic faith, belong not to the true
Church, is taught, not only by the Caluinists, So Thomas Waldensis, Io.
Driedo, Peter a Soto, Hosius, Canus, and others.
but by some of our Catholics; amongst whom is Io. de Turrecremata, l. 4. de
Eccles. But we follow their phrase of speech, which say, that those, who by an
external profession only are joined to the faithful, are true parts of the
body of the Church, though dry and dead. Bellarm. l. 3. c. 10. page 232.

Fourthly, Alexander Alensis, and Turrecremata against Bellarmine.
THere are some Catholic Doctors, Non desunt etiam Catholici qui dicant, etc.
which teach, in the passion of our Lord, there remained true faith in none,
but the blessed Virgin alone: and that they hold to be signified by that one
candle, which alone is kept light in the third night before Easter. So holds
Alexander Alensis [3. p. q. vlt. art. 2.] and John de Turrecremata [ l. 1. de
Eccles. c. 30.] But I wonder at Turrecremata, who for so slight an argument
from a candle, says, it is against the faith of the Universal Church to
affirm otherwise. For Rupertus in his 5. book of Divine offices, chap. 26.
says, that in his time, the last candle also had wont to be quenched. It may
be answered rather with Abulensis, that by this candle is signified, that only
in the blessed Virgin; there was for those three days an explicit faith of the
resurrection. Bellarmine l. 3. c. 17. page 27.

Fifthly, Caietane, Francisc. Victoria, against other Doctors.
Si nulla extaret etc.
IF there were no constitution for the choice of the Pope, and all the Cardinals
should perish at once: the question is, in whom should be the right of the
Election. Some hold, that the right of the choice (setting aside the positive
law) should belong to the Council of Bishops: as Caietane in his treatise of
the power of the Pope and Council, chap. 13. Franciscus Victoria, Relect. 2.
q. 2. of the power of the Church: others (as Siluester reports, in the word
excommunication) teach, that it pertaines to the Clergy of Rome. Bellarm. in
his first book of the members of the Church militant. c. 10. p. 52.

Sixthly, Bellarmine against Antonius Delphinus, and Michael Medina.
TO that objection out of Jerome, Sexta obiectio ex S. Hieronimo in com. etc.
who says upon the first to Titus, that a presbiter is the same with a Bishop;
is answered by Antonius Delphinus ( l. 2. of the Church) that in the beginning
of the church all Presbiters were Bishops. But this satisfies not. Michael
Medina [in his first book de sacr. hom. Origine] affirms, that S. Jerome held
the same opinion with the Aerian heretics, and that not only Jerome was in
this heresy, but also Ambrose, Austen, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrisostom.
Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophilact. The opinion of these men was condemned,
first in Aerius, then in the Waldenses, and after in Wickliffe. But this
opinion of Medina is very inconsiderate. Bellarm. same book, c. 15. p. 75.

Seventhly, Bellarmine against Onuphrius.
THe opinion of Onuphrius concerning the names or titles of Cardinals,
Onuphrius in libro de Cardinalium Titulis etc
see confuted by Bellarmine in the same book, c. 16. p. 82.

Eighthly, Io. Mayor. and Iodoc. Clictonaeus against S. Thomas, Caietane, Sotus.
Ac vt a primo incipiamus, Io. Mayor, etc.
Johannes Mayor holds, that the vow of single life of Priests, stands by the
law of God, and therefore cannot be dispensed with: So also Iod. Clictonaeus
[in his book de Contin. Sacerd.] who there defends two opinions which cannot
hold together: but S. Thomas [in 2.2. q. 88. art. 11.] says plainly, that the
vow of continency, is only by the decree of the Church, annexed to holy
orders, and therefore may be dispensed with: the same teaches Caietane in
opusc. and Sotus in his seventh book of Justice, etc. Bellarm. lib. 1. cap.
18. page 92.

Ninthly, Erasmus and Panormitan against the other Popish Doctors.
Praeterea Erasmus, etc.
ERasmus in a declamation of the praise of Matrimony, holds it profitable,
that liberty of marriage should be granted to Priests: and the same is taught by
Card. Panormitan, a Catholic and learned Doctor (in the Chapt. Cum olim.)
Against these errors we are to prove, that the vow of continency is so annexed
to holy orders, that they neither may marry, nor converse with their wives
formerly married. Bellarm. same book, c. 19. p. 95.

Tenthly, the Gloss, Innocent. Panormitan, Hostiensis, opposed by all Divines,
and some Canonists.
THe fourth error is of many of the canonists, Quartus error est multorum
Canonistarum.
which hold, that tithes, even according to the determination of quantity,
stand by the Law of God; and that no other quantity can be set down by any
humane law or custom: So the Gloss, Innocentius, Panormitan, Hostiensis; but
doubtless it is a manifest error, as not only all Divines, but some
Canonists also teach, as Syluester in the word Decima, quaest. 4. and Nauar.
cap. 21. And herein many of the Canonists offend double: once, in that they
defend a falsehood; Twice, in that they do almost condemn all those Divines as
heretics, which hold the contrary. Bellarm. same book c. 25. p. 145.

DECAD. VII.
First, Sotus against Syluester, and Nauar, Bellarmine and Aquinas with both.
WHether the Precept of Tithes, Dubium autem est, etc.
as it is Positive and Humane, may by custom be altered, is doubtful.

Sotus holds directly it cannot, book 9. quaest. 4. art. 1. and thinks that
this is the judgment of Aquinaes. But I think with Siluester and Navarre,
that it may, and I doubt not, but this is the opinion of Aquinas. Bellarm.
ibid. p. 148.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Thomas Waldensis.
THomas Waldensis teaches, Thomas VVald. do^et Clericos debere, etc.
that Clerks should either give their goods to the poor, or lay them together
in common; and proves it by some sentences of Fathers, Origin, Hierome,
Bernard. But it is certain that Clerks are not by their profession, tied to
put away their patrimony. Bellarmine same book, c. 27. p. 156.

Thirdly, Marsilius Paduan. Io. de Ianduno. Turrecremata: Canonists, Gloss,
Driedonius, Francisc. Victoria, Dominicus a Soto, Couarruuias dissenting.
IN the question concerning the liberty of Ecclesiastical persons, Postrema
restat quaestio de liberate Eccles.
are three opinions: First is of many heretics, that Clerks are and should
be subject to secular powers, both in payment of tributes, and in judgments,
especially not Ecclesiastical: So also Marsilius of Padua, and Io. de Ianduno
teach, that Christ himself was not free from paying tribute, and that he did
it not voluntarily, but of necessity, as is reported by Turrecremata.

The second opinion in another extreme, is of many Canonists, who hold that by
the Law of God, Clerks and their goods are free from the power of secular
Princes: so teaehes the Gloss, in Can. Tributum: and of this mind seems Io.
Driedonius to be in his book of Christian liberty, chapter 9.

The third in the mean, is of many Divines, that clerks are free partly by
the law of God, partly by the law of men, and partly neither way: so thinks
Franciscus Victoria, Dominicus a Soto, Couarruuias in his book of practical
quaestions. Bellarmine same book cap. 28. where he disputes against the
Canonists, confutes Cornelius Iansenius, and follows Tostatus and Caietane in
the exposition of Austen, and lastly, refels Dominicus a Soto, etc. page
159.166.167.

Fourthly, Dominicus a Soto and Alphonsus against Saint Thomas and Bonauenture.
IT is a question among Divines, Quaestionem esse inter Theologos, etc.
whether duties commanded by God, do properly fall within the compass of our
vows: for some deny it, as Thomas and Bonauenture (in 4. did. 38.) Others
affirm it, as some latter writers Dominicus a Soto, l. 7. de iustit. and iure:
Alphonsus a Castro. l. 1. of penal law, etc. c. 10. Bellarmine Controu. 5.
Gener. b. 2. c. 19.1. De membr. Eccles. militant. page 278.

Fifthly, Scotus and Albertus, and Bellarmine against Saint Thomas.
Et quamuis, S. Thomas.
ALthough Saint Thomas does not admit an absolute vow of virginity, in the
blessed Virgin, before her espousal, yet Scotus does admit it, in 4. did. 30
quaest. 2. And before Scotus, Albertus Magnus in his book of the praises of
our Lady, and before Albert the holy Fathers, Nissenus and Augustine. Neither
do I see, how that vow can prejudice the celebration of her true marriage; if
it be supposed (as all Divines do) that it was revealed to her, that Saint
Joseph should never require of her matrimonial benevolence. Bellarm. ibid. c.
22. p. 296.

Sixthly, Scotus, Paludanus, Caietane, against Albertus, Thomas, Bonauenture,
Richard, Durand, etc.
WHether after a solemn vow made, Vtrum autem post votum.
matrimony be quite dissanulled by the law of God, and of nature; or only by
the law of the Church, is questioned: For Albertus, S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture,
Richard, and Durand, in the 4. did. 38. and Dominicus a Soto in his 7. book
of law and justice, q. 2. art. 5. will have the marriage, by the law of God and
nature utterly void, if it be made after a solemn vow taken: But Scotus and
Paludanus in 4. d. 38. and Caietane, and all the whole school of Lawyers (as
Panormitan reports) affirm, that such marriage is only void by the law of
the Church. Bellarm. ibid. c. 34. p. 378.

Seventhly, Erasmus and Espencaeus, Justinian and Gregory, Bellarmine and the
common sort disagreeing.
OF the fourth are two extreme errors: De quarto duo sunt errores extremi.
One of Martin Chemnitius and the M^gdeburgenses, who teach, that Matrimony
whether ratified and consummate, or ratified only, cannot be dissolved by the
profession of a monasteriall life. So also teaches Erasm. [vpon 7. chapter of 1.
Cor.] and to the same judgment inclines Claudius Espencaeus in his sixth b. ch
4. of Contin. Another error in the contrary extreme, that marriage, though fully
consummate, is dissolved by entering into Religion: So decreed Justinian G. of
Bishops, and this law is related by Gregory, (b. 9. Epist. 39.) But the
judgment of the Church is in the mean between both, that matrimony ratified
only, is so dissolved, not when it is consummate: So besides many Canons, the
Council of Trent. Sess. 24. Can. 6. Bellarm. ibid. chapter 38. p. 394. etc.

Eighthly, Io. of Louan and Bellarm. against George Cassander.
THe third error is of George Cassander [in his b. of the office of a good man]
who holds that Princes ought to seek a way of reconciliatio^ betwixt the
catholics, Tertius error est, etc.
Lutherans, Caluininsts, etc. and til they do find it out; that they ought to
permit to every one his own faith; so that they al receive the scripture and
the Creed Apostolic. This is a manifest error, and against him wrote of the
Catholic Doctors, John of Louan; of the heretics John Calvin: and this
opinion may easily be confuted. Bellarmine l. 3. c. 19. p. 500.

Ninthly, some namelesse Doctors, also Scotus, Thomas, and Bellarmine in three
diverse opinions.
Non defuerunt qui, etc.
THere have been some which have denied, that venial sin could be remitted
after this life, as Saint Thomas reports, [in 4. did. q. 21. art. 2.] but
said, that all venial sins are remitted in the instant of death, by a final
grace: But they are deceived, for both Scriptures and Fathers teach us, that
small sins are remitted after this life, etc. Others (as Scotus in the 4. did.
21. q. 1.) say, that sin after the act is passed, leaves only a guilt of
punishment behind it: and therefore venial sin is said to be remitted in
Purgatory, because it is there wholly punished; but mortal sin is not said
to be forgiven after this life, because it is never there totally punished.
This opinion is also false. Another opinion of the same Scotus is, that venial
sins are remitted in the first moment of the souls separation from the body,
by the virtue of our foregoing merits: but this pleases me not: the opinion
of Thomas is truer, that venial sins are remitted in Purgatory by the act
of love and patience, etc. Bellarm. 6. controu. gener. of Purgat. l. 1. c. 14.
p. 84.

Tenthly, some vn-named Papists against Bonauenture, Scotus, Durand, Thomas,
etc.
SOme Catholics, Argumentum tertium quorundam Catholicorum.
to prove that (as they hold) souls in Purgatory may merit, argue thus: The
souls in Purgatory have all things necessary for merit; for they have grace,
faith, charity, freewill, etc. Also they prove it by the authority of Saint
Thomas, in 4. did. 1. q. 1. art. 3. But I answer to the argument; That the
souls in purgatory cannot merit, because they are not in the state of their
passage; for God has only decreed, during this life to accept our good works
for merit: and after this life, good works are the effects of glory: evil the
effects of damnation. For Saint Thomas, I answer, that he changed his opinion,
for (in q. 7. of evil, art. 11.) he says directly, that there can be no merit
in purgatory: so also Bonauenture, Scotus, Durand, and others. Bellarm. ibid.
l. 2. c. 3. p. 106.

DECAD. VIII.
First, Carthusian, Michael Baij, Gerson, Roffensis against the common opinion
of Divines.
THe third question is, Tertia quaestio nunc, etc.
whether the souls in purgatory be certain of their salvation or no: Some
Catholics teach, that they are not; who hold that there be sundry punishments
in Purgatory; whereof the greatest is uncertainty of salvation, with which
they say, some souls are only punished. So seems Dionisius Carthusianus to
hold, by reason of certain visions, which he reports; and so teaches Michael
Baij in his 2. b. of merit of works, chapter 8. This way seems to tend the
opinion of Io. Gerson, lect. 1. of spiritual life, and Io. of Rochester
against the 32. artic. of Luther. who hold venial sin to be only upon the
mercy of God: and therefore that it may (if God so will) be eternally punished,
etc. But the common opinion of Divines is, That all souls in purgatory are
certain of their salvation. Bellarm. ibid. c. 4. p. 108.

Secondly, Bellarmine warranted by Bid, Carthusian, and Gregory against the
Council of Florence, and all Divines.
Quantum ad primum, difficultas, etc.
IN the first question concerning the number of places, there is great
difficulty; for on the one side all Divines teach, that there are no other
receptacles beside the four mentioned; and the Council of Florence (Ses.
vlt.) defines, Quod ^am quasi pratum florentissimum lucidissimum, odoratis,
amaenum.
that the souls which have nothing to be purged, are straight taken into
heaven: On the other side Beda in his 5. book c. 13. tells of a very probable
vision, which he doubted not to believe; wherein was showed to a certain soul
which after returned to the body, besides hell, Purgatory and heaven, a goodly
flourishing, pleasant, light-some and sweet Meadow, wherein lived those souls
which suffered nothing, but only stayed there because they were not yet fit for
heaven; and diverse such visions are brought by Dionysius Cart^. and Greg.
Mitissimum purgatorium, and quasi carcer quidam Senatorius, and honoratus.
And it seems to me not improbable that such a place there is to be found,
which belongs to Purgatory: for though there be no punishment of pain, yet
of loss there is. Therefore this place is a milder kind of purgatory, and as
it were a more Gentlemanlike and honorable prison. Bellarm. ibid. c. 7. p. 123.

Thirdly, Alphonsus Ciaconus against Melchior Canus, and Dominicus a Soto.
IF this history of Traian should be defended, Si haec historia, etc.
we must say, that Traian was not absolutely condemned to hell, but only
punished in hell according to his present demerite, and that the sentence was
suspended by reason of Gregory's prayers foreseen by God; and therefore that he
was not immediately translated from hell to heaven, but first united to the
body, then baptized, and then that he did penance in this life: and this is the
common answer of S. Thomas, Durand, Richard, and others: But I rather incline
to the opinion of Melchior Canus, which simply reiects this history as fained:
and of Dominicus a Soto, notwithstanding the Apology which Alphonsus Ciaconus
has 3. years ago published, for this story. Bell. ib. c. 8. p. 124.

Fourthly, Sotus, Abulensis, Thomas, Richardus, and Durandus differing.
OF the damned I say: De damnatis similiter dico, etc.
that he that is absolutely damned to eternal punishment cannot be recalled to
life; for then the damnation of the wicked should be uncertain. Against this
opinion is Abulensis [quaest. 57. in the fourth book of the Kings:] To the
instances brought, Sotus answers, that those Heathens were only inuincibly
ignorant, and therefore in Purgatory: but I say, that those which were raised,
though they did deserve eternal damnation, yet were not condemned, but that
their judgment was suspended, In 4- sent. di. 45.
and that in the mean time they were punished, according to their present
injustice: So holds Saint Thomas, Richardus, Durand, and others. Bellarm. ibid.
c. 8. page 133.

Fifthly, Bellarmine against Dominicus a Soto.
BEsides these errors; Praeter hos errores, etc.
it was the opinion of Dominicus a Soto [vpon the 4. sent. did. 19. q. 3. art.
2.] that no man remains ten years in Purgatory. Whom see how Bellarmine
confutes by reasons, by visions, by the custom of the Church. Bellarmine ibid.
c. 9. page 133.

Sixthly, Thomas and the Schoolmen against the visions of Bid and Carthusian.
COncerning the third doubt, De tertio Dubio etc.
'it is altogether uncertain; for, that the souls in Purgatory are punished
neither by Devils, nor by Angels, but by fire only, is taught by the
Schoolmen, as Thomas [vpon 4. did. 20. art. 5.] On the other part, that the
souls in Purgatory are punished by devils, is taught by many revelations, as
that of S. Fursaeus in Beda, l. 3. hist. c. 19. and others: in Dionysius
Carthusian in his book de 4. nouissimis. Bellarm. ibid. c. 13. p. 137.

Seventhly, Bonauenture against Thomas.
ALthough all men grant in some sort, Quamuis autem aliquo modo etc.
that the punishment or pains of Purgatory are greater then the pains of
this life: yet it is doubtful how this is to be understood; for Saint Thomas
teaches two things: first that the pain of loss is the greatest of all
pains, whether in Purgatory, or in this life: Secondly, that the least pain
of Purgatory is greater then all the pains of this life. But Bonauenture, in
4. did. 20. art. 1. teaches; first that the pain of loss in Purgatory is not
greater then every pain, whether of Purgatory, or of this life: Secondly, he
teaches that the pains of Purgatory are greater then the pains of this life,
only in this sense; because the greatest pain of purgatory is greater then
the greatest pain of this life: although there be found some other punishment
in Purgatory, less then some punishment in this life: which opinion pleases
me best, for etc. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 14. page 138.

Eighthly, Dominicus a Soto against Petr. Cluniacensis.
NEither ought any man to doubt, Nec vlli dubium esse debet, etc.
but that the souls of the departed Saints, which reign with Christ, do pray
for the souls of the Saints which are in Purgatory: the contray whereof is
rashly affirmed by Dominicus a Soto, b. 4 sent. did. 45. qu. 3. art. 2. Whom
Bellar. confutes by the authority of Petrus Cluniacensis, Saint Austen, and
lastly, of the whole church, who in that prayer, which begins, God the giver of
Pardons, beseeches God that by the intercession of Saint Mary and all Saints,
the souls of the departed may come to the fellowship of eternal happiness.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 15. p. 141.

Ninthly, Saint Thomas against Pet. Damian, and Bellarmine.
THat the dead do good to the living, Quod autem mortui, etc.
it is manifest: for 2. Macab. 15. we read that Onias and Hieremias long before
departed, were seen to pray for the people of the Jews then alive: Neither is
it incredible, that even the souls in Purgatory do pray for us, and prevail,
since that the soul of Paschasius and Seuerinus (though in Purgatory) wrought
miracles, as appears by Gregory, [B. 4. of Dialog. chapter 40.] and Peter Damian
in an Epistle of the miracles of his time: And though Saint Thomas in 2.2. q.
83. art. 3. teach the contrary, yet his reason proves nothing, etc. But
although this be true, yet it seems superfluous for us, to sue to them that
they may pray for us; because they cannot ordinarily know, what we do in
particular, but only in common know that we are in many dangers, etc. Bellarm.
ibid. c. 15. p. 142.

Tenthly, Dominicus a Soto against many visions and Saint Brigit.
ONe doubt remains, Vnum hic solun dubium, etc.
whether the restitution of a thing detained, profit the dead, and so become a
fourth kind of suffrage: for the souls of the departed are said to have often
appeared, and entreated for restitution of those things, which either they had
forgotten, or could not restore: and Saint Brigit in her 6. b. of Revelations,
chapter 66. affirms, that the soul is so long tormented, till that which was
unjustly taken away be restored. Dominicus a Soto [vpon 4. did. 45. q. 2. art.
3.] holds, that such restitution, if it be made, auailes nothing, nor hinders
nothing, if vn-made; for God punishes not, but for our own faults committed in
our life time.

As to those apparitions, I answer, that perhaps those souls do not desire
restitution, as it is restitution, but as an alms; for although it do not
benefit the soul, that he restores, which is bound to restore it, yet it will
much profit it, if another restore it which is not bound: for this is a kind
of alms, and therefore satisfactory. Bellarmine ibid. chap. 16. page 146.

DECAD. IX.
First, Sotus against Paludanus.
Qui potest suffragijs, etc.
IT is the just man only, that can help souls by his suffrages: for the
unjust cannot satisfy for himself, much less for others. But you will say,
What if a just Prelate command his spiritual sons, to pray or fast for the
departed, and those sons be unjust? Paludanus answers upon 4. Sent. did.
45, q. 1. That all those devotions do profit the dead: But Sotus upon better
grounds denies it, in the same place. quaest 2. art. 2. Bellarm. ibid. c. 17.
p. 147.

Secondly, Caietane: some other Divines, and the common opinion in three
differences.
But our Divines dissent about particular suffrages: At dissentiunt de
suffragijs ^^^^^^ularibus, etc.
for Caietane in the first Tome of his Opuscul. (trac. 16. q. 5.) teaches, that
all souls indeed may be, and are helped by the general suffrages; but that by
particular suffrages; those souls only are helped, which have particularly
deserved to be helped by them, and such he holds to be those, who have had a
special devotion to the Keys of the Church, and have been careful for the
souls of others.

Others, whom Saint Thomas cites [vpon 4. did. 45. q. 2. art. 4.] say, that
the suffrages which are made for one, do not only profit him, but all
others, and not him more then others: as a Candle lighted for the Master,
equally gives light to the servants in the same place. But the common opinion
is between both these; that particular suffrages profit all them, and them
only (as in the nature of satisfaction) for whom they are made. Bellarmine
ibid. chapter 18. page 151.

Thirdly, Thomas and Bellarmine against Guilielm. de Sancto amore.
Guilielmus de Sancto Amore, Quarta expos. etc.
would have that place of Christ's speech ( Go sell all, and give to the poor,
etc.) understood only of the preparation of the mind, that it should be so
disposed, as that it could part with all things; against whom Saint Thomas
wrote, opusc. 19. Bellarmine, l. 2. de membr. Eccles. mil. cap. 9. page 228.

Fourthly, Gulielm. de Sancto Amore, confuted by Bellarm.
ANother error was, Alter error fuit Gul. etc.
that of Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, and after him of Io. Wickliffe, who teach,
that Monks are bound to live by the work of their own hands, etc. Bellarm. B.
of Monks, cap. 41. page 420.

Fifthly, Erasmus, Agrippa, Ferus against all Catholics.
Eandem haeresin nostro saeculo, etc.
ERasmus, Cornelius Agrippa, Io. Ferus have in our days revived that opinion
of the Manichees, that war is not lawful for Christians, holding herein with
the Anabaptists. Bellarm. l. de Laicis. c 14. p. 476.

Sixthly, eight opinions of Papists (and some ancient) concerning Purgatory.
COncerning the place where Purgatory is, Quaestio quarta sequitur ^vbi sit
Purgat.
there are many opinions: The first, of some who hold that the soul is there
purged, where it sinned; and indeed that the soul is in diverse places purged,
is probably gathered out of Gregory, l. 4. Dialog. cap. 40. and out of an
Epistle of Petrus Damianus. But that all are punished where they sinned, is not
probable.

The second is, That the places of souls are not corporal, so held Austen,
but he retracted it.

The third, That the place of punishment for the soul, is this world, etc.

The seventh is, That not the earth, but the dark air, where the Devils are,
is the place of punishment.

The eight is, the common opinion of Schoolmen, That Purgatory is in the
bowels of the earth, near to hell. Bellarm. l. 1. of Purgat. cap. 6. page
117.118.

Seventhly Peter Lombard, Thomas, Bonauenture, Richardus, Marsilius against
Thomas himself, Caietane, Durand.
THE Schoolmen inquire, Est autem hic notandum scholasticos, etc.
whether the glory of the soul after the resurrection shall be greater then
before: in two things they all agree: First, that the accidental glory of the
soul shall be greater both in extention, and intention: Secondly, that the
essential joy shall be greater in extention, because it is now in the soul
alone, then shall reach unto the body also. But about the increase of
essential glory in intention, they do not agree: for Peter Lombard in his 4.
of Sent. d. 49. And Saint Thomas upon the same place: And Saint Bonauenture,
and Richardus, and Marsilius say, that the essential glory shall then be
greater in very measure, and degrees of intention: But on the contrary, Saint
Thomas 1.2. q. 4. art. 5. and Caietane, in the same place, and Durandus say,
that the essential glory shall not be greater in degrees of intention, but in
extent only. I affirm two things: First, that the first opinion is more
according to Saint Austens meaning, and to Haymons in 6. Reuelat. and Bernards,
etc. Secondly, that the second opinion is simply the truer: and therefore that
Saint Thomas did well to change his opinion. Bellarmine 7. Controu. Gener. of
the Church Triumph, l. 1. c. 5. page 58.

Eighthly, Bellarmine against Mart. Peresius.
Neither does it hinder much, Neque obstat quod esti Patres, etc.
that the Fathers have seldom mentioned ( Dulia service) for when they say,
that Images and Saints are to be worshipped, and not with ( Latria) they show
sufficiently, that they ought to be worshipped with that kind of service, which
we call Dulia, as Beda calls it upon Luke 4. and the master of Sent. withal
schoolmen, l. 3. Sent. There was no need therefore that Martinus Peresius [in
his work of Traditions, part 3. consid. 7.] should say, that he did not
greatly allow, that this name ( Dulia) should be given to the worship of the
Saints, since Dulia signifies service, and we are not the servants of the
Saints, but fellow-seruants, etc. Bellarm. same book, c. 12. p. 83.

Ninthly, four disagreeing opinions of Doctors.
How the Saints know what we ask of them, De modo autem quo cognoscunt, etc.
there are four opinions of our Doctors: Some say, they know it by the
relation of Angels: Others say, that the souls of the saints (as the Angels)
by a certain marvelous celerity of nature, are after a sort every where, and
hear the prayers of their suppliants. The one of these is Austens, the other
Hieromes, but neither of them is sufficient. Others say, that the Saints see in
God all things, from the beginning of their blessedness, which may in any sort
concern them, and therefore also our prayers, 3. par. q. 10. ar. 2
which are directed to them: so teach Gregory (B. 12. of his Morals) Saint
Thomas, Caietane. Others lastly say, that the Saints do not from the beginning
of their blessedness see our prayers in God; but that then only they are
revealed by God to them, when we utter them. And of these two latter, the first
seems to me to be simply the more likely: for if the Saints ever needed new
revelations, the Church would not so confidently say to all Saints, Orate pro
nobis, pray for us, but rather would desire of God to reveal our prayers to
them. Bellarm. ibid. c. 20. p. 129.

Tenthly, Bellarmine against Catharinus and Thomas Caietane.
THE second opinion, Secunda opinio, etc.
is of Ambrosius Catharinus in his treatise of Images, where he teaches, that
God in the ten Commandments simply forbids all Images: but that this precept
was only positive and temporal. But this opinion is not allowed of us,
especially because Saint Irenaeus directly teaches, that the Decalogue is
natural, excepting only that Precept of the Sabbath; and Tertullian in his
book of Idolatry, holds, that this precept is most of all now to be
observed: so Cyprian also, Austen, etc. The third is of Thomas Caietane upon
20. Exodus which teaches, that not every Image or Idol is there forbidden, but
only that there is forbidden to any man, to make to himself any Image, which
he will take for his God. This opinion displeases me only in the manner of
speech; for Caietane takes an Image and an Idol both for one, which is false,
etc. Bellarm. l. 2. contr. 7. gener. c. 7. That is, De Imaginibus sanctorum, l.
2. c. 7. p. 176.

DECAD. X.
First, Abulensis, Durandus, Peresius against Catharinus, Payua, Saunders, and
Bellarmine.
Quarta opinie, etc.
THE fourth opinion is Caluins, in the first book of his institutions, chapter 11.
where he says, it is an abominable sin to make a visible and bodily Image of
the invisible and incorporeall God. And this opinion of Caluins is also the
opinion of some Catholic Doctors, as Abulensis [vpon 4. Deuteron. quaest. 5.]
and Durandus [vpon 3. did. 9. q. 2.] and Peresius [in his book of
Traditions.] But I affirm three things: First, that it is not so certain in
the Church, that we may make Images of God, or the Trinity, as of Christ and
the Saints, for this all Catholics confess. Secondly, that Caluins fraud and
craft is admirable, who after he has proved that Images of God are not to be
made, digresseth to amplification, and triumphs, as if he had proved that we
may not make, or worship any Image at all. Thirdly, I say, that it is lawful
to paint the Image of God the Father in the form of an old man; and of the
holy spirit in the form of a Dove, as is taught also by Caietane 3. Part. q.
25. art. 3.
. Ambrosius Catharinus Lib. de cultu imaginum, etc.
, Diegus, Payua, Nicholas Saunders, Thomas Waldensis. Bellarmine ibid. chapter 8.
p. 179.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Bartholomaeus Caranza.
BEsides it must be noted, Praeterea notandum est Bartol. etc.
that Bartholomaeus Caranza erres, who in the sum of the Councels, says,
(Can. 82. of the 6. Synod) that the Image of Christ in the form of a Lamb,
and of the spirit in the form of a Dove, is there forbidden: Whereas the
Council forbids not these Images, but only prefers to them the Images of
Christ in an humane form, etc. Besides, the reason of Bartholomaeus seems to
conclude against himself; that the shadows ceased when the truth came, for
these Images were not in use in the old Testament, but began only after
Christ's coming: but his error is to be corrected out of the 7. Synod, where
this Canon is often entirely cyted. Bellarmine same book, chap. 8. page 182.

Thirdly, Payua, Saunders, Alan. Copus and others differing.
PAyua answers, Ad secundum Payua responder.
that the Elebertine Council forbids only an Image of God, which is made to
represent the shape of GOD: But this seems not to satisfy. Nicholas Saunders
answers, that the Council for bad Images in the Churches, because the time
and place required it; for then there was danger, least the Gentiles should
think we worshipped wood and stones; and least that in the persecutions, their
Images should have been reproachfully handled by the persecutors. This answer
is good. Alanus Copus in B. 5. of Dialog. chapter 16 says, that Images are here
forbidden, because they began to be worshipped of those Christians, as Gods: in
which sense Saint Ino. takes that Canon in Decret. part. 3. c. 40. But this
exposition is not well warranted by the reasons of the Canon. Others say, that
there is only forbidden to paint images on the walls, and not in tables and
vayles. But howsoever it be, that Council is rather for us, then against us.
Bellarm. ibid. chapter 9. p. 190.

Fourthly, Three ranks of Popish Writers dissenting.
OF the last question, Venio nunc ad postremam quaestionem etc.
what manner of worship Images are worthy of, there are three opinions:
First, that the Image is no way in it self to be worshipped, but only that the
thing represented is to be worshipped before the Image: so some hold, whom
Catharinus both reports and refutes: the same seems to be held by Alexander,
3. part. q. 30. art. vlt. as also by Durandus, 3. Sent. di 9. q. 2. And by
Alphonsus a Castro. The second, that the same honor is due to the Image, and
the thing expressed by it: and therefore that Christ's Image is to be
worshipped with the worship of Latria, Saint Mary's with Hyperdulia, the Saints
with Dulia; so Alexander (3. part. q. 30. art. vlt.) Saint Thomas (3. p. q. 25.
art 3.) And upon the same place, Caietane, S. Bonauenture, Marsilius, Almain,
Carthusianus, Capreolus, and others; which opinion stands upon 7 grounds, there
specified. The third opinion in the mean, is of them that say, Images in
themselves properly should be honored, but with a less honor, then the thing
represented; and therefore that no Image is to be worshipped with Latria: so
holds: Martinus, Peresius, Ambrosius, Catharinus, Nicholas Saunders, Gabriell.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 20. p. 235.236.237. etc.

What shift Bellarmine makes to reconcile the second opinion; by adoration
improperly, and by accident, See the same book, c. 23. p. 242.

Fifthly, Bellarmine against Peresius and Durandus, etc.
PEresius answers, that it is not true, Peresius respondet.
that we are carried with the same motion of the heart to the Image, and the
thing represented: since these two are opposites, neither can be known, but
with a double act of knowledge. Bellarmine confutes him, and shows, that these
two are so opposite, as that one depends upon another, and that one can neither
be defined nor known without the other. Durandus answers otherwise; for he
admits there is one, and the same motion to both, but denies that therefore
they have but one and the same adoration: Others confirm this answer, for that
although there be one and the same motion of the mind (that is) of the
understanding toward them both, yet there may be contrary motions of will,
etc. But this answer satisfies not. I hold there must be another answer
given: See his determination at large, that there is the same motion of the
understanding and will, to the Image and the thing expressed; but in diverse
respects, as either of them is made the principal, or indirect object.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 24. p. 246.

Sixthly, Tho. Waldensis against Abulensis, Iansenius, and others.
Et quidem Tho. Waldensis,
THomas Waldensis holds not improbably [in his 3. Tom. Tit. 20. chapter 158.] that
the very Wooden Cross, which is now divided into many pieces and parc^ls,
shall then be renewed, and gathered up together, and shall appear in heaven.
The same seems to be affirmed by Sibilla and Chrysostom; and the other
fathers do not contradict it. But if this be not admitted, at least the bright
Image of the Cross shall appear out of the air, or fire condensated, as
Abulensis, Iansenius, and others teach. Bellarm. ib. c. 28. p. 260

Seventhly, two sorts of Papists dissenting.
Prima quorundam recentiorum, qui etc.
SOme of our latter writers think, that sacred houses are not properly built,
but only to God, as Sacrifices are offered to him alone, and that they have
their names from Saints, not for that they are built unto them, but because
their memories are in those Temples worshipped, and they called upon, as
Patrons in those places: So they interpret, the Church of Saint Peter, not for
that sacrifice is therein offered to Peter, but because it is offered to God in
thanksgiving, for the glory bestowed on Saint Peter; and he is there called
upon, as our Patron and advocate with God. Another answer admits holy
houses, truly and properly built to the Saints, but not in the nature of
Temples, Basilicae vel memoriae.
but as royal Monuments, or memories of them. Bellarmine lib. 3. cap. 4. page
299.

Eighthly, Thomas against Scotus, Abulensis, Lyranus.
WE are not bound by any peculiar precept, Non tenemur diebus festis, etc
not to sin on festival days, or to the acts of contrition, or love of God.
This is Saint Thomas his opinion against Scotus, upon 3. did. 27. which says,
on holy days men are bound to an internal act of loving God: and against
Abulensis and Lyranus, who hold, that sins being servile works, are
forbidden; and therefore that a sin done on a Holy Day is doubtful. Bellarm.
ibid. c. 10. p. 356.

Ninthly, Gulielm. Occam. against the common opinion.
THe second thing required to a Sacrament of the new law, Secundum est vt hoc,
etc.
is a sensible sign; for there are some invisible signs, as the Character
imprinted in the soul by the Sacraments: but it is certain there must be
visible signs also: scarce ever any but Gulielmus Occam. has held, that
though the Sacraments be visible signs, yet that this is not of their essence;
for that God might institute a Sacrament in a spiritual matter, as if he
should appoint that a mental prayer, or the meditation of Christ's passion
should give grace, merely by the work wrought. But Occam is deceived.
Bellarm. de Sacrament in genere c. 9. p. 34.

Tenthly, Three diverse opinions of Popish Doctors.
COncerning the definition of a Sacrament, Tres sunt doctorum sent entiae, etc.
there are three opinions of Doctors. Some hold, that a Sacrament cannonot
properly be defined, as Occam, Mayor, Richardus. Some hold, that it may be
defined, at least imperfectly: so Scotus, d. 1. q. 2. and Sotus. Some that it
may be properly defined: so Martinus Ledesmius in tract. of Sacram. Bellarm.
ib. c. 10. p. 40.

THE PEACE OF ROME. THE SECOND BOOK OR CENTVRY.
DECAD. I.
First. Bellarmine dissenting from Waldensis, Hugo, Gratian, Lombard.
THE definition of a Sacrament is so canuased by Bellarmine, Sunt enim plures
definitiones etc.
as that he rejects two of Augustines, seconded also by Hugo, B. 1. part. 9.
chapter 2. Bernard in his Sermon of the Lords Supper: Tho. Waldensis, Tom. 2. chapter
20. as altogether imperfect. Also Hugoes definition as too long: Gratians
(cyted by him from Gregory, but indeed from Isidore) as only an explication
of the word, not the matter; Peter Lombards as wanting somewhat, or rather
intricately enfolding it, and allows only the definition of the Council of
Trent, as most accurate; (definitio pulcherrima est) Bellarm. ibid. c. 11. p.
43.44. etc.

Secondly, Albert, Thomas Bonauenture, and others against Thomas, Dominicus a
Soto, Ledesmius, etc.
Duae sunt Theolugorum sententiae.
HEre be two opinions of Divines: the first of the master of Sentences [B. 4. d.
1.] and upon that place: Albertus, Thomas, Bonauenture, and others, who teach,
that no definition can directly and properly agree to the Sacraments of both
the old and new law, but that they all agree properly to the Sacraments of
the new; imperfectly and by proportion only to the Sacraments of the old.
Another opinion is, of Saint Thomas 3. part. q. 60. art. 1. (for he manifestly
changed his opinion) as also of Dominicus* a Soto, and Martin Ledesmius, who
teach, that this definition, The sign of an holy thing, does directly and
univocally agree to the Sacraments of both old and new law: Either sentence
partly pleases, and partly displeases me. Bellarm. ibid. c. 12. page 45.

Thirdly, Dominicus a Soto and Caietan, Thomas, Durand, Adrian, Alexand. Alens.
Dominic. a Soto, all opposite.
THere be diverse opinions of Doctors, Sunt igitur variae Doctorum sententiae,
etc.
the first of certain of our late writers, who hold, that properly the matter
and form in the Sacraments, is not the thing and words, but that some
sensible thing is the matter, whether it be substance or word, or both: and
that the signification is the form. So Dominicus a Soto [vpon 4. did. 1. q.
1. ar. 1.] and Caietane seems to affirm the same with very little difference.
Another opinion is, of them which teach, that the very Sacrament it self, and
not only the material part of it, consists of the things, as the matter; and
words, as the form: So Saint Thomas 3. part. q. 60. ar. 6. and the ancient
Divines in common. Others again hold, that all Sacraments do not consist of
things and words, but some only: so Durandus [vppon 4. did. 1. q. 3.] and
Adrianus [quaest. 2. of Baptisme] Others teach, that all Sacraments of the new
law consist of things and words: so Alexander Alensis, 4. p. q. 8, etc. and
the Divines commonly. Others lastly think, that all Sacraments do consist of
things and words, if they be taken in a large sense, else not. So Dominicus a
Soto upon 4. did. 1. q. 1. art. 6. Bellarm. ibid. c. 18. page 84.

Fourthly, Paluda. against Tho. Bellar. against Domin. a Soto.
THat which Paludanus says, Jtaque quod Paludanus, etc.
[vpon 4. did. 3. q. 1.] that the Sacrament is not ever made void, when a man
intends to bring in a new Rite, is true; but not against S. Thomas, as perhaps
he thought. But that which Dominicus a Soto says, namely, That the Greeks do
truly baptize, with those words, Let the servant of Christ be baptized,
because the Church of Rome tolerates that fashion, etc. But if the Church of
Rome should detest that Rite, then they should not baptize truly, is not
altogether true, etc. Bellarm. ibid. c. 21. p. 118.

Fifthly, Hugo, Pet. Lombard, Alensis, Bonauenture, etc. against the common
opinion, and Bellarm.
Our adversaries teach these two things: Aduersarij duo quaedam docent, etc.
That the Sacraments which they hold only two, were instituted by Christ:
namely, Baptism and the Lords Supper; and that the rest were not appointed by
Christ: so teach Calvin and Chemnitius: and with them (whom they cite) Cyprian,
Hugo, Peter Lombard, who deny, that all Sacraments were instituted by Christ:
They might have added Alexander Alensis, Saint Bonauenture and Marsilius, who
say, that the Sacraments of confirmation and penance, were not instituted by
Christ, but by his Apostles. Against this error the Council of Trent, set
down, Can. 1. Sess. 7. thus: If any man shall say, that all the Sacraments of
the new Testament, were not instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, let him be
accursed; yea immediately instituted by him. Further, that which Alexander and
Bonauenture teach concerning the Sacrament of confirmation cannot be defended,
etc. Bellarm. ibid. c. 23. page 127.128, 129. etc.

Sixthly, Bellarmine against Catharinus.
THere is a new heresy arisen in our time; Noua haeresis nostro tempore, etc.
that the intention of the Minister is not necessary in the Sacrament. To this
opinion of the heretics Ambrosius Catharinus comes very near: neither can I
see, wherein he differs from the opinion of Kemnitius and other heretics,
saving that in the end of his work, he subjects himself to the
Sea-Apostolike, and to the Council, both which they deride. Bellarm. ibid. c.
27. p. 155.

Note, the same which he condemns for heretical in Catharinus, he graunts to
be held by his St. Thomas, in the chapter following, page 169.

Seventhly, Caietane and Ledesmius against Thomas and others.
HEre are two opinions of Divines: for some, Responderidebet duas esse
Theologorum sententias.
as Caietane and Ledesmius teach, that in the Minister there is no operative
virtue, as an efficient and isntrumental cause, as there is in the Sacrament:
for in the words of the sacrament there is operative virtue, but by dependence
on the Minister; for then the words have virtue, when they are conjoined with
the virtue, which is in the Minister. Others hold that the Minister has in
himself no efficient power, in respect of justification, but that is only in
the Sacrament: so Thomas is thought to hold, 3. part. qu. 64. art 1. And that
the Minister concurres only by applying the Sacrament. Bellarm. same book, c.
27. page 163.

Eighthly, Bellarmine against Ambrose Catharinus.
Quartum argumentum est Catha. etc.
THe fourth argument is of Catharinus, from the authority of Saint Thomas,
Chrysostom, and Pope Nicholas. Of Saint Thomas, who says, that the intention
of the Church expressed in the very form of words, is sufficient to make a
perfect Sacrament, neither is any other intention required on the part of the
Minister etc.

And Catharinus adds a reason, that it seems ouerhard, that God should put
the salvation of men in the arbitrament of a wicked Minister, and so our
justification should be made uncertain. This argument is already answered. How
he answers and confuteth this opinion and authorities of Catharinus, See
Bellarmine ibid. c. 28. page 169.

Ninthly, Bellarmine against Ledesmius, Canus, Bonauenture, Scotus, Durand,
Richardus, Occam, Marsilius, Gabriel.
THat the Sacraments are true causes of justification; Sacramenta esse ver^s
causas, etc.
but Moral causes, not natural (as he that commands a murder is the true
cause of it, though he touch not the party murdered) is defended by Ledesmius
and Canus in Relict. de Sacram. And the same seems to be held by many of the
old Schoolmen, Bonauenture, Scotus, Durand, Richardus, Occam, Marsilius,
Gabriel, who hold, that the Sacraments do truly justify, but yet, that God
only does work that grace at the presence of the Sacraments, so as the
Sacraments are not natural causes, but such as without which, this effect
would not follow. But I hold that the more probable and safe opinion, which
attributes a true efficiency to the Sacraments. Bellarm. of the effect of the
Sacram. l. 2. c. 11. p. 225.

Tenthly, the Master of Sentences against the common opinion.
THere is therefore one question, Vna igitur quaestio est, etc.
whether the old Sacraments (excepting Circumcision) did justify actually by
the very work wrought: and there are two opinions: One of the Master of Sent.
[in 4. did. 1] which denies it, for he says, that those Sacraments did not
justify, though they were done never so much in faith and charity. The other
is the common opinion of Divines, that all those Sacraments did justify, ex
opere operantis, that is, upon the faith and devotion of the receivers; and
this opinion is most true. Bellarm. ibid. c. 13. page 239.

DECAD. II.
First, Alexander, Bonauenture, Scotus, Gabriel, against Thomas, Capreolus,
Scotus, Ledesmius, others, etc.
Porro de Circumcisione.
OF Circumcision there are two opinions: One of Alexander, and Bonauenture,
Scotus, and Gabriel, that Circumcision did confer justification, ex opere
operato, upon the very act done: which opinion is disproued by many arguments.
Where it is yet to be noted, that this opinion of theirs does not favor the
heretics of our time, for the heretics when they make the old Sacraments
equal to ours, do not extol the old, but debase ours: But this opinion does
not abase ours, but extol the ancient.

The other opinion, is of Saint Thomas and Capreolus, Scotus, Ledesmius, and
others; that Circumcision did by it own power justify, but yet justified
only as it was a protestation of our faith, and as it applied faith to us.
This opinion is doubtless the more probable of the two. Bellarm. ibid. c. 13.
p. 236.

Secondly, Durand, Scotus, Gabriel against the other Papists.
Signum aliquod spirituale, etc.
THat there is a certain spiritual stamp imprinted in the mind, in some
Sacraments, which is called a Character, is the common opinion of Catholics.
But it is to be noted that some of our divines, as Durand, Scotus, Gabriel, do
indeed admit this stamp or Character, but yet teach something which seems to
make for Kemnitius and the heretics: for Durandus holds, that the Character
is not any real thing distinguished from the soul, but is only a matter to
be conceived in the mind, and which has his being only in conceit. But all
others confess, that the Character is a real matter distinct from the soul.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 19. page 267.

Thirdly, Bellarmine against Durandus and Scotus.
THe Character is not a mere relation, Character non est relatio, etc.
but an absolute quality: this is a common opinion, excepting only Scotus and
Durandus. Durandus in the place forecited, holds, it has only a being in
conceit, etc. Which opinion can scarcely be distinguished from the heresy of
this time, and seems expressly condemned by Councels: which if Durandus had
seen, doubtless he would have taught otherwise; and surely the Council of
Trent, in her curse of this opinion, intends it against those which deny a
real Character. Scotus would have it a real relation, but that can scarce be
defended: and there have not wanted many, that have confuted him soundly.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 19. page 268.

Fourthly, three opinions of Papists.
Alij ponunt simpliciter in substantia.
SOme of our Doctors hold this Character to be in the understanding: Others
place it in the will, because they think it disposes us to charity, which is
in the will: Others hold it simply to be in the substance of the soul, and
this seems the truer opinion. Bellarm. ibid. c. 19. p. 270.

Fifthly, Scotus against Thomas.
Nec Circumcisio etc.
NEither Circumcision, nor any Sacrament of the old Law did imprint any
Character in the soul: So holds Saint Thomas 3. p. q. 63. ar. ^.
. Scotus thinks the contrary concerning Circumcision. But the opinion of
Thomas is truer. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 19. page 271.

Sixthly, Bernard, Hugo, Lombard, Pope Nicholas against all other Divines.
Praeter hos errores est opinio, etc
BEsides these errors, there is a very incommodious opinion of many Catholics,
who have thought, that the invocation of one person in the Trinity, and
especially of Christ, is sufficient to Baptism: so seems to hold S. Ambrose
in his first book of the holy Ghost: Beda upon 10. chap. of Acts: Bernard,
Epi. 340. ad Henricum. Hugo de Sancto victore, l. 2. of Sacraments: Master of
sentenc. b. 4. did. 3. And lastly, Pope Nicholas in his Epist. to the
Bulgarians. The two foundations of these Authors opinion are overthrown by
Bellarm. who concludes. But howsoever it be, it is certain that baptism is
either absolutely, or with condition to be repeated, if it be administered in
the name of Christ, or any other person, without an express mention of the
rest, as all more grave Divines teach. Bellarm. in his b. of Baptism, cap. 3.
page 11.

Seventhly, two contrary opinions of Doctors.
THat Christ did use some baptism before his passion it cannot be denied, but
the doubt is, Nota, negari non posse etc.
whether that Baptism were the same Sacrament, which now we have, or only a
preparation to the Sacrament of Baptism afterward to be instituted, as the
baptism of John was: Chrysostom. Theophilact, and Pope Leo hold with this
latter, etc. But the other which we have said, is more probable, which is
professedly taught by Augustine, tract. 13. and 15. upon John: by Cyrill 2. B.
upon John, c. 57. Hugo de Sancto victore, b. 2. of Sacraments: and this is the
commoner opinion of Divines, with the Master of Senten. b. 4. did. 3. Bellarm.
ibid. c. 5. p. 26.

Eighthly, Many opinions of Schoolmen.
NOte, Quo puncto temporis etc.
that concerning the time wherein Christ instituted the Sacrament of baptism,
there are very many opinions, among the Schoolmen; but the more common and
probable opinion, is that which we follow, which also the Catechism of the
Council of Trent receives, and the Master of Sent. with St. Thomas and others.
Bellarmine in his book of Baptism, c. 5. page 28.

Ninthly, Dominicus a Soto, Ledesmius, etc. against Thomas, Mayor, Gabriel, and
others.
Non desunt Theologi vt Dominicus, etc.
THere are some Divines, as Dominicus a Soto, and Martin Ledesmius upon 4. did.
3. which teach, that Martyredome does not give grace ( ex opere operato) by the
very work wrought* but only ex opere operantis, by the work of the sufferer:
and gives no degree of grace, but that which answers to the merit of the
martyrs charity. But it is a more probable opinion, that Martyredome by the
very work wrought does give the first grace; So that if a man being yet in his
sins, shall come to Martyredome, yet without an affection to any sin, and
with faith and love in part begun, etc: By the virtue of Martyredome he shall
upon the work wrought be justified and saved. So is expressly taught by St.
Thomas, Io. Mayor, Gabriel and others. Bellarmine same book, cap. 6. page 33.

Tenthly, Bellarmine and all Papists, with Thomas against Peter Lombard.
THere have been two opinions amongst Catholics, of John's Baptism, Inter
Catholicos fuerunt etiam etc.
whereof one is thought erroneous, the other very improbable. The first was
Peter Lombards, who distinguishes those which were baptized of John, into two
kinds: one was of them which were so baptized of John, that they did put their
hope and trust in that baptism, and had not any knowledge of the holy Ghost:
These he confessed were to be baptized with Christ's baptism. The other of
those, who were baptized of John, but did not rely upon that baptism, and had
knowledge of the holy Ghost: These were not necessarily to be rebaptized.

Bellarmine confutes him by himself, and consent of all Catholics, and
concludes; wherefore Saint Thomas [3. p. q. 38. ar. vlt] writes, that this is a
very unreasonable opinion. Bellarm. ibid. c. 19. p. 113.

DECAD. III.
First, Master of Sentences, Schoolmen, Thomas against Thomas, Bellarmine, and
other Papists.
ANother opinion is, Altera opinio est.
That the baptism of John was as a certain Sacrament of the old law: so taught
the Master of Sent. in the place forecited, and many of the Schoolmen: and
Saint Thomas himself; but he did justly afterward recant, and teach the
contrary, 3. part q. 38 art. 1. Whereupon Saint Thomas well says that the
baptism of John pertained not to the old law, but to the new rather, as a
certain preparation to Christ's baptism. Bellarm. ibid. c. 19. p. 113.

Secondly, Thomas, Council. Florentinum, Innocentius, Waldensis, Hugo,
Bellarmine dissagreeing.
SOme Schoolmen hold, Prior est aliquorum Scholasticorum etc.
that the Apostles did in diverse fashions minister the Sacrament of
confirmation; and that in the first times, because the holy Ghost visibly
descended, then they used no anointing, but mere imposition of hands: After
that, unction came in use, etc. And if you object that the Apostles could not
institute the matter of a sacrament, they answer; that they received that
commandment from Christ, that they should one while use imposition of hands,
another while Chrisme, as they should think most convenient: This answer is
not unlikely: and Saint Thomas is not fare off from it [3. p q. 72. art. 1.]
and perhaps hither might be drawn the testimonies of the Florentine Council,
and of Innocentius, etc But the other answer (me thinks) is more probable of
Thomas Waldensis, and Hugo de Sancto victore; who say, that the anointing with
Chrisme, and laying on of hands, is all one; for he that anoints, lays on his
hand. This answer is the likelier. Bellarmine in his B. of confirmation, c. 9.
p. 185.

Thirdly, Caietane, Dominicus a Soto, Franc. Victoria against all the elder
Papists.
IT is a question among our Divines, Respon. Quaestionem esse inter Theologos.
whether Balm be required in Chrisme, as upon the necessity of the Sacrament,
or only on necessity of the precept. All the old Divines and Lawyers, hold
Balm required upon the necessity of the Sacrament; so as the Sacrament is
void, if it be administered without it: But the latter Divines Caietane,
Dominicus a Soto, Franc. a Victoria, etc. hold, that balm is not required as
to the essence of the Sacrament, but yet necessarily to be used by the
commandment of God. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 9. page 190.

Fourthly, Rich. Armachanus against the common opinion.
OF the Catholics there is only Richardus Armachanus, which thinks, Ex
Catholicis solus est etc.
that the office of confirming is common both to Bishops, and Presbiters: and
from him Tho. Waldensis thinks that Wickliffe drew his heresy. Bellarm. ibid.
cap. 12. page 197.

Fifthly, Bonauenture, Durand, Adrian, against Thomas, Richard. Paludanus,
Marsilius.
AMongst our Catholic divines there is a question, Est quidem inter Catholicos
quaestio etc.
whether at least by dispensation a Presbiter may confer this Sacrament: for
Saint Bonauenture, Durand, Adrian, upon 4. did. 7. say, it cannot be committed
to Priests. But Saint Tho mas, and all his Scholars, and many other Divines,
as Richardus, Paludanus, Marsilius, and others; and all Canonists teach the
contrary: and indeed it is the truer, that these last affirm. Bellarm. ibid.
c. 17. p. 197.

Sixthly, some namelesse Papists against the common opinion.
IT is questioned, Sed existit hes loco, etc.
whether those things which are spoken of Christ, in the form of bread and
wine be spoken of him truly, and properly, or by some Trope: Some think them
truly and properly spoken, as the same thing should be truly and properly
spoken of the bread, if bread were there. Their reason is, because they think
that the Union of Christ with the accidents of bread, is either personal, or
very like to it; and therefore that there is a communication of properties
betwixt Christ, and those accidents, etc. But the common opinion of Divines
teach the contrary. Bellar. of the sacram. of the Eucharist. l. 1. c. 2. p. 28*

Seventhly, Gabriel, Cusanus, Caietane, Tapperus, Hesselius, Iansenius against
all other Papists.
ALmost all Catholics will have the words of John 6. understood of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, Porro Catholici fere omnes, etc.
or of the Sacramental eating of Christ's body in the Eucharist: but there are
some few, who (the better to disprove the Hussites and Lutherans) hold, that
this Chapter medleth not with any Sacramental eating of Christ's body, or
drinking his blood, of which sort are Gabriel, Nicholas, Cusanus, Thomas
Caietanus, Ruardus Tapper, Johannes Hesselius, and Cornelius Iansenius. All
other Catholics (whom Nicholas Saunders in his book of the sixth of John
cites) with great consent teach, that this Chapter entreats of the
Sacramental eating of Christ: which doubtless is most true. Bellarmine ibid.
cap. 5. page 41.

Eighthly, two sorts of Doctors opposite.
THe Catholics do not agree in the manner of explicating, what is properly
meant, Nota secundo Catholicos, etc.
by this pronoune Hoc or Hic, This, in the words of consecration: ( This is my
body) And there are two more famous opinions: One, that this pronoune ( Hoc,
This) signifies the body of Christ, confuted in this place of Bellarmine by two
arguments. The other opinion is of Saint Thomas [3. p.d. 78. art. 2.] and upon
1. Cor. 11. that the pronoune ( Hoc, This) does not precisely signify the
bread, or the body, but in common, that substance which is under these forms;
yet so as the signification does properly pertain to the forms; that so the
sense should be, Not, This, that is, These forms are my body: but thus, under
these forms is my body, as it was of old expounded by Guitmundus, l. 2.
Bellarmine ibid. c. 11. p. 83.

Ninthly, most Papists and Bellarmine against Thomas.
Quidam tamen Catholici, etc.
SOme Catholics hold, that a body may be locally in two places at once; for
(say they) if one place may hold two bodies, so as neither the places are
divided, nor the bodies confounded (as it was done in Christ's coming forth of
the grave) then one body may fill two places, etc. But some others, and amongst
them Saint Thomas thinks that one body cannot be totally in two places. His
reason, by the leave of so great a Doctor, is not found. Bellarm. l. 3 of the
Eucharist, c. 3. p. 291.

Tenthly, Durand. Occam, Albertus, Thomas, Bonauenture, Richardus, Scotus,
dissenting.
Primum est, duas opiniones falsas etc.
THere were two particular opinions, and both false and erroneous, devised in
the Schools, for the unfolding the greatness of this mystery: One of Durandus
[vpon 4. did. 10. etc.] who held it probable, that the substance of the body
of Christ is in the Eucharist, without magnitude or quantity: and he used those
arguments to this purpose, which now are taken up by the Sacramentaries.
Another opinion was of some ancient Divines, which Albertus without any name
reports, and confutes; which afterward Occam [vpon 4. q. 4.] followed; who
say, that there is in the Sacrament, the very magnitude or quantity of the body
of Christ, which yet, they think cannot be distinguished from the substance:
but they add, that all parts do so run into other, that there is no shape
in the body of Christ nor any distinction and order of the parts of the body.

But the common opinion of the Schools and Church is, that in the Eucharist
there is whole Christ with his magnitude and bigness, and all other accidents,
etc. And besides, that the parts and members of Christ's body, do not one run
into another, but are so distinguished, and disposed among themselves, as they
have both order and shape agreeable to an humane body: so teach Albertus, S.
Thomas, Bonauenture, Richardus, Scotus, and others upon (4. did. 10. or 13.)
and Alexander (3. p. q. 10. in 7.) etc. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 5. page 301.

DECAD. IIII.
First, Bellarmine against Durandus, etc.
AVgustine discoursing of Christ's coming into the world, through the womb of
the Virgin still continuing closed, says, B. Augustinus in Epistola ad
Vo^usianum de vtroque isto miraculo, etc.
that in these works all the reason of the fact, is the power of the doer: The
same is held by common consent of other Fathers, Gregor. Nazian. Theodoret.
Hierome, etc. But I am ashamed to say what Durandus and Beza answer to this,
etc. That which Durand says; that her Virginity might, and did still remain
inviolable, and yet that the passages were somewhat dilated; according to the
best Physicians, implies a contradiction: for Io. Fernclius teaches, that the
loss of Virginity does not consist in the breaking of any filme, but only in
the dilatation of the parts. Bellarm. ibid. c. 6. p. 309.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Durandus.
Quintum exemplum est.
THe fifth example is, of the ascension of Christ, and the Saints into heaven;
for we believe that Christ ascended above all heavens, and likewise that the
bodies of the Saints after their resurrection shall ascend But there is no
door in heaven, no window, no gappe through which they may ascend; for as Job,
47. The heavens are solid as brass, therefore there must needs be more
bodies in one place. To this Durandus answers, that by the power of GOD the
heavens may be divided, when the bodies of the Saints shall ascend: But if the
heaven be in it own nature solid, and incorruptible, as all Divines and
Philosophers teach, surely it is not probable there should be so many holes
made in heaven, as there are bodies of the Saints to ascend, etc. Bellarm.
ibid. cap. 6. page 311.

Thirdly, sundry opinions of Popish Doctors.
DVrandus holds, Durandus docuit partem vnam etc.
that one essential part of the bread namely, the form, is turned, but that
the other part, which is the matter, is not turned [vpon 4. did. 11.] Others
(that there might no error be missing) have contrarily taught, that the matter
of the bread is turned into Christ's body, but that the substantial form of
the bread remains still the same: This error St. Thomas reports without the
name of the Author [3. p q. 25. art. 6.] A fifth opinion is, that of Rupertus
the Abbot, which was some forty years after Guitmundus: which Rupertus
taught, that the bread of the Sacrament, is personally assumed by the second
person in the Trinity, in the very same manner, that the humane nature was
assumed by the same word, as appears in his sixth book upon John. This error
is noted, and confuted by Algerus [in 1. B. of Sacraments, chap. 6.] where he
says, that this is a new and most absurd heresy: this Algerus lived in the
same time with Rupertus, about the year 1124. as witness Trithemius and Petrus
Cluniacensis, who notes, that Algerus did most accurately confute the errors
of some modern Writers, concerning the body of our Lord. Bellarm. l. 3. c. 11.
p. 347.

Fourthly, Bellarmine against Dominicus a Soto, Sanctius, Alanus, etc.
HEnce may be refuted the common error, Hinc refelli potest, etc.
which possesses many of this time, concerning the Author of this heresy: for
as Thomas Waldensis witnesses, there was an old book of Divine offices,
without any name of the Author, wherein Wickliffe did marueilously triumph, and
vexed the Catholics with it; boasting it one while to be Ambroses, another
while Isidores, another while Fulgentius: At last the Catholics suspected
that Walramus or Valeramus was the Author of it; So write Dominicus a Soto,
Claudius Sanctius, Gul. Alanus, and others. But he was not the first, for the
Berengarians were before him; neither was Walramus the Author hereof, but
Rupertus Tuitiensis, from whose books this opinion is to be fetched, which
Dominicus a Soto idly expounds (upon 4. did. 9. q. 2.) Bellarm. l. 3. c.
11. p. 348.

Fifthly, Waldensis and Bellarmine against Johannes Parisiensis.
THE sixth opinion or heresy rather, Sexta opinio seu potius haeresis, etc.
is of one Johannes Parisiensis, which (as Waldensis reports) openly opugned
that other heresy, and brought in a new; for he taught, that the bread is
assumed by the Son, but by means of the body of Christ; as the body is taken
for part of his manhood, not for the whole: and he said, as part, not as
whole, least he should be constrained to admit, that God is bread. Bellarm. l.
3. c. 11. confuted, l. 3. c. 16. page 348.

Sixthly, Durandus against the Councels of Constance, and of Trent, and
Bellarmine.
THE third error is of them, Tertius error eorum est, etc.
which will have only the matter of bread to remain, which does expressly
contradict the Council of Trent [Sess. 13. cha. 4. and Can. 2.] And the
Council of Constance, [Sess. 8.] Yea also this opinion of Durandus is contrary
to the Council of Lateran: for neither would that Council have said, that
there is a transsubstantiation made, unless it would have signified, that the
whole substance of the bread is changed, etc. Therefore this opinion of
Durandus is heretical, though he himself be not therefore to be called an
heretic, because he was ready to yield to the judgment of the Church.
Bellarmine lib. 3. c. 13. page 351.

Seventhly, four diverse opinions of Divines.
ABout the time of Christ's instituting the Sacrament, Sunt igitur de praesenti
quaestione, etc.
there are four opinions: first, of the greeks who hold, that Christ did keep
his passover, and institute his Sacrament, the thiteenth day of the first
month: The second of Rupertus, who teaches, that the Hebrews were never wont
to celebrate two feast days together; and therefore when the feast of
unleavened bread fell the sixth day, it was wont to be deferred to the Saboth
following. This opinion of Rupertus both is false, and does not satisfy that
maine argument of the Greeks. The third of Paulus Burgensis, who holds, that
both the feast of unleavened bread, and of the Passover, might be deferred
upon the Tradition of the Elders, to the day following: and that in the year
wherein Christ suffered, the Hebrews did eat their Passover on Friday
evening, Christ his on Thursday in the evening. The fourth is, the common
opinion of Divines, that Christ instituted his Sacrament in that time, wherein
according to the law, and custom of the Jews, all leaven was cast away, which
was the 14. day, etc. This opinion is only true, etc. Bellarm. l. 4. c. 7. p.
455.

Eighthly, the Popish Doctors disagreeing.
THe Catholic Church has ever thought it so necessary, Porro Ecclesia
Catholica semper etc.
that water should be mixed with wine in the Chalice, that it cannot without a
grievous sin be omitted: But whether the Sacrament can consist without water,
it is not so certain: the common opinion leanes to the affirmative part.
Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 10. page 476.

Ninthly, Popish Divines differing.
Est igitur quaestio hoc loco tractanda, etc.
HEre is therefore a question to be handled, whether those only words ( For
this is my body, etc.) pertain to the form of the Sacrament: The Catholic
Church affirms it with great consent, Council Florent. Catech. of Council.
Trident, Divines with the Master of Sent. Lawyers: For although Divines
dispute, and cannot agree, whether all the several words, which are had in the
form of the consecration of the Chalice, in the Latin Masse-bookes, be of the
essence of the form thereof, yet all agree that they are of the integrity, and
perfection of the form; so as no one of them can without sin be omitted: and
their consent in this point is sufficient. Bellarm. l. 4. c. 12. p. 486.

Tenthly, Io. de Louanio against George Cassander.
Johan. de Louanio in his book of the Communion under both kinds, Johannes a
Louanio vbi praecipue etc.
chiefly confutes a B. of a certain Aduiser, who without any name set forth a
B. of this quest. persuading to this use: but after, it was known that the B.
was George Cassanders. Bellar. l. 4. c. 20. p. 538.

DECAD. V.
First, some Papists against the Council of Trent.
FIrst the opinion of some is to be confuted, Breuiter refellenda est opinio
eorum etc.
who hold, that from the words This is my body, is gathered, that whole Christ
is under the form of bread; for they say, that by the word ( Body) is
signified a living body, and therefore a body with a soul, and blood. But this
opinion is flatly contrary to the Council of Trent (Sess. 13. ca. 3.) who
teaches, that by the power of the words, only the body is there under the
form of bread; the soul, the Divinity, and blood, only by a Concomitance.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 21. p. 540.

Secondly, Alexand. Alensis and Gasper Cassalius against the common opinion.
Nihil spiritualis fructus capitur ex duabus.
THere is no spiritual fruit received by both kinds, which is not received by
one; this proposition is not so certain as the former: for our Divines are of
diverse judgments concerning it: But it is my opinion, and the common and most
probable assertion of Divines, of St. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, Richard, Gabriel,
Roffensis, Caietane, etc. And though Richardus seems to incline the other way:
yet he does it only to reconcile Alexander Alensis unto the common opinion:
for of all the ancients there is only Alexander (in 4. part. Sum. q. 53.)
which holds the contrary; and of the new writers Gasper Cassalius calls it
into doubt and question (in his second book of the Supper, etc.) Bellarm.
ibid. c. 23. p. 554.

Thirdly, Io. of Louan, Cornel. Iansenius opposite.
OF this place are two opinions of Catholics: De hoc loco duae sunt
Catholicorum sententiae.
First of John of Louan, and others, who hold, that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist was given to the two Disciples in Emmaus, and they bring for them
Austen, Chrysostom. Bid, Theophilact, Jerome, Isychius: The other of Cornelius
Iansenius upon the place, who teaches, that the bread blessed by Christ in
Emmaus, was not the Sacrament, but only a figure of it Bellarm. l. 4. cap. 24.
page 563.

Fourthly, two sorts of Popish Doctors dissenting.
WE teach, De modo autem loquendi, etc.
that the very Sacrament is to be adored (as the Council of Trent speaks)
but this manner of speech is taken two ways: Those that think the Sacrament of
the Eucharist to be formally the body of Christ, as he is under those forms;
do grant, that the Sacrament is justly said to be formally adored: But those
that say, the Sacrament of the Eucharist is formally the Species of bread and
wine, as they contain Christ, do teach consequently, that the said Sacrament
is materially to be adored. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 29. page 607.

Fifthly, Hugo de Sancto victore, Peter Lombard, Thomas, Rabanus, etc.
disagreeing.
MAny Catholics endeavor to show the word Missa (Mass) to be Hebrew, Plurimi
conantur, etc.
for Deuteronomy. 16. there is the word ((...)) in the same signification: and not the
Catholics only, but Philip Melanchton acknowledges this deriuation. Other (and
their opinion is more probable) hold it to be Latin; of whom also some hold it
to be ( a Mittendo) because our offerings and prayers are sent up to God. So
Hugo de Sancto victore (lib. 2. de Sacram.) Others less probably, for that an
Angel is sent from God to assist the Sacrifice, and carry it to God, as the
Master of Sent. and Thomas (3. p. q. 83.) But their opinion is most likely,
which derive it a missione, seu, dimissione populi: This opinion is Isidores,
Rabanus, and Hugo, and others later Divines admit this Etymology. Bellarm. de
Missa, l. 1. c. 1. p. 616.

Sixthly, Bellarmine against a nameles Doctor 1. G. Cassalius.
Near to this opinion of Melanchton seems to be a certain late Doctor, Ab
hac Philippi sententia non procul. etc.
a man otherwise learned and godly, who in his book of Sacrifice (chap. 5.)
teaches, that every good work, which is done, that we may in an holy
fellowshippe cleave to God, is a Sacrifice properly: But this opinion of his is
false, and may be confuted with many and manifest arguments. Bellarm. ibid. c.
2. p. 621.

Seventhly, Bellarmine against Arias Montanus.
THis testimony of Malach. 1. cannot be understood of the sacrifice of the
cross; Hoc testimonium non potest etc.
nor of any Jewish sacrifice, nor of the sacrifices of the heathen Idolaters;
wherefore the exposition of Arias Montanus is no way to be suffered; for it
does not only contradict the opinion of al those Fathers (which we will
straightway cite) but the Apostle himself, and the open truth: for to what
end were the blood of so many thousand Martyrs shed, for not communicating
with the Gentiles sacrifices, if those had been clean and acceptable to God.
Bellarm. 1. b. of Mass, cap. 10. page 679.

Eighthly, Cassalius confuted by Bellarm.
TO this purpose make all those places of the Fathers, Huc faciunt omnia loca
Patrum etc.
which teach, that there is one only sacrifice of the church, which succeeded
all the multitude of the old sacrifices. Leo, Chrysostom. Aug. etc. whence
appears, that the opinion of Gasper Cassalius in his 1. b. de sacrificio is
altogether improbable: who affirms, there are two sacrifices of the Eucharist;
one of bread and wine; another of the body and blood of Christ. Bellarm. b. 1.
of the Mass, c. 27. page 756.

Ninthly, diverse opinions of Popish Doctors.
THe consecration of the Eucharist belongs to the essence of the sacrifice;
Consecratio Eucharistiae, etc
This sentence thus generally proposed has many vpholders, for of the greeks
Nic. Cabasilas: of the latins Ruardus, Iodocus Tiletanus, Gasper Cassalius,
Alanus and others maintain it: But al hold it not a like. Some think it to be
therefore, because by the consecration there is made a true and real change of
the bread into Christ's body; and a true sacrifice requires such a mutation,
whereby the thing ceases to be. But this opinion has no small arguments against
it: Others think it to be, because by this consecration, Christ is truly
(though mystically, and vnblooodily)ffred. This opinion does not yet fully
satisfy: Thus therefore it seems to be set forth. There are three things in a
Sacrifice, which are found in the consecration of the Eucharist; first a
profane and earthly thing is made holy: Secondly, that thing, thus made holy,
is offered to God: Thirdly, the thing thus offered, is ordained to a true,
real, and external mutation, and distinction, etc. This seems to me the
opinion of St. Thomas (in 2.2. q. 85. art. 3.) Bellarm. ibid. c. 27. p. 759.

Tenthly, one or two Popish Doctors against the Council of Trent.
Sacrificium Missae etc.
THE Sacrifice of the Mass has not only, or principally his virtue from the
act of him, that offers it: but even from the work wrought, which is the
common opinion of Divines, and of the Council of Trent, (Sess. 22. c. 2.)
although there be one or two of our Writers found, that dissent from it.
Bellarm. 2. book of the Mass, c. 4. p. 773.

DECAD. VI.
First, Bellarm. against Platina and Polidor. Virgil.
Praeterea Damasus in Pontificali.
DAmasus in his Pontifical, in the life of Soter and Siluester Popes, amongst
other holy vessels, makes mention of Censers; wherefore it is false, which
Platina in the life of Sixtus 1. and Polidore Virgil in his book of the
Deuisers of things, write, that Leo 3. which lived An. Dom. 800. was the first,
that used Frankincense in the Mass. Bellarm. 2. b. of Mass, cap. 15. page 843.

Secondly, Bellarmine against other Papists.
THat Celestinus 1. was not the first Author of [the Introitus] in the Mass,
Conuenit fere inter authors, etc.
see defended by Bellarm. against the consent of their Writers, as himself
confesses. Bellarm. ibid. c. 16. p. 846.

Thirdly, Bellarmine against many Papists.
THat Anastasius 1. was not the first Author of standing at the Gospel, Quam
ceremoniam non ipse etc.
is held by Bellarmine against many of their writers. ibid. c. 16. p. 853.

Fourthly, four several opinions of Popish Doctors.
SCotus, Occam, and Gabriel (upon 4. Sent. did. 14.) place the essence of the
Sacrament of Penance, Jta ex Catholicis Theologis Scotus, etc.
in absolution only, etc. The question then is, whether there be any thing
besides absolution, which belongs to the nature and essence of this Sacrament.
Of this there are four opinions: the first is, that only absolution makes the
essence of this Sacrament. So of our Catholic Divines, Scotus, Occam, Io.
Mayor, Jacob. Almaine and others, etc. The last and truest opinion is, that the
Sacrament of penance consists of two parts, inward, and essential to it; the
absolution of the Priest, as the form, and the acts of the penitent, as the
matter; which was the opinion of many old Divines: St. Thomas, Richardus,
Durandus and others upon 4. Sent. did. 14. and is now held by almost all that
write of this Sacrament. Bellarm. 1. b. of penance, cap. 15. page 92.

Fifthly, Gratian and Bonauenture against the rest.
Deinde attexit varias esse opiniones Catholicorum etc.

Denique esto, non sit confessio iuris etc.


THen Chemnitius adds, that there are diverse opinions of our Catholics,
concerning the necessity of confession; and this he proves out of Gratian, and
a Gloss of his, and out of Bonauenture: these are all his fathers, etc. But
say that confession does not stand by the law of God, as Kemnitius would prove
out of a certain Gloss, which yet the Catholics mislike. Bellarm. 1. b. of
penance, cap, 11. page 79.

Sixthly, Scotus confuted by Bellarmine.
Neque Sco'us satis apt etc.
Neither is that aptly and well said by Scotus, that penance is the absolution
of the penitent, done in a set form of words, etc. For penance is the act of
the penitent, not of the Priest, and absolution is an act of the Priest, not of
the penitent. Bellarm. ibid. c. 15. p. 96.

Seventhly, Gropperus rejected by Bellarmine.
Jnprimis null ^unt Catholicorum etc.
THere is no Catholic writer which makes the matter of this Sacrament to be
only the action of the Priest, pronouncing absolution in a set form; save
only Gropperus, or whosoever was the Author of the Enchiridion Coloniense;
which sometimes seems to speak very vnheedely. For Divines would either have
it consist in absolution alone, or else they assign the matter to be on the
behalf of the penitent; the form from the Priest: which indeed is the
commonest opinion of almost all. Bellarmine 1. b. of pen. cap. 16. p. 98.

Eighthly, Scotists against Thomas, Bonauenture, and others: Vega, Ferrariensis,
etc.
THe Scotists object, Obijciunt tertio etc.
that absolution alone is the cause of grace, for that all the power of the
Sacrament rests in the keys; which are the Priests, not the penitents: I
answer first, by denying the consequent: the sacrament may consist of two
parts, and yet work only by one: as a man consists of body and soul, and yet
understands only by his soul: and this answer is followed by them, who place
the virtue of the Sacrament in absolution alone, which was once the opinion of
St. Thomas, and Saint Bonauenture, and other ancients upon 4. did. Sent. did.
18. and of the later, Andreas Vega, Francis of Ferrara, etc. Farther, it may be
answered, that absolution is indeed the principal cause of justification, not
the only cause; but that is partly in the keys of the Absoluer, partly in the
act of the penitent: So holds Saint Thomas (who recanted his former opinion) 3
part q. 86. art. 6. Bellarmine ibid. c. 16. p. 103.

Ninthly, Durandus against Thomas and the common opinion.
OF the division of Penance into contrition, Sequitur altera partitio, etc.
confession, satisfaction, there are two questions: One amongst the Catholics,
the other with the Heretics. The former is not, whether these three be
necessary, and absolutely to be used, but whether all be the true parts of the
Sacrament: For it was the opinion of Durandus (upon 4. did. 16. q. 1.) that
only confession is the material part of this Sacrament of penance, and that
contrition is the disposition toward it, and satisfaction the fruit of it. But
the common opinion of Divines, and of Saint Thomas (3. p. q. 90.) is, that all
three of them* are the true material parts of the Sacrament of Penance:
neither can now be doubted of, since it is flatly set down by two general
Councels of Florence and Trent, Bellarm. ibid. c. 17. p. 104.

Tenthly, Adrianus refuted by Bellarmine.
Neque probandum est quod Hadrianus etc.
THat there may be a conditional will (at the least) of things impossible, as
well as a desire of a thing lost: see defended against Adrianus, q. 1. de
paenitentia by Bellarm. l. 2. of penance, cap. 5. page 155.

DECAD. VII.
First, Io. Mayor, Iac. Almain, Andr. Vega against Thomas, Scotus, Durand,
Albert. Soto, Canus, etc.
BUT in this our Catholic writers do not agree, Porro Catholici Scriptores in
eo etc.
whether the purpose of a better life, and detestation of sin be expressly and
formally necessary to true contrition, or whether it be sufficient to have it
implicitly or confusedly, and virtually. The old Divines, as Peter Lombard,
Alexander Alensis, S. Thomas, Scotus, Durandus, Albertus, and others, simply
teach, that it is of the very essence of contrition, to detest our sin, and
to purpose amendment: and though they distinguish not betwixt a formal and
vertuall purpose, yet they plainly show, they mean a direct, formal purpose;
which was after more plainly taught by Pope Adrian. 6. in 5. quodl. art. 3.
Tho. Caietanus, Dominicus a Soto, Melchior Canus: yet there have been some
few, that have disputed against it, and contenting themselves with a virtual
purpose, which is concluded in the hatred of their sins, have denied that other
to be necessary. In this rank were Io. Mayor, Iac. Almayne, in. 4. Sent. d.
14. Andr. Vega upon the Council of Trent, c. 21. Bellarm. ibid. c. 6. p. 157.

Secondly, Capreolus, Dom. a Soto and others against Peter Lomb. Thomas,
Albertus, Bonauenture, etc.
IN this only do the Schoolmen seem here to disagree, Theologi Scholastici
in eo solum etc.
That some will have the act of penance, as also the act of faith and charity,
to be only a disposition to the remission of sins, and not to be any merit
(either of work or congruity) of the forgiveness of them: Of this opinion is
Io. Capreolus (upon 2. Sent d. 4. q. 1.) Dominicus a Soto (2. b. of Nature and
Grace, c. 4.) But other, and the most, hold those acts to be not only a
disposition toward, but a merit (by congruity) of our justification; which
opinion is the Masters of Sent. (b. 2. d. 27.) and St. Thomas (upon 2. d. 27.)
of Albertus, S. Bonauenture: Besides, of Scotus, Durandus, Gabriel, and others
upon 2. did 28. And of the later Writers Andreas Vega (8 b. upon the Council
of Trent.) Bellarm. ibid. c. 12. p. 185.

Thirdly, one Popish Doctor against the rest.
THe Catholic Doctors with common consent, are wont to teach, ^^quidem
Catholici doctores etc.
that contrition if it be perfect, and have the desire and vow of the Sacrament
of Baptism, or Absolution, reconciles a man to God, and remits sin before
the Sacrament of Penance be performed. But there was of late a Catholic
Doctor, who not many years since in a book which he wrote of charity, taught
against this common opinion. Bellarm. ib. c. 13. p. 191.

Fourthly, Armachanus confuted by Bellarmine.
RIchardus Armachanus in l. 9 quaest. Armen. cap. 27. taught it probable, that
for some great sins, Et Richardus Armachanus docuit, etc.
pardon could not be had, though the sinner should do whatsoever he could, for
obtaining it. But this we affirm, not as probable, but as certain, and
confessed of Catholics, that no multitude or haynousnes of sin can be such,
as may not be done away by true repentance. Bellarm. ibid. c. 15. p. 209.

Fifthly, Bellarmine against Richardus.
THat the sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, Secunda est Richardi in
libello de spiritu blasphemiae etc.
Richardus teaches to be, not in respect of the fault, but of the punishment;
because if a man repent not of it, none of his temporal punishment (required
to satisfaction) shall be forgiven. Bellarm. ibid. c. 16. Confuted by
Bellarmine by 3. arguments, page 219.

Sixthly, Rupertus opposed by Bellarmine.
THat fear, Errat enim Rupertus Abbas l. 9. etc.
which is one of the four passions of the mind, is not in it self evil: See
defended against Rupertus the Abbat, l. 9. de operibus spiritus, by Bellarm.
ibid. c. 17. p. 223.

Seventhly, the Council of Trent against Petr. Oxoniensis, Erasmus, Rhenamus.
Extitit etiam ante annos etc.
THere was about some hundredth year since, one Petrus Oxoniensis, which
affirmed, that the particular, and special confession of our sins in
several, is not required by any law of God, but only by some Decree of the
universal Church. In our age have held the same error Erasmus Roterodamus,
and Beatus Rhenanus, who hold, that secret confession of our several sins,
both, was never instituted, and commanded by any law of God, and besides, was
never in use with the ancient Church: Against all these mentioned errors, the
Council of Trent has determined. Sess. 14. c. 5. and Can. 7.8. Bellarm. 3. b.
of Penance, cap. 1. page 238.

Eighthly, Bellarmine against Thomas Waldensis, and others.
I Know that Thomas Waldensis [in 2. Tom. c. 141.] was of this mind, Non
ignoro Thomam VValdensem etc.
that he thought Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, did simply abrogate the
use of confession; and therein greatly offended: But I would not easily yield
to that: And I know that some have thought this whole History feigned, and
devised by Socrates; But I cannot be brought to believe, that a false History
could be written by him of a matter whereof many living in the time, when, and
where the thing was done, could convince him. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 14. page 320.

Ninthly, all Doctors against Ru. Tapperus, and perhaps Thomas.
Indeed Ruardus Tapperus a worthy Divine, Docet quidem Ruardus Tapperus
insignis Theologus etc.
teaches, that a man may satisfy God for his eternal guilt and punishment,
by certain acts, which in order of nature follow the infusion of justifying
grace, and go before remission of sins; and cyteth Thomas for his opinion
(upon 4. Sent. did. 15. qu. 5) Neither is it certain, whether St. Thomas
meant so, or no: It is enough for us, that all Doctors agree in this, that
before this grace received, no man can satisfy God. Bellarm. l. 4. of Penance,
c. 1. p. 341. Where also he endeavors to reconcile Andreas Vega, in his opinion
of our satisfaction to God, for the fault and offense of sin.

Tenthly, Thomas, Durand. Paludan. against Adrian, Caietane and Bellarmine.
ALthough the opinion of Thomas, Durandus, Add quod licet sententia sit Valde
etc.
Paludanus and others [vpon 4 Sent. did. 15.] be very likely, that
satisfaction is not rightly made to God by works, which are otherwise due to
be done, yet the opinion of Adrianus and Caietanus is not improbable; that we
do satisfy God even by works, otherwise due to him; since the satisfaction
we give to God does not belong to justice only, but to friendship also.
Bellarmine l. 4. cap. 13. page 402.

DECAD. VIII.
First, Scotus, Gabriel, and few others against Thomas, Richard, Durand,
Paludan, etc.
COncerning satisfaction enjoined by a Priest: Non concedit melior pars
Theologorum etc.
the better part of Catholic Divines do not grant, that the party confessing
may without sin refuse such a satisfaction: for although Scotus and Gabriel,
and some few others teach thus, yet the Master of Sent. S. Thomas, Richardus,
Durandus, Paludanus and many others (upon 4. did. 16.) hold, as we teach, That
a Priest has the keys, whereby he may not only absolve from guilt and
offense, but as a Judge, may in Gods steed bind unto punishment, which the
penitent cannot refuse, unless he resist the Judge set over him from heaven,
and by consequent God himself, Bellarm. li. 4. c. 13. page 402.

Secondly, the better Popish Divines against the worse.
Denique nemo Catholicorum d^cet, etc.
NO Catholic Doctor teaches, that works done in deadly sin do discharge from
death. Indeed some say, that the works done in mortal sin, are satisfactory,
if he which did the works, return again to the grace of God: But that they
are so, whiles he continues in deadly sin, no man (that I know) affirms;
yea our better Divines hold, that those works which are done in deadly sin,
neither are, nor ever can be satisfactorie. Bellarmine lib. 4. cap. 14. page
406.

Thirdly, Ruardus, Iansenius, Dominicus a Soto against Waldensis, and
Alphonsus, etc.
OF the place (Mar. 6.13.) we all agree not; De priore non omnes conueniunt.
whether that anointing which the Apostles used, were Sacramental, or only a
figure of this Sacrament: those which defend the first opinion are Thomas
Waldensis, and Alphonsus de Castro; but the later is surely the more probable,
which is the opinion of Ruardus, Iansenius, and Dominicus a Soto, and others.
Bellarmine in his book of extreme Unction, cap. 2. page 6.

Fourthly, Dominicus a Soto opposed by Bellarmine and all Divines.
SOme Catholics, Quidam Catholici inter quos etc.
amongst whom is Dominicus a Soto, think that bodily health is an absolute and
infallible effect of this Sacrament of anointing, etc. But this answer
pleases me not, since that all Divines, and also the very Councels of
Florence and Trent directly say, that bodily health is promised in this
Sacrament, only conditionally, if it may be expedient for the good of the
soul. Bellarm. ibid. c. 6. p. 21.

Fifthly, three dissenting opinions of Papists.
THere is yet one question amongst our Divines: For what be those remainders of
sin, Vna tantum est inter Theologos quaestio etc.
which are done away by this anointing? they do not all agree: Some would have
them venial sins, but improbably, for they may be wiped away without any
Sacrament. Others would have it to be, that pronenesse to sin, or habit which
remains of sin; but that is yet more unlikely. But I say that the remnants
of sin are double, both which are wiped away by this Sacrament. First are
those, which sometimes remain after all other Sacraments, whether they be
venial or mortal sins; for a man may after confession and communion fall
into a mortal sin, and not know it, etc.

Secondly, under the name of these remnants are understood that dullness,
heaviness, anxietie which uses to be left of sin, and which may vex a man
near his death, etc. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 8. p. 29. and 30.

Sixthly, Waldensis, Dominic. a Soto, Iansen. etc. disagreeing.
HEre is yet one doubt, Vna est tantum hoc in loco dubitatio etc.
in that Pope Innocentius 1. in his Epistle 1. chap. 8. says, that not only
Priests but Laymen in cases of their own, and others necessities, may anoile:
which opinion Beda upon Mar. 6. recytes in so many words, and the Council of
Worms, Can. 72. though Waldensis answers, that Innocentius his words are to
be understood of that time, and place where there are no Priests, and that
then, and there, it is lawful for Layickes to minister this Sacrament: But
this exposition is justly confuted of all Divines.

Dominicus a Soto understands Innocentius to speak of the use of Oil, for
healing of diseases, besides, and out of the business of the Sacrament: But
that seems to be against the use and practice of the Church: Others, more
truly (as Iansenius) say, that Innocentius speaks of the party to be
anointed, not of the Minister. Bellarmine in the same book, cap. 9. page 31.

Seventhly, the Council of Florence, Thomas, other Divines at variance.
THere are two usual Ceremonies in this Sacrament: Duae sunt ceremoniae etc.
One, that the Letany and other prayers be read before the anointing. The
second, that seven parts of the body be anointed; namely, the Eyes, Ears,
Nostrils, Mouth, hands, because of the five senses; Then the Reins, which are
the seats of lust; and lastly the feet, which have the power of motion and
execution: So is it prescribed by the Council of Florence. But some think
that none of all these annointings, is of the essense of the Sacrament, but
that it is sufficient (for that) if the sick man be anointed any where; the
rest to be but for Rite and solemnity: But others hold, that all those
several annointings are essential: But the common opinion (which also St.
Thomas holds) is, That the anointing of the five senses only is enough for
the essence of the Sacrament, and indeed respect of honesty seems to require
we should forbear the anointing of the Reins in women, etc. Bellarm. ibid.
cap. 10. p. 32.

Eighthly, old Schoolmen, and Dominicus a Soto against Petr. a Soto, Caietane,
Durand, Paludanus, etc.
Ordinatio ^ Episcopalis, etc.
ORdination of Bishops is a Sacrament, truly and properly so called: This
opinion, though it be denied of some old Schoolmen, and amongst the new, by
Dominicus a Soto ( lib. 10. de Instit.) yet is affirmed by the ancient
Fathers, and of the late, by Petrus a Soto, Caietane; and of some old
Schoolmen too, as Altisidoriensis, Io. Mayor, Scotus, Durand, Paludanus:
Though Durandus would have it one and the same Sacrament, with the Sacrament of
Priesthood: and lastly, of all the Canonists almost, upon Chapter Cleros, did. 21.
Bellarmine in his book of the Sacram. of Orders, cap. 5. page 44.

Ninthly, Durandus and Caietane opposed by Bellarmine and other Divines.
IT is very probable, De diaconis valde probabile est.
that the Ordination of Deacons is a Sacrament, though it be not certai^e, as a
matter of faith: that it is very probable, appears, first because it is
approved by the common opinion of Divines: Only Durandus there is, which
holds, that only Priesthood is the Sacrament of Orders, and with him
Caietanus, Tom. 1. Opusc. Tract. 11. Bellarm. ibid. c. 6. p. 48.

Tenthly, Durandus and Caietane against the rest.
FOr Sub-Deaconship there is not so great certainty as of Deaconship, Jam vero
de Subdia conantu etc.
for neither is it mentioned in Scripture, neither has the Ordination thereof
any imposition of hands, as appears by the fourth Council of Carthage, Can.
5. etc. But yet it is very probable, that this Order is a Sacrament also:
Only Durandus and Caietanus deny it. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 7. page 52.

DECAD. IX.
First, the old Schoolmen, and some new against Durand.
OF the lesser Orders, Denique de minoribus Ordinibus etc.
it is less probable that they are Sacraments, then of the Sub-deaconship: yet
it is the more probable opinion, that holds them all to be Sacraments, then
that which denies it: First, because all the old Schoolmen affirm it,
excepting only Durandus, and the grauer sort of the new, as Franciscus de
victoria, Petrus a Soto, etc. Bellarmine. ibid. cap. 8. page 53.

Secondly, Dominicus a Soto, and some others against Petr. a Soto, Ledesmius,
Hosius, etc.
THe third Controversy is, Sequitur tertia Controuersia etc.
of the matter and form of this Sacrament: for whereas in the Ordination of the
Priest and Deacon, there are two external signs, imposition of hands, and
reaching forth of an Instrument, as of the Chalice and Patin in the Priesthood:
The book of the Gospels in the Deaconship. The question is, whether of these
two signs are the essential matter of this Sacrament. Some think, that
imposition of hands is only accidental, and that the reaching forth of the
Instruments is only essential. So holds Dominicus a Soto (Did. 24. quaest.
1. art. 4.) and some others: But the more probable and true opinion is, That
not only the reaching out of the Instruments, but the imposition of hands
also, is the essential matter of this Sacrament: So affirms Petrus a Soto,
Martinus Ledesmius, Cardinal Hosius, etc. Bellarmine ibid. cap. 9. page 54.

Thirdly, Durandus against the rest.
OF the Catholic writers there is only Durandus, Ex Catholicis vnus est
Durandus.
who (upon 4. Did. 26. qu. 3.) holds, that Matrimony cannot be called a
Sacrament, save only Equiuocally: whom Chemnitius brings for his part;
forgetting, that by Durandus own confession, all our Divines teach the
contrary. Bellarmine of the Sacram. of Matrimony, c. 1. p. 66.

Fourthly, Alphonsus a Castro and Petr. a Soto against the Council of Florence
and Trent.
THere are some Catholics which hold, Non desunt Catholici qui admittant, etc.
that Matrimony is not properly a Sacrament of the new Law, but that it was so
in the old Law amongst the Jews, and so not instituted, but only confirmed by
Christ: So teaches Alphonsus a Castro 11. book against Here Is. Petrus a Soto
Lect. 2. of Matrimony, and some others. But I see not how that can be safely
defended; for the Council of Florence reckons up Matrimony amongst the
Sacraments of the new Law; and the Council of Trent Sess. 24. Can. 1. in flat
words, says, that the Sacrament of Matrimony was instituted by Christ in the
new Law. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 5. page 85.

Fifthly, two opinions of Popish Doctors differing.
De copula coniugali duae sunt etc.
COncerning carnal copulation, are two opinions of Catholics: Some teach, that
it neither is the Sacrament, nor part of the Sacrament, but only an act or
duty of Matrimony; and therefore only accidental in respect of the Sacrament
of Matrimony: Others would have it a part of the Sacrament, yet not an
essential part, but integrall; and therefore before copulation the Matrimony
is ratified, but not consummate. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 5. p. 91.

Sixthly, three different opinions of three ranks of Papists.
SOme hold (as Petrus Paludanus, Respondent aliqui vt Petrus etc.
Io. Capreolus, Io. Eckius) that those married persons which are converted to
Christianity, ought after their baptism to be married together again, and then
that their marriage is made a Sacrament: Others, as Tho. de Argentina, and
Paludanus, etc. say, that without any new contract, that Matrimony which before
Baptism was no Sacrament, straight after baptism become a Sacrament. But how
ever it be, the common opinion of Divines is, that the marriage of Infidels may
be true and lawful, but not ratified nor indissoluble: but if both be
converted, and baptized, their marriage becomes both ratified, and indissoluble,
and consequently a Sacrament. Bellarm. ibid. c. 5. p. 102.

Seventhly, Canus confuted by Bellarmine.
MElchior Canus while he strives for the defense of his new and singular
opinion, Canus autem dum pro sua opinione etc.
unwisely uses those arguments, whereby the Heretics of our time might vex
the Church; for in his 8. book of Theolog. places, chap. 5. he affirms, that
not every marriage lawfully contracted betwixt Christians, is a Sacrament, but
that only, which is celebrated by an Ecclesiastical Minister in set and
solemn words. See his opinion sharply confuted by Bellarmine, ibid. cap 6. and
7. which he concludes thus: That Canus goes about, so much as in him lies, to
prove that there is no true sacrament of Matrimony in the Church. page 103.104
etc.

Eighthly, diverse opinions of their Doctors.
SOme teach, Quidam enim docent, etc.
that the Patriarchs had but one lawful wife, and the rest were their
Concubines. Others not only teach, that those women were the true and lawful
wives of the Patriarchs, but also hold, that this was not forbidden, save
only by the positive law of the Gospel, which they would have the opinion of
St. Jerome and Augustine. There is a third opinion common in the Schools, that
the Patriarchs might by Gods dispensation marry more wives then one: but of
this are diverse conceits, some think that the several Patriarchs had a
peculiar inspiration from God for this dispensation: Others hold it enough that
this dispensation was made known by inspiration to the first Patriarchs, etc.
Bellarm. ibid cap. 11. page 136.

Ninthly, Erasmus, Catharinus, Caietanus against the other Popish Doctors.
Eandem sententiam etc.
ERasmus in his notes upon 1. Cor. 7. goes about largely to show, that in case
of fornication the Innocent party may marry again: And these notes were set
forth by Erasmus in the year of our Lord 1515. two years before Luthers
faction arose. And there are two other Catholics, which are possessed with the
same error: Ambrose Catharinus and Caietanus; for Catharinus concludes in his
notes upon Caietane, as from him; That from the Gospel it cannot be gathered,
that in case of fornication it is not lawful to marry again; but that this is
forbidden by diverse Canons, and therefore ought not to be done without the
authority of the Church. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 15. page 160.

Tenthly, Bellarmine against Canus.
Et Dominicus etc.
DOminicus a Soto upon 4. Sent. Did. 26. quaest. 2. affirms, that in his time
there were some which began to defend, that the essential form of this
Sacrament of Matrimony, are those words of the Priest, I join you together,
but yet that there was none, which durst commit this Opinion to Writing; whence
it follows, that the Opinion of Canus is new and singular, etc. Bellarmine in
his first Book of Matrimony, cap. 7. page 110.

Diverse opinions of Divines acknowledged: Canus Confuted.
THat which Canus says, Quod vero ille dicit, etc.
that our Divines write no certainety of this Sacrament, that they are
distracted into diverse opinions, helps his cause nothing at all; for though
our Divines follow diverse opinions of the matter of this Sacrament, yet of the
form and minister of it, they disagree not. See the confutation of Canus at
large, Chap. 8. etc. Bellarmine the same book, cap. 7. page 111.

DECAD. X.
First, Pet. Lombard, Bonauenture, Rich. Dominicus a Soto, against Thomas,
Scotus, Duran. Palud. Abulensis, etc.
IT is a question among our Doctors, Quaestio est inter doctores, etc.
whether Divorce so granted to the Jews, as that after it they might marry
again, were yielded to them as lawful, or as a lesser evil: Master of
Sentenc. Did. 33. Lib. 4. and Bonauentura, Richardus, Dominicus a Soto, and
others hold it was ever unlawful, but only tolerated with impunity, for the
avoiding of a greater evil: But the contrary opinion (I must confess) ever
seemed to me most probable, which is defended by Saint Thomas, Scotus,
Durandus, Paludanus, Abulensis, Eckius, Dominicus a Soto. Bellarmine the same
book, cap. 17. page 192.

Secondly, Erasmus and Gropperus against the rest.
Primus videtur Erasmus etc.
ERasmus was the first that called this matter into Controversy: Whether the
consent of Parents be required to the essence of Matrimony; but the Catholic
Doctors are so far from doubting of this point, as that they never number the
want of Parents consent, amongst the impediments of Matrimony, and the Council
of Trent accurses them which shall hold marriage, without consent of Parents
void, or voydable by parents. All the old Divines, and amongst them St. Tho. in
4. d. 28. and the most of the learned new writers, as Ruard. Petr. and Dominic.
a Soto, and others, teach, that Matrimony without consent and knowledge of
parents, is not only true marriage, but also a true Sacrament: Indeed
Gropperus denies this Clandestine Matrimony to be a Sacrament, wherein he is
manifestly deceived, and contradicts both St. Thomas and all sounder Divines.
Bellarm. ibid. cap. 19, and 20. page 201.202. etc.

Thirdly, Thomas, Bonauent. Albert. Richard. Durand. Dominicus a Soto, against
Scotus, Paludan, Caietane, and all Canonists.
IT is a Controversy among Catholics, Quaestio igitur etc.
by what Law a solemn vow dissolueth that Matrimony, which is contracted
after the said vow; whether by the Law natural and Divine, or only
Ecclesiastical and positive: For many, and those grave Divines Saint Thomas,
Saint Bonauenture, Albertus, Richardus, Durandus, and Dominicus a Soto hold,
that a solemn vow dissolues Matrimony by the Law of GOD and nature: but many
deny their grounds, as Scotus, Paludanus, and Caietane, and all the
Interpreters of the Canon law, as Panormitanus witnesses: who thinks, that
this dissolution is only warranted by the Decree of the Church. Bellarm. ibid.
c. 21. page 217.

Fourthly, Caietane against the common opinion.
COncerning these four forbidden degrees, De his quatuor gradibus etc.
some Doctors have denied, that they are forbidden by the law of nature,
amongst whom is Caietane, in 2.2. q. 154. But yet the commoner and truer
opinion teaches the contrary. Bellarm. ibid. c. 28. p. 278.

Fifthly, Albertus, Thomas, Bellarmine, and others against Pet. Lombard, Io.
Scotus, etc.
Non desunt quidem Theologi.
THere be some of our Divines, which separate Original justice given to our
first Parent, in his Creation, from that Grace which we call ( Gratum
facientem) and which teach, that Adam received indeed at first a certain
habit, which subjected the inferior part of the soul to the superior; but
not this saving Grace, which makes us the Sons and friends of GOD, and is
necessary to the earning of eternal life; Of which opinion were Peter Lombard,
2. Sent. Did. 24. and after him Io. Scotus and certain other. We follow
Albertus Magnus, Saint Thomas and others, which conioyne Original justice with
the said Grace, etc. Bellarmine in his book of the grace given to our first
Parents, cap. 3. page 9.

Sixthly, some learned Papists confuted by Bellarmine.
THE State of Adam after his fall, Quare non magis differt, etc.
differed no otherwise from his estate in his pure naturalles, then a stripped
man from a naked, neither is man's nature ever a whit the worse, if you only
take away his Original fault; neither is more ignorant and weak, then it
would have been in his mere naturals: therefore the corruption of nature is
not of the want of any natural gift, or the addition of any ill quality, but
only from the loss of his supernatural gift, from Adams sin, which is the
common opinion of Schoolmen, both old and new: neither did we learn this
which we teach from Dominicus a Soto only: neither has Saint Thomas and
other approved Authors written the contrary (as some otherwise very learned men
do hold) but as I said, this is the commoner Opinion, as shall appear by the
testimonies following. Bellarmine in his book of the grace given to our first
parents, cap. 5. page 21.

Seventhly, Bellarmine against Eugubinus.
THE Pelagians held, Prior fuit Pelagianorum etc.
that man should have died though he had not sinned: to which error
Augustinus Eugubinus comes very near in his notes upon Genes. 2. Bellarmine in
the same book of the grace given to mankind in our first Parent, cap. 8. page
46.

Eighthly, Franc. Georgius refuted by Bellarmine.
SOme of the Ancients have turned all that History of Paradise, the Rivers
and Trees, Non defuerunt ex veteribus etc
into mere Allegories, as Philo, Valentinus Haeresiarcha, Origenes: But in our
age Franciscus Georgius, 1. Tom. of Problemes, and in his Harmony of the World,
Cant. 1. Tom. 7. chap. 21. has gone about to receive and defend this opinion,
long since condemned by the fathers. Bellarm. ibid. c. 10. p. 53.

Ninthly, Aug. Eugubinus, Hier. de Oleastro, Vatablus, Iansenius rejected by
Bellarmine.
Quaerta opinio est recentiorum. etc.
THe fourth opinion is, of some later Writers, Augustine Eugubinus, Hierome de
Oleastro, Francis Vatablus, Cornelius Iansenius that hold, Paradise was in
Mesopotamia, but that in the time of the Deluge, the beauty and pleasure of it
so faded, that there was no show of a Paradise, and therefore now there is no
more guard of the Angel, or flaming sword: But for many causes I cannot like
this opinion. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 12. page 62.

Tenthly, the later Papists against the ancient.
Howsoever the later writers, which we cyted before; Eugubinus, Et quidem
recentiores illi etc.
Iansenius and others, hold the contrary; yet since I never read any of the
ancient, which have held the earthly Paradise to be perished, either by waters
or by any other cause: And I have found many that affirm it is yet extant, as
almost all the Schoolmen (upon 2. Sent. d. 17.) and Saint Thomas: besides,
Iren. Hierom. Augustine, Theodoret, Bid, etc. and others: I dare not dissent
from so common and received an opinion, Bellarm. ibid. cap. 14. page 68.

THE PEACE OF ROME. THE THIRD BOOK OR CENTVRY.
DECAD. I.
First, Bellarm. against S. Tho. and other Schoolmen.
IT is held by Io. Damascenus, Et quidem Johannes Damascenus, etc.
St. Thomas, and other of the Schoolmen, that men only, and not brute
creatures should have had place in Paradise, if man had not sinned; But the
authority of Saint Basil and Saint Austin, which teach the contrary,
prevails more with me: See the confutation. Bellarmine the same book, cap.
15. page 71.

Secondly, the Schoolmen opposed by Bellarmine.
St. Austin whom the Schoolmen in this do follow, Vna sancti Augustini quem
Scholastici etc.
holds, that the tree of life was appointed to defend that death, which uses
to ensue upon old age: the opinion of many other Fathers, and I think very
agreeable to Scripture, and reason, is quite otherwise; namely, that this Tree
had this power, that once tasted of, it could give perfect immortality, such as
we shall have after our resurrection, etc. This I confess I like better of the
two. Bellarmine ibid. c. 18. page 74.

Thirdly, Bellarmine against Alphonsus de Castro.
I Marvel what Alphosus de Castro meant, Quocirca valde mirum est etc.
to write that Saint Jerome never ascribed this error of the equality of
sins to Iouinian, for in many pages in his second book against Iouinian, he
both names him, and answers his Arguments for this purpose. Bellarm. in his
first book of the loss of grace and State of sin, cap. 4. page 97.

Fourthly, Io. Gerson and Io. Rossensis against Lombard and the rest, and
Jacob. Almaine.
His omnibus erroribus contraria est sententia Theolog. Catholicorum etc.
THe Catholic Divines in the Master of Sent. 2. B. Did. 42. and Saint Thomas
out of the consent of almost all writers teach, that some sins of their own
nature (without all respect to Predestination, or reprobation of the state of
the regenerate, or unregenerate) are deadly, and others venial, and that by
the first, man is made unworthy of Gods favor, and guilty of death; by the
other liable only to some temporal punishment, and fatherly chastisement:
Only Io. Gerson, 3. p. Theol. Tract. 3. and Io. of Rochester in his refutation
of 32. Art. of Luther, and Iacobus Almaine must be excepted, which differ
somewhat herein from the common opinion of Divines. Bellarm. ibid. c. 4. p. 102.

Fifthly, Bellarmine and Thomas against Scotus and Bonauenture.
THE common opinion of Catholic Divines is, that Eues first sin was pride,
At sententiae communis etc.
yea S. Thomas holds, that the first sin of both our first Parents was
pride, 2.2. quaest. 163. S. Bonauenture and Scotus hold, that Adams first sin
was inordinate love to his wife, not of concupiscence, but of humane kindness.
The other opinion is to be received rather: See the confutation of Scotus and
Bonauenture, cha. 5. Bellarm. 3. book of the loss of grace, etc. c. 4. p. 278.

Sixthly, different opinions of ancient Fathers, maintained by some Papists.
SOme think, that Eve believed not, Aliqui docent etc.
that death should follow upon the eating of the forbidden tree, but rather
believed, that GOD had lied to them, and upon envy forbad that so excellent
and wholesome fruit. So teach Cyrill, Chrysostom, Augustine, Rupertus, Rabanus,
and many others. Others think, that Eve believed that the same fruit was not
indeed forbidden by God, and that she and her husband had mistook the words
of GOD: This opinion is noted by Augustine book 11. Genesis ad literam, cap. 30.
and by Epiphanius in the heresy of Cainites. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 6. page 290.

Seventhly, Scotus and some few others against Thomas, Albert, Bonauenture,
Richard, Durand.
SOme there are which think, that the first sin of our first Parents might
have been venial: Et quidem non desunt.
So holds Scotus (upon 2. Senten. Did. 21.) and some few others which
follow him: But the greater Divines teach contrary, as Saint Thomas, Albert,
Saint Bonauenture, Richardus, Durandus, Egidius, and others, upon 2. Sent.
Did. 21. and Alexander Alensis in Sum. Theol. p. 2. q. 104. Bellarm. ibid.
cap. 8. page 298.

Eighthly, Bellarmine against the Schoolmen, with Chrysostom.
Et quidem S. Johannes Chrysostom.
SAaint Chrysostom directly teaches, that the sin of Eve was more heinous
then Adams, which opinion most of the Schoolmen follow, upon 2. Sent. Did.
22. Contrarily, Saint Ambrose by many Arguments, proves, that the man sinned
worse then the woman: Saint Austin so speaks, as if he thought the sins of
both equal: Bellarmine allows Chrysostomes opinion for probable, but yields
rather to Ambrose, and concludes, that absolutely the man sinned worse then the
woman, though in respect of some acts, the woman sinned equally to him.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 9. p. 299.

Ninthly, three ranks of Popish Doctors dissenting.
COncerning the Traduction of Original sin, Explicandus est modus etc.
Saint Austin holds thus: That either both Body and Soul is corrupted in the
deriuation of it, (according to their Opinion, which hold the Soul
propagated) or that the Soul is corrupted in the Body, as in an unclean
vessel, according to them which hold the Soul created by God, and only the
corrupted flesh taken from our parents: Further, Austin writes, that the flesh
is corrupted, because it is begotten in lust; and that it is not Generation but
lust, which properly traduceth sin, as August. in his first book De peccat.
meritis, and 1. B. De nuptijs and concup. But this opinion, if it be taken as
the words sound (as it is indeed understood by Peter Lombard, Gregory
Ariminensis, and Gabriel) seems not to be suffered. Others hold, that the
Soul is defiled with the Body, because the flesh destitute of Original
justice, and grown rebellious to reason, draws away the soul, and inclines
it amiss: so think Alexander Alensis and S. Bonauenture: but this opinion is
confuted by the same arguments. There is another opinion, which I doubt not is
the truest, of Saint Anselme, Saint Thomas, Scotus, Durandus, and others upon
2. Sent. did. 31. That to the traducing of Original sin, nothing is
required, but that a man be by true generation descended from Adam, for in that
he was in Adams loins when he transgressed, he did communicate with his
sin. Bellarmines 4. book of loss of grace, cap. 12 page 400.

Tenthly* some Popish Doctors against Thomas Aquin* and others.
Quod ad priorem etc.
ALl hold, that no sin could have been traduced to mankind, if Eve alone had
sinned: But in this they differ, that some think from Eues sin alone; there
would have grown a necessity of dying to her sons, and the other
inconveniences that follow mortality: Others hold, that neither sin nor
necessity of dying would have followed: This latter opinion is Saint Thomases,
1.2. q. 81. and without doubt very true. Bellarm. ibid. c. 13. p. 402.

DECAD. II.
First, all Divines against Thomas Aquin.
THe common opinion is, Communis sententia est si primus, etc.
that if the first man had not sinned, whosoever else should sin, his offense
should have bin personal and particular, and therefore could not infect and
defile his posterity: but yet S. Thomas seems to hold the contrary in his 5.
quaest. of evil, art 4. but perhaps the place is corrupted. Bellarm. l. 4. c.
13. p. 403.

Secondly, Capreolus, Caietanus and others against the common opinion.
THough some Catholics hold, Tametsi non desint. inter Catholicos, etc.
that opinion to have some more inclination to the truth, which exempts none
but Christ from the state of original sin, yet even those Authors do not
condemn the contrary opinion as erroneous, neither indeed can, unless they
will resist the Decrees of the general Council of Trent, and of Sixtus 4. and
Pius the 5. Popes, which if they did, they should not be reckoned for
Catholics; and of this opinion were Capreolus, Caietanus and others. Bellarm.
l. 4. c. 15. and 16. page 409.

Thirdly, Bellarmine against some namelesse Papists.
THere are that hold, the blessed Virgin sinned not in Adam; Non desunt qui
existiment.
for, they say, that the law of not eating of the tree of the Knowledge of good
and evil, was given to our parents for themselves and their posterity, except
the Virgin Marie; which opinion seems to me not safe to be defended. Bellarm.
ibid. cap. 16. page 418.

Fourthly, Hofmeisterus and Viruesius confuted by Bellar.
Ex nostris Ioha^nes etc.
OF our writers John Hofmeisterus, and Alphonsus Viruesius do scarce
acknowledge, there is any difference in this article of Original sin,
betwixt us and the heretics; but if it be well considered, there is a double
difference in our doctrine. Bellarm. l. 5. of the loss of grace, cap. 4. p.
460.

Fifthly, the Council of Trent against Pighius and Catharinus.
Non vnum in omnibus etc.
THe Council of Trent has defined, that original sin is not as one, and the
same in all; but that every man has his own proper birth-sinne, against the
false opinion of Pighius and Catharinus. Bellarm. ibid. c. 6. p. 472.

Sixthly, two ranks of Popish Doctors opposed by Bellarm.
THere do now remain two incommodious opinions of Catholics to be confuted.
Nunc refutand^e sunt duae etc.
Some therefore of our authors, would have original sin to be nothing but
concupiscence: that is, a faulty quality in the mind, evermore stirring up
wicked desires: so holds Peter Lombard (in 2. Sent. d. 31.) Henricus [b. 2. q.
11.] Gregorius Ariminensis; and of the later Io.Driedo: But this difference is
betwixt Henry and Gregory; that Henry holds, that evil quality of the Soul,
to be a pronenesse to all evil: Gregory restrains it to the inclination unto
that thing, which is carnally delightful. This opinion (me thinks) cannot be
defended. (And a little after) In all this we agree with Peter Lombard,
Henricus, Gregory and the rest: Only here lies the question, Whether this
faultines of nature be a positive quality, or not: and whether it be properly
and formally original sin: they affirm both, we deny both. Bellarm. ib. c,
15. p. 548

Seventhly, Albert Pighius, and Catharinus, and some ancient confuted by
Bellarmine.
LAstly remains to be confuted, Restat vltimus error.
the error of Albertus Pighius, Ambrosius Catharinus, and some of the ancient,
as Pet. Lomb. reports; which is, that original sin is nothing else but the first
disobedience of Adam, whereby the precept of God, for not eating of the
forbidden tree was broken, etc. but it is false and heretical, that original
sin is nothing else, besides the first actual transgression of Adam, etc.
Bellarm* ibid. cap. 16. page 555.

Eighthly, four sorts of Popish Doctors at irreconcilable variance.
Quinque numerantur sententiae etc.
THere are five opinions of the estate and punishment of Infants vn-baptized,
after this life: first of those which durst promise the Kingdom of heaven to
them; though they denied not, that they were borne in original sin: so held
one Vincentius of old, and now lately Zuinglius, and many of the Sectaries of
these times. The second of them which exclude them from heaven, but yet yield
them an eternal and natural blessedness, free from all sorrow and trouble,
out of the Kingdom of the blessed, and far from the prison of the damned: so
did the Pelagians hold, as August. b. of heresies, chap. 88. near to which
opinion are Ambrosius Catharinus Albertus Pighius, and Hierome Sauanarola. The
third is, that Infants dying without baptism are damned in hell to eternal
death, but yet so punished with want of the vision of God, as that in the mean
time they suffer no pain, neither inward nor outward: so teaches S. Thomas in
q. 4. of evil, art. 1.2. etc. and some other School Doctors [vpon 2. Sent. d.
23.] The fourth opinion exempts such infants from the torment of the fire and
worm, whereof we read (Mar. 9.) but not from an inward sorrow, for the loss
of their eternal blessedness. So teaches Peter Lombard (upon 2. Sent.) and
after him some others, as S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, and Gregory Ariminensis,
and others report. The fifth, which is the seuerest opinion, teaches, that
Infants for their original sin, are perpetually tormented in hell, with both
sorts of punishment, of loss, and of sense: to which opinion incline Gregorius
Ariminensis, Io. Driedo. Bellarm. 6. b. of the loss of grace. c. 1. p. 174*
175.

Ninthly, two sorts of Popish Writers opposite.
THe place wherein such Infants do, Locus in quo paruuli degunt etc.
and shall live, is the prison of hell; a place dark and horrible, as almost
all the Schoole-Diuines teach, Saint Thomas, S. Bonauenture, Scotus, Durandus,
Richardus, Capreolus, and others upon 2. Sent. did. 33. and besides, Alexander
Alensis, and Albertus. This difference only there is betwixt these old
Divines, that some place Infants in the higher part of hell, which they call
Limbum puerorum, the verge of Infants: others say, they have one common place
with the damned. Thus the fathers of the Florentine Council teach, etc.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 2. p. 582.

Tenthly, Durandus, Thomas, Bonauenture, Richardus differing.
SOme of the old Schoolmen have held, Aliqui veterum Scholasticorum.
that those infants shall therefore have no sorrow, for the loss of blessedness,
because they shall not know they have lost it, which may be done only by
faith: this reason is approved by Thomas in qu. 2. de malo, but himself
reproues it in 2. Sent. did. 33. quaest. 2. Durandus upon the same place
defends it. Bonauenture has devised another reason: Thomas a third: and
Richardus upon the same place, seeing that the foresaid reasons did not give
satisfaction, adds a fourth, and says: that infants know they are fallen from
happiness, and yet are not sad, it comes to pass by a singular providence
of God which remoues sorrow from their minds. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 6. page 609.

DECAD. III.
First, Albert Pighius and Peter Lombard, with Scotus against the rest, etc.
Ad hanc sententiam accessit Albertus etc.
THat no part of justice stands in any quality or habit of ours, but all wholly
in Gods free acceptance, is held by Calvin, Kemnitius, Heshusius: and to this
opinion of the heretics comes Albertus Pighius (otherwise a Catholic Doctor)
but in some questions (as Ruardus Tapperus noted before us) miserably seduced
by reading of Caluins books: for thus Pighius writes in his fifth book of
Freewill: We will fetch the diverse acceptions of grace from the Scriptures,
not from the Schools; for in them commonly they immagine, that the grace of
God is some quality created in our souls by God, etc. all which I think false
and feined, and to have no authority from scripture: thus Pighius. But the
common opinion of Divines constantly teaches, that a supernatural habit is
infused into us by God, whereby the soul is garnished and perfited, and so
made acceptable to God. For though Peter Lombard in 1. Sent. did. 17. seem to
say, that charity is not an habit, but the very holy Ghost himself, yet it
appears in the same book did. 37. he meant, that the spirit of God dwells
not in them only, which know and love him, but even in Infants by some habit:
wherefore Io. Scotus holds, that Peter Lombards opinion may well be expounded
and defended; but St. Thomas and other Divines reprove his opinion, as if he
denied the habit of charity. Bellarm. of grace and freewill, l. 1. cap. 3.
page 50.

Secondly, four diverse opinions of Popish Doctors.
WHether the habit of grace be the same with the habit of charity, Vtrum
habitus gratiae.
there are four opinions of Divines: for some would have this justifying grace
( gratum facientem) to be an habit, in nature and respects different from
charity, as St. Thomas, Capreolus, Caietanus, Ferrariensis, Dominicus a Soto.
Others make not a real, but a formal distinction betwixt them, as Albertus
Magnus, Alexander Alensis, and perhaps St. Bonauenture upon 2. Sent. did. 26
Others hold them neither in deed nor formally, but only in certain respects
different; and this is the judgment of Alexander Alensis, who belike changed
his opinion, Richardus, Scotus, Mayro. Gabriel, Mayor, Henry of Gaunt, and
Andreas Vega. Others hold, there is no difference at all betwixt them, save in
name only. So Durandus upon 2. did. 26. q. The third opinion seems to be
most probable, and more agreeing to Scripture, Fathers, and Council of Trent.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 6. p. 63.

Thirdly, Thomas and all Divines against Peter Lombard.
Operae precium esse duximus. etc.
WE thought it meet to confute the opinion of them, which teach, that charity
whereby we love God, is not any created habit, but the very person of the holy
Ghost, which uses to be accounted Lombards opinion. But we must think Pet.
Lomb. was not gross, and dull, to think the very act of love, which we our
selves produce, is the very holy Ghost: but this was it, that Lombard taught,
that the very next immediate cause, or ground of the love of God, is the spirit
of God in us, and not any created habit, as of faith, hope, and the rest;
which opinion all Divines confute in their Commentaries (on the 1. book Sent.
did. 17.) especially Saint Thomas (in 2.2. q. 23.) and in his questions, who
answers 24. objections that might be made for Lombards opinion. Bellarm.
ibid. c. 8. p. 77.

Fourthly, three ranks of Popish Writers at variance.
Whence grace proves effectual, Vnde sumatur efficacia gratiae etc.
are three opinions: The first of them, which hold the efficacy of grace to
stand in the assent and cooperation of man's will: and therefore these hold it
in man's power to make grace effectual, which otherwise in it self would be
but sufficient. The other of those, which think effectual grace to be the
natural action of God, which determines the will, to will and choose that good,
which was inspired to them by exciting grace: This opinion seems either the
same with the error of the Caluinists and Lutherans, or very little different;
The Abettors of this opinion like it, because they think it is Augustines: but
that it was not his, may be showed by four arguments, etc. The third, is the
mean between both these extremes. Bellarmine ibid. c. 12. p. 97.98. etc.

Fifthly, Popish Divines divided.
MAny Catholic Divines, and almost all, teach, Theologi Catholici quam plurimi
etc.
that every man has sufficient grace given him for the place and time, and yet
without preventing grace no man can desire or receive it. So Alexander Alensis,
Albertus Magnus, S. Thomas, Bonauent. Scotus, P. Adrian, Io. Roffensis, etc.
Bellarm. l. 2. of grace and freewill, c. 1. p. 116.

Sixthly, Andr* Vega against Abulensis, Adrian, Caietane, Roffensis.
Auxilium dei sufficiens etc.
ALthough sufficient and necessary aid to rise from sin, be not wanting to
any man for the time and place, yet it is not present at all times: This
proposition is not mine only, but it is confirmed by Abulensis, Adrianus 6.
Caietane, Roffensis, Driedo, Tapperus. But Andreas Vega says, that sinners may
be at any or every time converted, yet he adds, that they cannot at every time
bring that their possibility to effect: so he partly affirms, and partly
denies it. Bellarm. l. 2. c. 6. p. 131.

Seventhly, Thomas, and Caietane, and Bellarmine against other Doctors.
Disputant quidem Theologi etc.
Divines indeed dispute, whether predestination belong rather to the
understanding, or to the will: But I like the opinion of Cardinal Caietane and
St. Thomas, who hold it rather of the understanding; and the rather, because it
is Saint Augustines in his book De bono perseuerant. cap. 17. Bellarm. ib. c.
9. p 154.

Eighthly, Ambros. Catharinus and some others confuted by Bellarmine.
Sed explicemus paulo fusius, etc.
BUT let us more at large expound that principal place out of Romans 9. because
Ambros. Catharinus, and some other new Writers take it amiss. Bellarm. ibid.
cap. 10. page 157.

Ninthly, some namelesse Authors confuted by Bellarm.
THE distinction which some Catholics make betwixt predestination and
election; Propter hoc argumentum non defuerunt etc.
that predestination is before election; predestination is the means, election
respects the glory it self; predestination is free, election depends on the
praeuision of our good works. See by Bellarmine (the same book, cap. 15. p.
186.) confuted, as disagreeing from Scripture and reason.

Tenthly, eight several opinions of Popish Doctors.
THe first opinion is, Sunt autem de hac re multae Theologorum sententiae etc.
That freewill does consist properly in our act, not in any habit, etc. so
teaches Herueus (1. quodlibet. q. 1.) who places freewill in those acts of the
understanding and will, which go before deliberation, or the conclusion of
deliberation. The second is, Bonauentures opinion, who places freewill in a
certain natural habit, arising from reason and will (upon 2. Sent. Did. 23.
art. 1.) The third is Albertus opinion, that freewill it is a power of the
soul, perfected by a natural habit. The fourth, that freewill is an
universal power, or faculty, containing under it all the powers of the
understanding and sensitive soul. This opinion is reported without name by
Saint Bonauenture and Saint Thomas. The fifth is, of Alexander Alensis, which
teaches, that freewill is a particular power or faculty of the soul, and
distinct from reason and will (in p. 2. Sum. q. 74. etc.) The sixth is Durandus
(upon 2. Sent. d. 24. q. 3.) who teaches, that freewill is the very power of
reason and will, but more especially of reason. The seventh is the opinion of
Henricus and Scotus (in 2. Sent. did. 25.) who hold, that freewill is but one
particular faculty, even the will it self; and that it is so free, that it
does not depend so much as upon the practical Judgment of reason. The eight
is the opinion of S. Thomas (1. part. Sum. q. 83.) and (in 1.2. q. 13. etc.)
Richardus Capreolus, Conradus, Caietanus, and others, which hold, that freewill
is indeed one particular faculty, even the will it self (as the former
opinion) but they add, that the root of this freedom is in reason, and that
the will wholly depends upon the last judgment of practical reason, which
opinion seems to me to be the truest. Bellarm. l. 3. cap. 7. page 221.

DECAD. IIII.
First, Occam against the common opinion.
Tametsi Gul. Occam in l. 3. Sent. q. 13.
ALthough Gul. Occam write, that the object of the will is any thing that has
being, whether it be good or evil; so that it can be set upon evil, as it is
evil: yet the common opinion of Divines is contrary, etc. and amongst the rest
of Saint Thomas in 1. part, q. 20. art. 1. etc. Bellarm. ibid. c. 12. p. 248.

Secondly, three ranks of Popish Divines disagreeing.
ABout the object of freewill, Tres de hac re sententiae etc.
there are three opinions; The first of Pet. Lombard, Occam, Gabriel, who hold,
that all things which are present, are necessary, and cannot be otherwise; and
therefore that future actions alone are in the power of freewill.

The second of Gregorius Ariminensis (upon 1. Sent. d. 39.) which thinks, that
the entering into an action, even for the present, may be free, but that some
continuance, is altogether necessary.

The third is more common in Schools, and more true, which is declared and
defended by Io. Scotus, Capreolus, and Hersubcus: that freewill has in his
power, not only future, but present actions, and not only in their entrance,
but continuance also. Bellar. ibid. cap. 13. page 251.

Thirdly, Scotus and Henric* against Thom* and Capreolus.
COncerning the first act of the will, Tres enim Theologorum.
whether it be simply free, as Scotus and Henricus hold, or whether it be
wrought wholly by God alone, so as the will is but only passive, as Capreolus
and Saint Thomas (by Capreolus report) or whether thirdly, it be efficiently of
the will, but yet of God as the author of it: as following upon that natural
inclination, which God has set in the will, as Caietane, Ferrariensis, and
Saint Thomas. See Bellarmine same book, cap. 14. page 256.

Fourthly, Petrus ab Aliaco against Saint Thomas and other Divines.
Vna solum controuersia rema net.
ONe Controversy remains, whether by the light of reason alone, we can know
that there is a God, and that he is one. Of our men Petrus ab Aliaco in 2.
Sent. q. 3. writes, that we can know nothing at all of God, without a special
help of grace: but almost all Divines, and especially Saint Thomas, teach the
contrary; who doubt not to call that opinion erroneous. Bellarmine in his
fourth book of grace and freewill, c. 2. p. 277.

Fifthly, Durandus against all Divines: some other namelesse against the rest.
Duo siquidem contrarij errores etc.
OF actions natural, or civil, or manual (without consideration of any moral
good or evil in them) whether they could be done of us, by the only power of
nature, there have been two contrary errors: for some have taught that man as
well as other things, can do his works without any help of God, whether
general or special. So Origin seems to hold, as Saint Thomas notes: so also
the Pelagians, and amongst others Durandus upon 2. Sent. did. 1. quaest. 5.
Others have held in an other extreme, that God does so immediately and
properly work all things, that the second causes do just nothing; but in their
presence God does all. Saint Thomas reports this opinion, in quaest* de
potentia art. 7. The true and common opinion of Divines is between both.
Bellarmine the fourth book, cap. 4. page 285.

Sixthly, Saint Thomas, Gregory, Gabriel, Buridan, Andreas de Castro, Laurent.
Valla, in three ranks against one another.
ONe of the maine Controversies of this matter is, Tertia quaestio quae vna ex
principalibus etc.
whether man have freewill in natural and civil actions, whereof are three
opinions: First, of well near all Catholics, that not only man is of
freewill in the foresaid actions, but that this is evident, both in the light
of nature and doctrine of faith, as Saint Thomas (above others (in quaest. 6.
de malo) and Gregory, Gabriell, and others upon 2. Sent. d. 25. The second of
some Catholics, which hold it certain by the doctrine of faith, not by the
light of reason, that man has this freewill. So teach Io. Buridanus 3. Ethic.
q. 1. Andr. de Castro, 1. Sent. d. 45. cyted by Ruardus, etc. The third
opinion, or heresy rather, is of Laurentius Valla in his book of freewill,
etc. and Bucer, who teach, that man has not freewill in any thing, in this
state of his corrupted nature; no not in things indifferent and civil.
Bellarm. l. 4. c. 5. p. 289.

Seventhly, Caietane, Durandus, and another sort vn-named against each other,
and Bellarm. against all.
Concordiam istam liberi arbitrij etc.
THE cooperation of Gods providence with man's freewill, Caietane thinks cannot
be expressed: Contrary, Durandus thinks he has sufficiently unfolded it, when
he teaches, that there is no concourse of Gods will with second causes; but
that the natures and virtues of themselves are sufficient: and that God as he
has made them, so should preserve them. But this opinion is false and contrary
to Scriptures, Fathers, and reason. The third sort hold, that God by his
concourse determines the action of man's will, and yet that it is absolutely
free: and this for many causes I cannot allow. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 14. page 318.

Eighthly, Greg. Ariminensis, Capreolus, Cassalius against Albert, Bonauenture,
Scotus, Richard Durandus, etc
Quidam Theogi, etc.
SOme Divines hold, that no moral truth can be known by man, in the state of
his corrupted nature, without the special aid of Gods spirit so teach
Gregorius Ariminensis, Johannes, Capreolus, Gaspar Cassalius. Contrarily, all
Divines almost think by the mere power of nature, and by a general aid of
God, some moral truth may be known. So Albertus, S. Bonauenture, Scotus,
Richardus, Durandus, Dominicus a Soto, S* Thomas, etc. This latter opinion
seems the truest, which we do the rather defend, because it so much
displeases our adversaries, and Io. Calvin especially. Bellarm. 5. book of
grace and freewill, cap. 1. page 337.

Ninthly, Scotus, Durandus, Gabriel, Gregor. Ariminensis, Capreolus, Marsilius,
Alexander, Albert, Thomas Bonauent. opposite to each other.
ALl Catholics agree, Conueniunt Theologi Catholici, etc.
that no works meritorious of grace, can be done by the only power of nature;
and secondly, that all our works before justification are no sins: within
these bounds some dispute for freewill, perhaps more freely and lauishly then
were meet, as Scotus, Durandus, Gabriell, upon 2 Sent. d. 28. Others again
give less to it then they should, as Gregorius ^ Ariminensis, Capreolus upon
2. Sent d. 28. and Marsilius. We will follow that, which the greater and grauer
sort of Divines teach, namely, Alexander, Albertus, S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture,
etc. Bellarm. l. 5. c. 4. p. 351.

Tenthly, two sorts of namelesse Doctors opposed.
PErhaps those authors which say, Fortasse conciliari possunt.
that without the help of God no tentation can be overcome, and those which
hold, some may be vanquished without it, may be reconciled; yet their opinion
and speech is more agreeable to Scriptures and Fathers, which say, no tentation
can be overcome without Gods aid. Bellarm. ibid. c. 7. p. 363.

DECAD. V.
First, Bellarmine with Saint Thomas and Bonauenture against some namelesse
Doctors.
Dictum iliud commune Scholarum, etc.
FOr the common saying in Schools (To the man that does what he can, God denies
not grace) I answer, that this is well expounded of St. Thomas in 1. 2. q.
109. and Saint Bonauenture in 2. Sent. did. 28. grace is not denied to him
that does his utmost, when a man does it by working together with Gods grace,
whereby he is stirred; not when he works only by the power of nature:
certainly those which teach that man by doing what he may, is by the only
strength of nature prepared to grace; either think that he may thereby
desire, and ask grace, which is the Pelagians heresy, or hold, that man by
his own strength may keep all the moral law, etc. and this also is
Pelagianisme, confuted in the former book. Bellarm. l. 6. of grace and
freewill, c. 6. p. 508.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Dominicus a Soto.
SOme Catholics, and especially Dominicus a Soto, Aliqui etiam ex Catholicis,
etc.
2. b. of not. and grace, c. 14. deny, that our dispositions toward
justification, can by any reason be called merits, and to be justified freely,
they hold to imply a justification, without any merit whatsoever: But I cannot
understand, why we should not in that case use the name of merit (especially
with that addition of congruity) when we speak of works done by the preventing
grace of God. Bellarm. of justification, l. 1. c. 21. p. 103.

Thirdly, Albertus Pighius and the Divines of Colen against the Council of
Trent and Bellarmine.
NOt only Martin Bucer, In eandem sententiam five potius, etc.
but Albertus Pighius (with some others, as namely the Divines of Colen) in his
second controversy, held this opinion, or error rather, that there is a double
justice, whereby we are formally justified, one imperfect, which is in our
inherent virtues: the other perfect, which is Christ's righteousness impured,
whose opinion is rejected by the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. c. 7. Bellarm. l.
2. of Justification, c. 1. and 2. p. 124.

Fourthly, Gropperus, Catharinus, Saint Thomas, Bonauenture, Scotus, in three
opinions.
OF this matter, De proposita igitur quaestione etc.
concerning certainty of salvation, there are 3. opinions, or rather falsehoods:
The first, of the heretics of this time, that the faithful may have such
knowledge, as that by a sure faith they may know their sins forgiven, etc.
The second is, of the Author of the Enchiridion Coloniense, which holds, that a
man both may, and ought to be certain his sins are forgiven, but yet he
denies, that he is justified by faith alone: But this book is in many other
things worthy of the censure of the Church. The third is of Ambrosius
Catharinus, who holds, that a man may be certain of his own grace, even by
the assurance of faith: Contrary to these errors is the common opinion of
almost all Divines, Saint Thomas, S. Bonauenture, Scotus, Durandus, Roffensis,
Alphonsus a Castro, Dominicus a Soto, Ruardus, etc. Nicholas Saunders, Thomas
Stapleton, etc. that no man by any certainty of faith be assured of his
justice, except those which have special revelations. Bellarm. l. 3. of
Justice, c. 3. p. 206.

Fifthly, the Divines of Louan and Paris against Catharin.
Nam Parisiensis and Louaniensium vero, etc.
HOw Bellarmine presses Catharinus with the authority of the Universities of
Paris and Louan, and the flat words of the Council of Trent; and Catharinus
his answers and elusions of all, See Bellarm. ibid. cap. 3. page 208.

Sixthly, Bellarmine against Catharinus.
CAtharinus his exposition of those places of Ecclesiastes, Ecclesiasticus, Job
for his purpose, see largly confuted by Bellar. Bellar. ib. c. 4. and 5. p.
211.212.

Seventhly, Catharinus and two ranks of Popish Divines differing.
I Say there is no Catholic writer holds, Dico nullum Catholicum Scriptorem
etc.
that a man should ever doubt of his reconciliation with God; for there are
three opinions amongst Catholics: One of Ambrosius Catharinus, which does not
only exclude all doubt, but adds, that the just man may have an assurance of
his justification, by the certainty of a Divine faith. Another goes not so
far, yet holds, that perfect men are wont to attain unto that security, as
that they have no fear of their justification, as we believe without all
doubting that there was a Caesar, an Alexander, etc. though we saw them not,
but this opinion I confess, I like not. The third, which is more common in the
Church, takes not away all fear, but yet takes away all anxiety, and wavering
doubtfulness. Bellar. l. 3. of iustific. c. 11. p. 264

Eighthly, Andr. Vega against Thom. and other Catholics
ANdr. Vega in his 11. book upon the Counsels, Ab hoc argumento etc.
c. 20. holds, venial sin to be properly against the Law: But venial sins
(without which we cannot live) are not simply sins, but imperfectly, and in
some regards, and are not indeed against the law, but besides it, as St.
Thomas teaches well in 1.2. q. 88. Bellarm. l. 4. c. 14. p. 359.

Ninthly Robert Holkot against Saint Thomas and the common opinion.
Quamuis non desint etc.
ALthough some have taught, that freedom of will is not necessary to merit, as
Robert Holkot held (witness Io. Picus in his Apology) yet the common opinion
of Divines is contrary, as it appears out of St. Thomas 1.2. quaest. 114. and
other Doctors, upon 1. Sent. d. 17. etc. Bellarm. l. 5. of Justification, c.
10. p. 432.

Tenthly, a certain namelesse Author against Pius 5. Peter Lombard, and others.
Fuit opinio cuiusdam etc.
IT was the opinion of a certain late Author, which was in many points
condemned by Pius 5. that eternal life is due to good works, for that they
are the true obedience to the law; not for that they are done by a person
advanced by grace, into the state of the Son of God; so he holds, that
meritorious works may be done by a man not regenerate by Baptism, etc. The
contrary opinion is received and allowed in the Schools of Catholic Divines:
See Pet. Lombard, and the Divines upon 2. Sent. did. 24. Bellarm. l. 5. of
justification, c. 12. p. 438.

DECAD. VI.
First, Guliel. Altisidoriensis against all Popish Doctors.
IT was the singular opinion of Gulielm. Fuit singularis opinio Gulielm. etc.
Altisidoriensis ( l. 3. Tract. 12. c. 1. etc.) that merit does more
principally depend upon faith, then charity; which opinion of his does not a
little favor the heretics of this time: But in truth Scripture is so
pregnant against him, that I wonder so worthy a man could be so far deceived.
Bellarm. ibid. c. 15. p. 454.

Secondly, Bellarm. against many of their grave Authors.
THough there be some grave Authors which hold, that every good work of a just
man, Et quamuis non desint grauissimi, etc.
and a man endued with charity is meritorious of eternal life: yet I hold it
more probable, that there is further required to merit, that the good work
should in the very act of it proceed from charity, and be directed to God, as
the supernatural end, etc. Bellarm. l. 5. cap. 15. page 456.

Thirdly, Thomas Waldensis, Paulus Burgensis, against Durandus, and Gregorius
and the common opinion.
Catholici omnes agnoscunt etc.
ALL Catholics acknowledge, that good works are meritorious of eternal life:
but some hold that these words (of congruity and condignity) are not to be
used: but only that we should say absolutely, that good works by the grace
of GOD do merit eternal life: So teaches Thomas Waldensis, Tom. 3. of
Sacraments. chap. 7. Paulus Burgensis in Psalm 35. Others will have them to
merit by condignity, in a large manner: So teach Durandus and Gregorius. The
common opinion of Divines does simply admit a merit of condignity. Bellarmine
lib. 5. cap. 16. page 459 Where note, that Bellarmine finds Durandus to hold
the same in this point with us. page 460. lin. 5.

Fourthly, Bellarmine against some of their acute Distinguishers.
Quod vero quidam distinguunt etc.
HOw some distinguish nicely betwixt Dignum and Condignum, and their
confutation, who will admit a merit of dignity, not of condignity, See
Bellarm. l. 5. c. 16. p. 459.

Fifthly, Caietane and Dom. a Soto, Scotus, Andr* Vega, Tho. and Bonauenture
with Bellarm* differing.
SOme hold, that the good works of the just merit eternal life upon their
very worth, Non desunt qui censeant opera etc.
in regard of the work: though there were no such agreement betwixt God and
us: So hold Caietane (in 2.2. quaest. 114.) and Dominicus a Soto (3. book of
Nature and Grace, chap. 7.) Others contrarily, think that good works
proceeding from grace, are not meritorious upon the very worth of the work,
but only in regard of Gods covenant with us, and his gracious acceptance:
Thus holds Scotus in 1. Sent. d. 17. q. 2. whom other of the old Schoolmen
follow: and of the later Andreas Vega: yet this opinion differs far from the
heresy of the Lutherans, etc. But to me the mean opinion seems more
probable, which teaches, that good works are meritorious of eternal life upon
condignity, in respect of the work and covenant together, which opinion I
doubt not is agreeable to the Council of Trent, and the chief Divines, as St.
Thomas and Bonauent. Bellarm. l. 5, c. 17. p. 464.

Sixthly, Thomas and Bonauent. against Andr. Vega and the Doctor of Louan.
THe last question is, Postrema restat quaestio. etc.
whether God reward good works of his mere liberality, above their worthiness:
the common opinion constantly affirms it, as is plain in Saint Thomas, S.
Bonauent. Scotus, Durandus, etc. But Andr. Vega, and that Doctor of Louan (many
of whose opinions Pius 5. confuted) held the contrary: and this is the
fourteenth opinion by him expressed and condemned. Bellarm. l. 5. c. 19. p. 471.

Seventhly, some Popish Doctors against Chrysostom confuted by Bellarmine.
Vtrum autem operibus. etc.
WHether God do give punishment to evil works, beyond the worthiness or
condignity of them, is not so certain. St. Chrysostom seems to patronage the
affirmative part, but Saint Austin rather tolerates then approues it: some
others defend the negative by four testimonies of Scripture, answered by
Bellarm. lib. 5. cap. 19. page 472.

Eighthly, Caietane against Dominic. a Soto and Bellarm.
Quamuis Cardinalis Caietanas. etc.
THough Cardinal Caietane teach, that those Clerks and Monks sin not
deadly, which choose the Roman Breuiary, and neglect that Breuiary which is
proper to their order, and Church: yet that opinion is not so safe and sure, as
Dominicus ^ Soto well admonishes, except it be by consent of the Bishop and
whole Chapter. Bellarm. of good works in particular, l. 1. cap. 18. page 96.

Ninthly, Bellarmine against Panormitan.
WE answer, Respondemus iure Diuino etc
that Clerks and Monks are by Gods law bound to pray and praise God more then
others: but unto this form of prayer and praises which is now in use, they are
only tied by the determination of the Church; as for that which Panormitanus
(otherwise a learned Lawyer) holds, that the number of seven hours for Divine
service is determined by Gods law, when David says, seven times a day do I
praise thee, it is very slight, etc. Bellarm. ibid. c. 19. p. 102.

Tenthly, some Popish Doctors opposed by Bellarmine and Pius 5. and Council.
Lateran.
Whatsoever some Doctors have formerly thought, we say, Quicquid olim
Doctores. etc.
that now doubtless those Clerks which do not their Divine offices, either
ought to want the fruits of their Benefices, or if they have received them, to
restore them again for common Alms, or reparations of their Churches: and
there is a flat Decree for this in the Council of Lateran, Sess. 9. Statuimus,
and in the constitution of Pius 5. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 19. p. 103.

DECAD. VII.
First, Bellarmine against Io. Cassianus, and some others vn-named.
A^tera sententia est Johannis Cassiani etc.
ANother opinion for Lent, is that of Io. Cassianus, who teaches, that in the
Primitive Church, the Fast was alike all the year long: after, when devotion
grew cold, it pleased all the Priests to appoint the Fast of Lent, and to
establish it in a firm Law. But this opinion is built on a false ground. The
third opinion is of them, who refer the institution of Lent to Pope
Telesphorus etc. But the only true opinion is, that the Lent fast was ordained
by the Apostles of Christ: and enjoined to the whole Church. Bellarm. l, 2. of
good W. in part, c 14. p. 177.

Secondly, Albertus against Thomas and Bellarmine.
Quamuis autem praeceptum elecmosynae etc.
THough the precept of Alms belong not properly to the ten commandments,
since therein only are contained precepts of justice: Yet Divines use to reduce
all moral precepts to those ten. And some (as Albertus upon 4. did. 15. art.
16.) reduce the precept of Alms to that commandment, Thou shall not steal,
Others as Saint Thomas in 2.2. quaest. 32. etc. Honor thy father and mother:
which opinion is more probable. Bellarmine the third book, cap. 6. page 233.

Thirdly, some grave Divines against St. Thomas, Albertus, Richardus,
Paludanus, etc.
ALthough there be grave Divines that hold the contrary, Quamuis non desint
graves Theologi etc.
yet I hold that the truer and safer opinion, which teaches, that no
superfluous riches can be retained in our hands without sin: whether we meet
with extreme necessities of the poor, whereon to bestow them or no, which
opinion follows S. Thomas, in 2.2. quaest. 6^. Art. 7. and besides him,
Albertus, Richard, Paludanus, and others upon 4. Sent. did. 15. In which place
S. Thomas writes, that this is the common opinion of Divines. Bellarm. ibid. c.
7. page 236.

Fourthly, the old Schoolmen against the common opinion and Bellarmine.
SOme of the old Schoolmen, Non defuerunt ex Antiquis Theologis etc.
though they admitted indulgences, yet doubted of the spiritual treasure: as
Francis Mayro (upon 4. Sent. d. 19.) makes question of the treasure of the
ouerflowing satisfactions of Christ, laid up in the Church, and Durandus (upon
4 did. 20. q. 3.) doubts, whether the satisfaction of Saints pertain to the
treasure. But the common opinion of Divines both old and new, St. Thomas, S.
Bonauenture, and others, acknowledge both. Bellarm. l. 1. of Indulgences, c. 2.
p. 8.

Fifthly, Pius 5. Gregory, 13. Clem. 6. Leo. 10. against some Divines of Louan.
Non desuerunt aliqui ex recentioribus etc.
SOme of the new Writers, especially the Doctors of Louan, have taught, that the
sufferings of Saints are not so by Indulgences applied, that they become true
satisfactions for us: but that they be motives only to induce God to apply to
us Christ's satisfaction: but this opinion was condemned by Pius 5. Gregory 13.
by Clement 6. and Leo 10. Bellarm. l. 1. of Indulg. cap. 4. page 32.

Sixthly, Durand, Anthonius, Pope Adrian, Syluester, Thomas, Franciscus Mayro,
Caietane, Dominicus a Soto, etc. disagreeing.
Non defuere qui indulgentias etc.
SOme there have been, which would have pardons nothing else but a payment, or
discharge of punishments, out of the treasure of Christ's merits and the
Saints, applied to us by the Pope: So held Durandus (4 did. 20.) Saint
Anthonius, P. Hadrian 6. Syluester, and S. Thomas as it seems (upon 4. d. 20.
q. 1.) Contrarily, Francis Mayro in the place forecited, will have pardons
nothing but a judiciary absolution: which opinion seems to be favored by the
examples of the auncientest Councels. But the late Divines have on better
consideration defined, that in Indulgences there is both an Absolution, and a
payment, etc. Caietane, Dominicus a Soto, Petrus a Soto, Martinus, Ledesmius,
and others. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 5. page 34.

Seventhly, Pope Sixtus 4. and Bellarmine against Petrus Oxoniensis.
WHerefore the opinion of Petrus Oxoniensis was justly condemned of Pope Sixtus
4. Quaere merit^ damnata est etc
and the Council Complutense, which held, that the Pope could not pardon to a
man living upon earth, his punishment of purgatory; and that by contrition
alone our sins are done away: See Alphonsus de Castro his book of heresies,
the word Confession. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 6. page 37.

Eighthly, Archidiaconus and Syluester, and some others against Sotus, Nauarrus,
and the common opinion.
SOme have held, Non defuerunt qui negauerint etc.
that the pope or other Bishops are not partakers of those pardons, which they
give to others in common: so teaches the Archdeacon in chap. of Indulg. and
cytes some few others of his judgment. Syluest. in summa verb. Indulg. But all
other Divines hold contrary (upon 4. did. 20) and Sotus d. 21. and the
Canonists, with Nauarrus in his Tract of the Iubily. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 6. p. 39.

Ninthly, Caietane and Richardus against Saint Thomas and Bellarmine.
Certe haec responsio probabilis visa est Caietano etc.
CAietane holds, that the Pope by his Confessor (not by himself) may give
pardon to himself: and so Richardus (upon 4. did. 20.) But it may be better
answered, that the Pope may indirectly be partaker of a pardon granted by
himself, or his Predecessor, without the help of a confessor, if he do those
things which are required of others, for the obtaining of pardon, as Saint
Thomas upon 4. Did. 20. q. 1. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 6. p. 40.

Tenthly, Petrus Paludanus against the common opinion.
Videtur quidem Petrus etc.
PEtrus Paludanus (upon 4. did. 20.) seems to hold, that the faultines of
venial sins, though not of mortal, is taken away by pardons: but the common
opinion of others is more probable, that nothing is taken away, but the guilt
of temporal punishments, which remains after the fault is discharged.
Bellarm. l. 1. c. 7. p. 41.

DECAD. VIII.
First, Saint Thomas and others against some of the ancient Divines.
THat Pardons deliver a man from punishment, Indulgentiae liberant etc.
not only before the Church, but before God, was cenyed by some of the
ancient Divines, whose opinion is related and confuted by S. Thomas upon 4.
did. 20. and others: and now at this day is denied by Luther and Calvin.
Bellarm. l. 1. c. 7. p. 43.

Secondly, Thomas Elysius against Caietane, Dominicus a Soto, Ledesmius, etc.
WHen in the form of the pardon it is said, Cum in forma Indulgentiae etc
that there is granted remission of the penance enjoined, it is not to be
understood of that penance, which the Priest inioynes in the Sacrament of
confession: against some that hold, all penance to be meant under the name of
penance enjoined, as Thomas Elysius ( in Clipeo Cathol. q. 44. art. 7.) But
almost all learned men teach the Contrary, as Card Caietan, Dominicus a Soto,
Ledesmius, Nauarrus, Cordubensis, Syluester, Gabriel, etc. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 7.
p. 46.

Thirdly, Alex. Alensis, Durand. Paludan. Adrian Pope, Petr. a Soto, etc.
against S. Thomas, Mayor, Syluester, Dominicus a Soto etc.
Cum non fit mentio etc.
When a Pardon is absolutely granted without mention of penance enjoined, it
is to be understood, that all penances are pardoned in it: whether already
enjoined, or that might be enjoined. This proposition is against very grave
Authors, Alex. Alensis, in Sum. p. 4. q. 23. Durandus, Paludanus, Adrian the 6.
pope: Petrus a Soto, Card. Caietane, who hold, that pardons are never given but
for enjoined penances: But our opinion has neither fewer nor less worthy
patrones, S. Thomas upon 4. did. 20. Io. Mayor, Syluester, Dominicus a Soto,
Michael, Medina, Ledesmius, Anthon. Cordubensis, Nauarrus, Panormitan, Io.
Andreas, and Caietane confesses this the common opinion. Bellarm. l. 1. cap. 7.
p. 47.

Fourthly, Bellarm. against Caietane, and Dom. a Soto etc.
Porro Caietani definitio etc.
THose definitions which Caietane and Domin. a Soto have made of pardons: see
rejected by Bellar. l. 1. cap. 8. page 52.

Fifthly, Dom. a Soto against Palud. Adrian, Nauar. etc.
Existit autem hoc loco etc.
HEre it is in controversy: Whether the pardon of so many days and years in
this life, answer to so many in purgatory: for Dominicus a Soto holds, that
one day spent in purgatory, takes more of the guilt of punishment due to our
sins, then many years in this life, spent in the sharpest penance. But the
common opinion holds the contrary, as it is to be seen in Paludanus, Adrian,
Nauarrus, Cordubensis and others. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 9. p. 54.

Sixthly, Bellarm. against Gerson, and Dominicus a Soto.
THere have been some of our Writers, Non desunt qui negent etc.
which have held, that all those pardons which contain the release of many
thousand years penance, were not given by any popes, but only feined by their
pardoners for commodity: So hold John Gerson in his Tract, of Absolut. Sacram.
and Dominic. a Soto upon 4. d. 21. The contrary is maintained by Bellarm. l.
1. cap. 9. page 56.

Seventhly, Popish Doctors disagreeing.
WHether he that receives a pardon in the point of death, as is supposed,
after recovering, An qui indulgentiam. etc.
may receive it again, when he comes to the point of death, our Doctors
disagree. See Nauar. de Iubil. notab. 30. nu. 3. and Cordubensis q. 39. etc.
Bellarm. l. 1. c. 9. p. 57.

Eighthly; Anthonius against Nauarrus and Cordubensis.
Si quis tempore Iubilei. etc.
IF a man upon the hope of a Iubile to come, shall willingly and purposely fall
into a sin reserved; the doubt is, whether he may be absolved from that
sin: some say he cannot, as Anthonius 1. p. Tit. 10. c. 3 but others think
the contrary, Nauar. in Tract. de Iubil. and Cordubensis, q. 37. de Indulg.
Bellarm. l. 1. cap. 10. page 60.

Ninthly, Bellarmine and other namelesse against Felinus, Dominicus a Soto,
Nauar. Cordub. etc.
De conci^io generali quaeri potest etc.
WHether a general Council may grantfull pardons, is questioned: for Felinus,
Dominic* a Soto, Nauar* Cordubensis, affirm it etc. And though I have not read
any that expressly denies, that a general Council can do it, yet all those
Authors seem to hold thus, which write, that this Authority belongs to the
Pope alone, and I think this latter opinion is most true. Bellarm. l. 1. c.
11. p. 62.

Tenthly, two sorts of Popish Doctors opposite.
Altera dubita^io est de iure etc.
Upon what law Bishops may give pardons, it is questioned, for some hold, that
they may do it by Gods law, others deny it. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 11.

DECAD. IX.
First, Angelus, Bartholm. Fumus, Innocentius, Panormitan against the common
opinion, and Canon law.
ANgelus (in summa) and Bartholomaeus Fumus hold, that all Parish Priests,
Denique Angelus in summa.
or what Priests soever may hear confessions, may also in that Sacrament of
confession grant pardons: and they bring for them Innocentius, in Com. cap.
cum ex eo: and Panormitane and others. But the common opinion teaches the
contrary, that no priests (under a Bishop) may give pardons, unless by
commission from the Pope or Bishop: and there is an express text in the law
for it. Chap. Accedentibus, de excess. praelatorum. Bellar. l. 1. c. 11. page
64.

Secondly, Thomas, Durandus, Paludanus, Anthonius Turrecrem. Syluester, etc.
against Bonauenture, Adrian, Caietane, Mayor, etc.
FOr the cause of a pardon-giuing, some hold, Ad iustam causam requiri etc.
there need not be any proportion; but that it is enough, that the cause be
honest and holy: that is, that pardon be not granted upon an evil work
enjoined, or a work merely temporal and vain, etc. But such a one as
pertaines to Gods glory, and the profit of the Church. Thus hold St. Thomas,
Durandus, Paludanus, S. Anthonius, Io. de Turrecremata, Syluester, Io.
Tabiensis, and our Gregory de Valentia. Others hold, that to make the cause
just, is required some work, that may be proportionable to the pardon. So
teach of the old Schoolmen, Saint Bonauenture, Richardus; Aug. de Ancona, Io.
Gerson, Gabriel, and of the later, in our age, Pope Adrian, Card. Caietane,
Mai^r, Ledesmius, Dominicus a Soto, Petrus a Soto, Nauarrus, Cordubensis, to
which add Innocentius and Felinus. Bellarm. l. 1. c. 12. p. 68.

Thirdly, Bellarm. against Io. Gerson, Dominicus a Soto, Vega, etc.
^icu^ ^roban^^n non est quod etc.
AS it is not to be allowed, that some upon a good zeal, but perhaps ouer-hote,
have spoken with some reproach of pardons granted upon slight causes, as Io.
Gerson, Dominic. a Soto, Andreas Vega, etc: So Clement 8. is justly to be
praised, which has received and urged the Decree of the Lateran Council, of
moderating indiscreet pardons, etc. Bellarm. l. 1. cap. 12. page 71.

Fourthly, Caietane, Petrus a Soto etc. against Paludanus, Anthonius,
Cordubensis, etc.
An requiratur status gratiae etc
FIrst it is questioned, whether the state of grace be required in a man at that
time, when the pardon is received, or rather when the works enjoined are done,
or when the pardon is first pronounced, or the letters there of delivered. For
Caietane, Petrus a Soto, and others hold, that the state of grace is then
required, not only when the pardon is received, but when the work enjoined is
performed, not when it is published, etc. Other very grave Authors, as Petr.
Paludanus, S. Anthonius, Anthon. Cordubensis, and others hold contrary.
Bellarm. l. 1. cap. 13. page 75.

Fifthly, some namelesse Doctors against Anthonius Adrian, Caietane, etc.
IT is thirdly questioned, Tertia quaestio est de confessione
whether confession (which commonly is one part of the work enjoined) be
required in deed, or purpose only. The answer is, That if the form of the
Pardon do flatly set down, confession to be made within so many days, then it
is to be required in deed, and actually, else not: yea though a man have
mortal sins; it is probable, that contrition alone with a purpose of
confessing, will serve the turn; so hold Paludanus, Syluester, Panormitanus,
Felinus. But yet it is more safe and probable, that confession is actually
required, and not in purpose only: when a pardon is granted under the terms
of rightly penitent and confessed, as teach Saint Anthonius, Adrian, Caietane,
Nauarrus and the Gloss. Bellarm. lib. 1. Indulg. cap. 13. page 77.

Sixthly, Caietane and Barthol. Fumus against all other Divines.
Nam Cardinali^ Caietan. etc.
CArd. Caietane teaches, that besides fulfilling of the works enjoined, he that
would receive pardon, must have a purpose to satisfy God, by his own works,
as much as he may: which opinion of his is profitable and godly, but perhaps
not true: since it is contrary to the doctrine of others. Neither did I ever
read any that followed Caietane in it, but Bartholm. Fumus in Summa. Bellarm.
lib. 1. cap. 13. page 78.

Seventhly, Ostiensis and Gabriel against the common opinion.
Ex Catholicis Ostiensis.
NOt only the heretics, but also amongst the Catholics Ostiensis (in summa.
l. 5. Tit. de remiss.) and Gabriel (lect. 57. in Can. miss.) have taught, that
pardons do no whit profit the dead. But it is a most certain thing, and
undoubted among all Catholics, that by pardons the souls in purgatory may be
helped. Bellar. l. 1. c. 14. p. 80.81.

Eighthly, Michael Medina against Bonauenture, Richard. Gabriel, Mayor, etc.
De modo quo indul. etc.
IT is questioned how pardons may help the dead: For Michael Medina, dis. 7. c.
34. holds, that the souls of the deceased belong to the jurisdiction of the
Pope, and that they may receive pardon from him, by way of absolution. But
almost all writers hold the contrary, as St. Bonauenture, Richardus, Gabriel,
Io. Mayor, Caietane, Dominicus a Soto, Petrus a Soto, Nauarrus, etc.
Cordubensis. Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 14. page 82.

Ninthly, three different opinions of Papists.
HOw pardons do help the dead, Quid significet per modum suffragij etc.
by way of suffrage: see controuerted in three opinions, and two of them
confuted by Bellarm. l. 1. cap. 14. p. 85.

Tenthly, Dominicus a Soto, and Nauarrus against Caietane, Petrus a Soto,
Cordubensis.
THe hardest question of all is, Difficillima omnium ea est etc.
whether pardons do help the dead, upon any justice and worthiness, or only
upon mere favor of God, and congruity: some hold it is in justice and
condignity, as Dominicus a Soto upon 4. d. 21 Nauarrus de Iubil. not. 22.
Others hold it merely upon the mercy, and bounty of God, and therefore only of
congruity. So Caietane, Petrus a Soto, Cordubensis. Bellarm. l. 1. cap. 14.
page 86.87.

DECAD. X.
First, Bellarmine against Caietane.
Requiritur ex sententia Caietani etc.
CAietane holds, that he that would be helped in Purgatory by suffrages, must
have been not only in the state of grace, but devoted to the keys of the
Church, and studious, and careful to help others, while he was alive by his
suffrages. But this opinion of Caietane, though it be profitable and godly, yet
it is not true, and confuted by every one. Bellarmine, l. 1. cap. 14. page 90.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Praepositinus.
Praepositinus quidam etc.
THe opinion of one Praepositinus, of the common help which suffrages give to
the deceased: See confuted by Bellarm. l. 1. c. 14. page 90.

Thirdly, Bellarmine with S. Thomas against himself, and Durandus.
Remelius considerata etc.
WHereas Bellarmine in his 4. book de Christo, chap. 16. had said: It is
probable, that Christ's soul went down to all the places of hell: and had
confuted S. Thomas his answer of his descending in effect and virtue: for so
(says he) we might with Durandus say, that Christ did descend to no place
otherwise then in effect: Now upon better consideration he says, he holds
Thomas his opinion, and some other Schoolmen rather to be followed. Bellarm.
Recognitions, page 11.

Fourthly, Bellarmine against himself and Pighius.
I Approve not, that I said with Albertus Pighius, Non probo quod etc.
that Saint Paul appealed to Caesar as to his lawful prince: The first answer
therefore is to be stood in, that S. Paul appealed to him de Facto not de Iure,
as the supreme Judge of Judea, not as his superior. Bellarm. Recognition, page
17.

Fifthly, Bellarmine against some not named.
WHereas we said, Vbi dicimus senten^iam etc.
that the opinion of those which teach, that infallibility of judgment is not
in the pope, but in the general Council, is not altogether heretical, but
erroneous and near to heresy: Now it seems to us so erroneous, that it may
justly by the Churches judgment be condemned as heretical. Bellarm.
Recognition, page 19.

Sixthly, Durand. against S. Thomas and Bellarm.
I Do not like that I said, Infidel princes cannot by the Church be deprived
of the Dominion, Non approbo quod dixi. etc.
they have over the faithful, except they go about to turn their subjects
from the faith of Christ: for though Durandus, whom I followed (upon 2. Sent.
did. 44, q. 3,) do probably dispute this against Saint Thomas, yet the
authority of Saint Thomas ought justly rather to prevail. Bellarm.
recognition, p. 44.

Seventhly, St. Thomas, Dominicus a Soto, Nauar. opposed by some new Writers.
Docuimus hoc loco, etc.
I Wrote, that civil power in Kings and Princes is not immediately from God,
but mediately from the council and consent of men: And because this is the
common opinion, I did not strive to prove it: But now since of late some have
written, that the civil power of Kings is no less immediately from God then
the power of the pope: I hold it necessary to add somewhat of this point: and
first I bring forth the author of this opinion, Saint Thomas 2.2. q. 10. art.
10. Dominicus a Soto, of the Canonists Nauarrus, etc. Bellarm. recognition, p.
57.

Eighthly, Suarez against Bellarmine.
Reprehendit vtrumque etc.
HOw Franciscus Suarez reprehends Bellarmine concerning Rupertus his error of
Impanation, See Bellarmine recognition p. 80.

Ninthly, some namelesse Papists against Bellarmine.
THE exceptions taken by Catholics against Bellarmine, Dixi conuersionem etc.
for saying that the conversion of the bread is adductiue not productiue, and
his defense, See Recognition, page 81.

Tenthly, Fr. Suarez against Bellarmine and John of Louan.
FRanciscus Suarez, Videtur reprehendere Io. de Louan and me.
disp. 41. de Euchar* reprooues Bellarmine and Io. of Louan for teaching that
Christ gave the Sacrament in the form of bread, in the time of his legal
supper, and the wine when Supper was ended, after many other businesses and
actions: How Bellarmine cleares himself, See Recognition page 84.

First, Bellarmine against Gropperus.
I Cyted the Enchiridion of John Gropperus which he is said to have written
under the name of the Council of Colen: Posui inter libros Catholicos etc.
but though Gropperus himself were a Catholic, yet in that book there are
no small errors, as we have showed: and therefore it is not without cause put
into the number of books prohibited. An. Dom. 1596. Bellarm. Recognition page
87.

Secondly, Bellarmine against Abulensis, Adrian, Caietane, etc.
Allegantur multi authors etc.
WE said, that many Authors held, that sufficient help is not given at all
times to rise from sin, but only in respect of time and place: as Abulensis,
Adrianus, Caietan. But we are to note, that these Authors do not only say
that which we say, but somewhat also which we say not: That unto some men for
the greatness or multitude of their sins, God in his certain Decree denies
help in the rest of their life. So Abulensis quaest. 12. upon 4. Exodus Adrian
quaest. 3. de paenitentia. Caietanus Ientaculo. 8. q. 1. which three Doctors
seem to be borne out by three holy Fathers: Saint Anselme in Comment. upon 12.
Matt. Saint Isidor. lib. 2. de summo bono. Saint Austen. For me, as I dare not
reprove so great Authors, so I hold it an holy course, thus to think of God in
his goodness, that there is no men, which while they live, are not in time and
place visited by the regard of his divine grace. Bellar. Recognit. p. 105.

Thirdly, Popish Doctors disagreeing.
Quia dum haec recognoscer^m etc.
BEcause while I writ this, there is great controversy amongst our writers
about the Kingdom of Christ, I thought good to explain my self further: I
hold therefore that heed is to be taken of godly men, least they so uphold
Christ's temporal Kingdom, that they deny his poverty. That his Kingdom
therefore was not temporal but spiritual, besides the ancient, is well
taught by two accurate Interpreters, Cornelius Iansenius, and Adamus Sasbout,
etc. Bellarm. Recognit. page 25.

THE PEACE OF ROME. THE FOVRTH BOOK CONTAINING ABOVE THREESCORE different
opinions of Papists, in that one point of Confession, all (saving 5. or 6. of
the last) confessed by Nauarrus.
DECAD. I.
1. The Gloss and Gratian against Navarre and the common opinion.
Quamuis. Glossa etc.
THough the Gloss (1. and 2. in cap. Lachrymae) and Gratian ( de paen. did.
1.) hold a^ man excluded from Confession, by his contrition; so as being once
thoroughly contrite, he is not of necessity in due time to confess, which they
prove by diverse Authorities from the Canon law, and from Saint Crysostome, and
Saint Austen: yet we must with a sure faith hold, and defend, that although by
the contrition of the heart alone, without actual confession, our sins are
remitted, yet that he to whom they are pardoned, is bound in due time (if
opportunity can be had) to confess them, Nauarrus in his Commentaries upon
the seven distinctions of penance, abridged by Gregory Sayrus chap. 4. of his
Summa Sacram. paenitentiae, printed at Venice with Privilege. An. 1601. p. 6.

2. Navarre against some namelesse.
Confess. Sacram. non esse in Paradiso etc.
THat Sacramental confession was not instituted in Paradise, nor brought in by
the law of nature, see defended against some of their namelesse Writers by
Nauar. Sum. paenit. cap. 5. page 11.

3. The same Author against other Catholics.
A nullo puro homine etc.
THat confession was not instituted by any mere man, or any humane law, but
only by Christ himself, and that it was not instituted by Iosuah to Achan,
against the error of some namelesse Catholics, is maintained by Nauar. Sum.
paenit. c. 5. p. 11.

4. Some namelesse Catholics confuted by Nauar.
Errasse etiam eos.
THe errors of those, which held the Sacrament of Penance was instituted by
Saint James. chap. 5. see also confuted. Sum. Paenit. cap. 5.

5. The Gloss, Panormitan, Decius, against Durandus, Mayor, Navarre.
FVrther it follows necessarily that the Gloss ( Summa de paen. did. 5.)
erreth, which teaches, Infertur errasse Glossam etc.
that the full confession of sins was not instituted by any authority of the
old or new Testament, but only by the Tradition of the universal Church:
which opinion is followed by Panormitan and Decius, but is confuted by all, but
especially by Durandus and Mayor. Sum. paen. cap. 5. page 12.

6. Nauar. against Caietane.
IT is further employed that Caietane erred, Errore Caietanum.
who upon John 20. teaches, that Sacramental confession was instituted by
Christ, but not commanded. Sum. paenit. cap. 5. page 12.

7. Sixtus the fourth, and others against Petrus ab Osma.
IT is yet inferred further, Etiam Petrum ab Osma errasse etc.
that Petrus ab Osma erred, who in the time of Sixtus the fourth, at
Salmantica, and other places of Spain taught, that Sacramental confession
began by humane institution, and the Tradition of the Church: and that mortal
sins both for their fault and punishment in another world, might be done away
without confession, by the only contrition of the heart, etc. Al which were
condemned by Sixtus 4. Sum. paenit. cap. 5. page 12.1.

8. Navarre against the Canon.
Infertur falli Canonem etc.
THe Canon is deceived, which ( in Relect. de Sacram,) teaches, that penance and
outward confession was necessary to salvation, not only under the time of the
Gospel, but of the law also, and under the time of nature, in act, if it might
be had, or in desire and purpose, if it might not. Sum. paen. cap. 5.

9. Nauar. and Scotus, etc. against the Gloss.
Errasse Glossam
THe Gloss erreth ( Sum. de paen. did. 5.) that says, that Sacramental
confession was not in use in the Greek Church, as is largely taught by Scotus
4. d. 17. and the Council of Colen. Fol. 151. Sum. paenit. cap, 5. page 12.2.

10. Nauar. against Caietane.
Tenetur homo etc.
A Man is bound to contrition and confession, so often as any action is to be
done, which requires contrition and confession to go before it, such as the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. Howsoever Caietane teach the contrary in Sum. verb.
communio, and upon 1. Cor. 11 who holds, that he sins not deadly which
communicates upon contrition had, before he confess himself, though he have
opportunity of confession, which opinion is condemned by the Tridentine
Council. Sum. paenit. c. 6. p. 15.1.

DECAD. II.
11. Nauar. against Paludanus, etc.
NAuar holds, Non esse vllum etc.
there is no precept that ties us upon pain of sin, to confess before any
Sacrament, save the Eucharist. Paludanus in 4. d. 7. q. 2. says, that to the
Sacrament of confirmation, of Orders, of extreme unction, an actual
confession of our sins is necessary. Sum. paenit. cap. 6. fol. 15.2.

12. Paludanus and Anthoninus against Thomas and Navarre.
HOw often we commit one and the same sin, Male autem addunt Paludanus etc.
is ill put by Paludanus and Saint Anthoninus among the circumstances to be
confessed: for the second sin is not the circumstance of the first; whereupon
neither Aristotle nor Saint Thomas number (this Quoties) among the
Circumstances. Sum. paenit. cap. 7. fol. 16.2.

13. Io. Mayor against Thomas, Paludanus, Gabriel, Anthoninus, Adrian,
Caietane, Prierias,
Circumstantias quae aggrauant.
We are not bound to confess those circumstances, which do aggrauate the
fault, but change it not into another kind of sin, as the common opinion
teaches, Saint Thomas, Paludanus, Gabriel, St. Anthoninus, Adrian, Caietan,
Prierias. The contrary opinion (which is defended by Io. Mayor 4. d. q. 3.)
makes the conscience full of scruples and fear. Sum. paenit. cap. 8. fol. 18.1.

14. Thomas, Scotus, Mayor differing.
Difficile est autem etc.
IT is hard to know, what circumstances changes the action from one kind into
another: whereof are three diverse opinions: One of Saint Thomas 4. d. 16. q. 3.
The other of Scotus: The third of Io. Mayor in 4. did. 17. q. 4. Sum. paenit.
cap. 8. fol. 20.2.

15. Alensis against Nauar: Nauar against Lyra, Mayor, Anthoninus, Adrian.
Non igitur circumstantia temporis etc.
THe circumstance of time is not necessary to be confessed; as that we have
sinned upon an Holy Day: whence Alensis is deceived, which holds, that a mortal
sin upon an Holy Day is double in respect of the guilt, though single in
respect of the act: and Lyra Exodus 20. and Mayor 4. d. 17. q. 4. and Anthon. 3.
p. art. 17. and Adrian upon 4. de confess. q. 4. are deceived, which teach,
that in that precept of the Decalogue, only mortal sin is fobidden. Sum.
paenit. c. 9. f. 24.1.

16. Adrian, Mayor, Syluester, etc. against other namelesse Divines: and Nauar
betwixt both.
IT is doubted by our Doctors, Dubium est inter Doctores etc
whether he that sins mortally before other, and yet not with any purpose to
give occasion of sinning to others, be bound to confess the circumstance of
his scandal given: for Adrian in 4. de confess. q. 4. and Io. Mayor 4. did.
38. and Syluester, say he must confess it: Others deny it. Navarre determines
betwixt both. Sum. paenit. cap. 9. fol. 26.2.

17. Navarre against Adrian.
IT is a great difficulty among our Doctors, Difficultas est inter Doctores etc.
whether he that does any thing that he thinks he should not do, or with any
thing which he doubts whether it be a mortal sin or no, be bound to confess
not only that he has sinned, but that he has sinned wittingly, or against his
conscience. Adrianus in 4. de confess. quaest. 4. holds, that circumstance must
be confessed, etc. But for all that, it is not necessarily to be confessed.
Sum. paenit. cap. 10. fol. 27.2.

18. Mayor against Thomas.
Neminem teneri ad etc.
SAint Thomas 4. did. 17. q. 3. holds, that confession is sometimes to be made
by an Interpreter: Io. Mayor upon the same place denies it. Sum. paenit. cap
12. fol. 36.1.

19. Paludanus and Adrian against the common opinion.
Neque confess. neque absolutionem fieri posse per procuratorem.
NO confession or absolution can be given or taken by a proxy, or messenger,
nor by writing: for all Sacraments (except Matrimony) require our own person,
and cannot be done by Deputies: But Paludanus in 4. did. 17. q. 2. and Adrian
in 4. de confess. q. 1. hold such confessions and absolutions as are done by
writing to be of force. Sum. paenit. cap. 12. fol. 37.1.

20. Paludanus, Anthoninus, Thomas opposed by other Doctors and Navarre.
Quamuis in confesso sit, etc.
ALl Writers confess a lie to be ever a sin, but especially in confession:
but they agree not what kind of sin it is, for Paludanus upon 4. d. 21. q. 2.
says, it is a mortal sin to lie in confession: and Saint Anthoninus p. 3.
Tit. 13. c. 18. and Saint Thomas 2, 2. q. 69. art. 1. to the same purpose.
Others more truly teach, it is not always a mortal sin to lie in
confession. Sum. paenit. cap. 13 fol. 38.2.

DECAD. III.
21. Scotus, Paludanus, Gabriel, Mayor, Caietane, Council. Florent. Io. Scotus
disagreeing.
THis matter concerning the examination of the conscience, is very doubtful,
Res haec satis dubia etc.
and controuersiall amongst our Authors: for Scotus (in 4. did. 17. q. 1.)
and Paludanus ( ibid. q. 2. art. 1.) holds, that such diligence is to be
required in this business, as the penitent would use for the remembering of any
other difficult matter. But Gabriel (upon the said did. q. 1.) says, that a
man ought only to confess all that he can well remember. But Io. Mayor (
ibid. q. 3.) will have a man take such pains to find out and remember all his
sins, as a Scholar would do, to get a Latin Oration by heart, which he
should utter amongst learned hearers. Caietane (in verbo confess.) holds, he
that believes, he has made sufficient inquisition for his sin, though he
have not done so, has discharged himself, and need not reiterate his
confession. The Council of Florence, only teaches us to confess what sins
are in our memory, and speaks nothing of any diligence to recall them. Io.
Scotus is too rigorous, etc. Sum. paenit. c. 15. fol. 43.2.

22. Gabriels Mayor, Syluester, Thomas, Paludan against Innocentius, Hostiensis
and the truer opinion.
Quamuis S. Thomas etc.
St. Tho. (in 4. d. 16) and Palud (in 4. d. 21. q. 3) will have the third person
revealed in confession: as Palud. instanceth, that a woman committing incest
with her brother, ought to confess this, although her brother be known to the
Confessor: which opinion is followed by Gabriel ( ibid. q. 1.) and Mayor (qu.
3.) Arg. 80. and Syluester verb. confess.. 1. q. 24. yet the truer opinion
holds, that the person and his sin is to be concealed: so teaches Innnocent.
in cap. Omnis. Hostiensis ibid. col. 4. yea herein Io. Mayor is contrary to
himself. Sum. paenit. cap. 16. fol. 48.1.

23. Nauar against Io Mayor.
Quoad casus reservatos etc.
AS for cases reserved, although an Inferior confessor cannot absolve the
penitent, yet the penitent is bound to confess all his mortal sins to his
own Parish Priest, whether reserved or other. The contrary is held by Io.
Mayor (in 4. d. 15. q. 5.) Sum. paenit. cap. 16. fol. 49.1.

24. Nauar against Adrianus.
Vnde fallitur Adrianus etc.
FRom whence it is plain, that Adrianus is deceived, who upon 4. q. 4. of
confess. col. 9. teaches, that the absolution which is given by him which
receives only the confession of sins reserved, is not Sacramental. Sum.
paenit. cap. 16. fol. 50.2.

25. Popish Doctors divided.
TO heal, or advise him that has none but mortal sins lawfully confessed,
or venial sins, Ad medicandum and consulendum etc.
the Confessor has no need of any knowledge or prudence, but only skill to
pronounce the very words of the Sacrament: Because there is neither
contrition necessarily required, nor confession indeed necessarily to be made,
as it is the opinion of almost all our Doctors, in cap. Omnis de paenit. and
Saint Thomas 3. part. quaest. 87. art. 1. Sum. paenit. cap. 17. fol. 54.2.

26. Vrbanus and the Gloss and Paludanus against Innocentius: and Hostiensis
and Panormitan betwixt both.
THere is no small difference amongst our doctors, Non parua inter doctores etc.
whether in case our own Confessor be ignorant, it be sufficient to ask him
leave to choose another, though he grant it not. Vrbanus 2. in d. c. placuit.
and the Gloss 3. in d. 3. flatly say, that in case of ignorance the consent of
our parish priest is not necessary: and of the same opinion is Palud. in 4. d
16. q 3. and did. 17. q. 3. But afterward Innocent. 3. (in cap. Omnis)
Decreed, it should not be lawful to confess to another, without the leave of
our own. So Hostiensis and Panormitan (in d. cap. Omnis) and Adrian (4. de
confess.) hold, that it is necessary, leave should be asked of our own, though
not obtained, etc. Sum. paenit. cap. 18. fol. 55.2.

27. Paludanus, Anthoninus, against Nauar, and against Raymundus, Hostiensis,
Godofr.
Tertius casus est etc.
IN case a Parishioner remove his dwelling from one Town to another, or Winter
one where, and Summer another: it is questioned to whom his confession is to be
made. Paludanus in 4. d. 17. q. 3. and St. Anthoninus par. 3. Tit. 17. cap. 9.
hold, that his confession is to be made to him, in whose Parish he dwells when
he is shriuen. But it is the truer opinion, that in such case he may confess
to either. Sum. paenit. cap. 18. Hostiensis, Raymundus, Godofredus hold, that
he must confess to his own former Priest: but they are deceived. fol. 57.1.

28. Hostiensis and Paludanus and Anthon. against the Gloss and Panormitan.
Parochianus delinquens, etc.
A Parishioner sinning in the Parish of another (says Hostien.) is to confess
to him in whose parish he sinned, not to his own priest: and the same opinion
is held by Paludan. and Anthoninus, but falsely, as the Gloss in cap. placuit.
6. q. 3. and Panormitan in cap. Cum contingit. number. 26. etc. Sum. paen. c. 18.
fol. 38.1.

29. Paludanus against Hostiensis.
THat the Sacrament which from the beginning was none, Ratihabitionem
retro-trabi. etc.
cannot by any after-allowance become good and available, see disputed by
Paludanus in 4. d. 17. q. 3. against Hostiensis. Sum. paenit. cap. 18. fol.
58.2.

30. Bonauenture, Richardus, Panormitan, Hostiensis, Paludanus, Nauarrus
disagreeing.
WHo should be accounted our own Priest in this business of confession, Quid
tamen nomine proprij etc
there are many disagreeing opinions: Saint Bonauenture (in 4. d. 17. art. 5.)
and Scotus, and Richardus ( ibid. art. 2. q. 1.) bring three acceptions of this
title: Panormitan and others in d. cap. Omnis, and Hostiensis in sum. de
paenit. parag^cui confit. and Cardin. in Clem. dudum de sepult. and Paludanus
(in 4. d. 17. q. 3.) say, that there are more then three to be taken for our
own Priest, and Nauarrus in that place reckens up eleven. Sum. paenit. c. 19.
fol. 59.2.

DECAD. IIII.
31. The opinion of Doctors, Panormitan, Andr. Sicul. Paludanus, Angelus,
Syluester, Gabriel, etc. against the Gloss.
Quicquid Glossa etc.
Howsoever the Gloss require, that he which is chosen for our Confessor should
have charge of souls, either ordinarily, or by Commission; yet the truer
opinion of Doctors teaches that whosoever has leave to choose, may take what
Confessor he lists, whether he have charge of souls or not: so teach
Panormitan ( in Clem. 1. de Offic. deleg) and Andr. Sicul. Paludanus ( in 4. d.
17. qu. 4.) Angelus (verbo confess. 3. Sec. 4.) Syluester (verb. Confessor)
Gabriel (in 4. did. 18.) Adrianus (in 4. de confess. dub. 1.) Sum. paenit.
cap. 20. fol. 62.1.

32. Clement the 8. Anthoninus, and the common opinion of Doctors against the
Gloss, Io. Andreas, and Panormitan.
Quamuis non nulli olim vt Glossa etc.
SOme have held, that though the Pope, or our own Bishop should give us leave
to choose our Confessor, yet we might not do it without the consent of our own
parish priest: So Glossa 6. and Io. Andreas, and Panormitanus in part. (upon
cap. Omnis vtriusque) But the truer and commoner opinion of Doctors is
contrary, and Saint Anthoninus in 3. par. Tit. 17. cap. 9. says, that this
opinion of the Gloss, Andreas, and Panormitan was condemned by Clement 4. Sum.
paenit. cap. 21.

33. Navarre against Paludanus and Anthoninus.
THey are deceived, which hold, Quamuis viatores etc.
that the Bishop giving any manlibertie of pilgrimage, gives him liberty also
to be absolved by that Confessor he chooses, from cases reserved: yet so held
Palud. in 4. did. 17. q. 4. and Saint Anthoninus 3. p. Tit. 17. Sum. paenit.
cap. 21. fol. 67 1.

34. Richardus and Syluester against the common opinion.
Quidam eius opinionis sunt etc.
SOme hold that a parish priest is bound only upon necessity to hear
confessions only at those times, when the parishioner is bound to be shriuen:
So teach Richardus (upon 4. d. 18. art. 2.) and Syluester ( verbo Confessor 1.
qu. 1.) that is, once a year. But those teach truer, which hold him bound to
take the shrift of his people, as often as any of them will confess. Sum.
paenit. cap. 23. fol. 70.1.

35. Io. Mayor, Adrian, Caietane, against Richardus and Syluester.
Quoties quis putat se non etc.
SOme hold, that so often as a man thinks he cannot remember, what mortal sin
he has committed till Lent, so often he is bound to confess it before, as Io.
Mayor in 4. d. 17. q. 2. Adrianus in 4. De confess. dub. 8. Caietane verbo
confess. against Richardus and Syluester vbi supra. Summa paenitentiae cap. 23.
fol. 71.1.

36. Felinus against Paludanus and all Divines etc.
Laicus cui in articulo etc.
IF a penitent on his death-bedde confess himself to a Lay man, though that
Layman cannot absolve him yet he is bound to conceal his secrets by the seal
of confession, says Paludanus and all Divines upon 4. did. 21. The contrary
is taught by Felinus (in c. pastoralis. praeterea.) Sum. paenit. cap. 24. and
cap. 29. fol. 73.1.

37. Paludanus, Adrianus, Thomas, Navarre against the Gloss and the
Archdeacon.
Quicquid olim Glossa etc.
THE Gloss teaches (1. A. in cap. placuit. de paenit. did. 4.) that men may be
tied to confess over again those sins, which they have once lawfully
confessed: of which opinion also is the Archdea. (ibid. in verb. and consulo.)
But they hold truer, which teach, that no humane law can bind a man so to do,
without his own consent, as Gerson (in Lect. 2. upon Marc.) Paludanus (in 4.
did. 17. quaest. 5.) Adrianus (in 4. de confess. q. 5.) S. Thomas (quodlib. 1.
ar. 12.) Sum. paen. 25 fol. 74.1.

38. Io. 22. against Io. Poliacus.
THe three heretical opinions of Johannes Poliacus concerning confession, Tria
illa dieta etc.
were confuted by pope John 22. in Extrauag. vas Elect. Sum. paenit. c. 25. f.
74.1.

39. Io. Mayor against the common opinion and Nauar.
IO. Mayor ( in 4. d. 17. q. 6.) in defense of the Gloss holds, Jo. Mayor qui
maxim contendit etc.
this second confession of the same sins requisite for religious persons, but
he dares not affirm it fit for all the people. Nauar. Sum. paen. cap. 25. fol.
74.

40. Caietane opposed by Navarre and others.
COncerning the questions to be moved by the Confessor to the penitent before
his shrift, Jnterrogatio praeambula etc.
see the disagreement betwixt Caietane and Nauar. Sum. paen. c. 26. fol. 78.2.

DECAD. V.
41. Navarre against Caietane.
Non sufficit autem vt putat Caietan. etc.
COncerning the sufficiency of knowledge required in a Confessor: See the
difference betwixt Caietane and others on the one side, which hold it enough
in some cases if he know the form of absolution: and Nauar on the other, who
requires somewhat more. Sum. paenit. cap. 28. fol. 88.1.2.

42. Some namelesse Doctors against the rest.
Quicquid aliqui etc.
SOme hold, that under the seal of Confession we are bound only to conceal
the very sin so confessed: But the common opinion of Doctors is, that not
only mortal and venial sins, but all circumstances (which might bring the
sin unto knowledge) must be also concealed. Sum. paenit. cap. 29. fol. 89.1.

43. Navarre against Panormitan and Caietane.
Quicquid contrarium dicat Caietan.
COncerning particular cases, how far we may go in the revelation of things
confessed: See the disagreement of Caietane and Panormitan with P. Nauarrus.
Summa Paenitentiae cap. 30.

44. Scotus, Bonauenture, Durand. etc. against Archidiac. both Cardinals, and
the Canon etc.
THat the Penitent may give leave unto his Confessor to reveal somewhat of his
confession, Licentiam hanc dari posse etc.
only when it may tend to his own spiritual good, is held by Scotus in 4.
did. 21. Bonauenture and Durandus, Richardus and Angelus verb. confess. But it
is truer that he may give his Confessor leave to reveal it for his own
temporal good, or others, as is plain in cap. Domino Sancto d. 50. and
Archidiaconus Dominic. and both Cardinals in cap. (ipsi Apostoli) Turrecremata
his shift in this case, see confuted by Nauar. Sum. paen. cap. 32. fol. 95.96.

45. Alexander, Ostiensis, Io. Andreas, Panormitan, Petr. ab Anchor etc.
against Thomas, Scotus, Paludan, Bonauenture, Hostiensis, Caietan.
Aliqui saltem in alijs duobus etc.
SOme hold, in two cases confession should be revealed: first, in a case of
heresy, which opinion the Doctors (upon 4. d. 21.) and Adrianus (in 4. de
confess. post. 5.) and Caietane ( Tom. 1. opusc. tract. 21.) have rejected, and
have condemned that old Latin verse, which maintains it as pestilent. The
second, when a notorious crime to be committed, is confessed, as the burning of
the City, etc. and the party confessing will not relent from his ill purpose:
In such a case it is held by some that the confession may be revealed: So teach
Alexander in 4. par. qu. 78. mem. 2. Ostiensis, Io. Andreas, Panormitan,
Petrus, ab Anchorano, Decius, Angelus, Syluester, which Authors grievously
erred in this matter etc. All other therefore, as Saint Thomas, Scotus,
Paludanus, Bonauenture in 4. did. 21. and Hostiensis himself, in Summa.
paenit. paragraph. in quo. Turrecremata in cap. Sacerdos. Caietane in Tom. 1.
Opusc. Tract. 21. teach, it is utterly unlawful to disclose it. Yea Caietane
asked by another Cardinal, answers, that a Confessor to whom is revealed a
Treasonable purpose, to kill the King or the pope, may not reveal it. Sum.
paenit. cap. 32. fol. 98. and 99.

46. Richardus and Navarre against Mayor and Adrian.
Quid facere debet confessarius etc.
Whether a Priest traveling amongst Thieves into a wood, hearing by one of
them now before hand relenting, that they mean to kill him in that wood, be
bound to go on into the wood, and die rather then reveal that which was
confessed, see disputed betwixt Io. Mayor in 4. did. 21. and Adrianus in 4. de
confess. post. 5. on the one side, which hold, he may return and save
himself: and Richardus in 4. did. 21. art. 4. on the other, who holds, (and
Navarre with him) that he must rather go into the Wood, and manifestly hazard
his life. Sum. paenit. d. 32. fol. 99.2.

47. Nauar against some namelesse.
Confessariu^ quo ad confitentem etc.
THat which some hold, that a Confessor must so behave himself out of
Confession toward the Penitent, as if he had never heard his confession, See
confuted by Nauar. Sum. paenit. cap. 32. fol. 103.1.

48. Navarre against diverse Confessors.
Six several fashions of Absolution, Informa absolutionis.
used by the Confessors of his time, See confuted by Nauar. Sum. Paenit. cap.
33. fol. 105.106. etc.

49. Navarre against the common practice.
THe imposition of hands upon every Penitent, Manus impositio super capite
paenitentis etc.
is not necessary always, nor fit to be used, yea sometime evil: See defended
by Navarre, As when the penitent is a woman, and perhaps sweetly beautiful,
and delicately attired: according to Paludanus in 4. did. 22. quaest. 3. Sum.
paen. 33. fol. 107.1.

50. Navarre against Angelus.
Hinc infertur falli Angelum etc.
THat a Confessor may absolve his penitent from his sins, and after send him for
absolution from his excommunication to his superior, unto whom that
excommunication is reserved, is falsely taught by Angelus in ver. Confess.
parag. 10. says Nauarrus. Sum. paen. 34. fol. 112.1.

DECAD. VI.
51. Popish Doctors divided.
Jn hac quaestione difficili etc.
IN this difficult question our Doctors agree not: whether a Confessor may
absolve a penitent which will not obey him; because the penitent follows other
Doctors, which hold the contrary opinion to the Confessor. Some hold, that
penitent may not be absolved; but their opinion is more probable, which hold he
may. Sum. paen. 35. fol. 114.

52. Scotus and the Doctors of Paris against Thomas, Bonauenture, Richardus,
Durandus etc.
Quamuis mult. Doctores, etc.
ALthough many Doctors think, that no sacramental satisfaction done out of
charity, auailes any thing to expiate the punishment for sin, which we owe to
God, because God accepts not his works, that is infected with mortal sin,
and by consequent, is his enemy, for any satisfaction: as St. Thomas, Bonauent.
Richard. Durand. upon 4. d. 15.16. Caietan Tom. 1. Opusc. Tract. 6. q. 1. Yet
it is more truly held by Scotus (in 4. d. 15. q. 1.) and the Doctors of Paris
in the same place, that he which is in mortal sin may satisfy for his
temporal punishment, due to his sin wiped off by contrition. Sum. Paenit.
37. fol. 120.

53. Navarre against Caietane.
CAietane holds ( Tom. 1. Opusc. Tract. 6.) that a sacramental satisfaction
takes not the like effect afterward, which it would have had, Quamuis Caietanus
etc.
if it had been done in charity: But the contrary is truer, that such
satisfaction by the addition of charity afterward, becomes as perfect as if it
should have been done in it. Sum. paen. 37. fol. 120.2.

54. Thomas, Paludanus, Mayor. Almaine, Roffensis, Anthoninus, against Caietane
and the truer opinion.
IN this question so difficult and controuersall amongst our Authors,
howsoever Saint Thomas, In hac quaestione satis difficili etc.
Paludanus, and others (upon 4. did. 20.) Mayor (in 4. did. 17.) Almaine (in
4. did. 18.) Roffensis in his 5. Artic. against Luther and St. Anthoninus (3.
p. Tit. 14. cap. 19.) hold, that the Penitent is bound upon command to accept
the penance imposed, and having once accepted, to perform it: yet the truer
opinion is, that the penitent is not bound by precept before he be absolved, to
accept the penance enjoined by his Confessor; But that it is free for him to
accept or not accept it, and it is enough that he will either in this life, or
in Purgatory satisfy for his sins. So Caietane (in summa verb. Satisfactio)
and Hostiensis (in summa de paenit, and remiss.) says, that only the Lords
prayer is to be enjoined to the penitent, to be said for penance, rather then
he should be sent away not absolved Sum. paenit. cap. 38. fol. 121.1.2.

55. Nauar against Richard. Anthoninus, Syluester, etc.
RIchardus (in 4. d. 17. art. 2. q. 8) Anthoninus (3. p. Tit. 14. cap. 19.) and
Syluest. (verbo confessio) are deceived, Vnde falluntur Richard. etc.
which hold, that upon mere omission of doing penance, confession is to be
iterated. Sum. paen. cap. 38. fol. 124.2.

56. Two contrary opinions of Popish Doctors.
WHether we are bound to confess venial sins, two opinions are reported by
Thomas. (q. 6. art. 3.) Franciscus de Victoria (Sum. Sacram. de confessione
art. 129.

57. Innocentius, Archidiac. Adrian. Palud. Bonauent. against Saint Thomas, Fr.
Vict. and other Doctors.
THat a man is bound presently upon his sin committed to confess, is held by
Innocentius (cap. Omnis) Archidiacon (in cap. ille rex.) But Saint Thomas and
other Doctors hold the contrary, and Franciscus de victor. ibid. art. 133. who
adds Adrianus, Paludan. and Bonauenture, set down some cases wherein a man is
bound presently to confess: but I believe them not. Artic. 136.

58. Fr. Victor. against other Divines.
THat the pope cannot dispense with the precept of confession: see defended
against other their Divines by Victoria art. 140.

59. Scotus against Pet. Lombard, Thomas, Durandus, Paludan, Richard, Gabriel.
THat we may in an extremity confess our sins to a Layman, is held by the
Master of Sentences (4. d. 17.) and Saint Thomas (in the same place, and in
additionibus q. 8. art. 2.) who cyteth Augustine and Bid) by Durandus,
Paludanus, Richardus, Gabriel. But Scotus defends it not safe to be done (in 4.
d. 14. art. 2.) who is confuted by Fr. Victoria art. 143.

60. Paludanus, Capreolus, Durandus, against Mayor and Fr. Victoria.
THat any Priest may absolve us in the point of death, stands by the law of
God, says Paludanus (4. d. 20. q. 1) and Capreolus (d. 19. q. vnica) and
Durandus. It stands only by a positive law, says Mayor and Fr. Victoria. art.
156.

DECAD. VII.
61. Io. Mayor, Bernardus de Gauaco, Capreolus and Caietane in three different
opinions.
WHether an imperfect and inform confession be to be repeated, are three
opinions; two extreme, and one mean: the first of Io. Mayor (4 d. 17. q.
3.1.) that it must be repeated if it were not entire, or wanted of contrition:
which Victoria calls an intolerable error: The second of Bernardus de Gauaco (
in impugnat. Godofredi quodlib. 5) that how imperfect soever it be, it is not
to be repeated. The third is more likely, of Capreolus (d. 17. q. 2.) and
Caietane, which hold, that some imperfect confession is to be repeated, some
not. Victor. art. 157.

62. Fr. Victor. against Durandus.
THat by an imperfect confession, the precept of confession is satisfied, and
fulfilled, is denied in some cases by Durandus (4. did. 17. quaest. 14 and
15.) affirmed by Fran. Victoria. art. 163.

FINIS.

