THE GREAT Impostor, LAID OPEN in a SERMON at GRAYES INN, Febr. 2. 1623.

By IOS. HALL D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Havilano for Nath. Butter. 1623.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, AND WORTHILY Honored Society OF GRAYES INN: AT WHOSE
BAR This IMPOSTOR was openly arraigned: J. H. HVMBLY DEDICATES THIS PVBLIKE
LIFE OF HIS WEAK AND UNWORTHY LABOUR.

THE GREAT IMPOSTOR, Laid open, out of IER. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above
all things.
I Know where I am; in one of the famous Phrontisteries of Law, and Justice:
wherefore serves Law and Justice, but for the prevention or punishment of fraud
and wickedness? Give me leave therefore to bring before you, Students,
Masters, Fathers, Oracles of Law and Justice, the greatest Cheator and
Malefactor in the world, our own Heart. It is a great word that I have said,
in promising to bring him before you; for this is one of the greatest
advantages of his fraud, that he cannot be seen: That as that old Iugler
Apollonius Thyanaeus, when he was brought before the Judge, vanished out of
sight; so this great Impostor, in his very presenting before you, dispeareth
and is gone; yea so cunningly, that he does it with our own consent, and we
would be loath that he could be seen: Therefore as an Epiphonema to this just
complaint of deceitfulness, is added Who can know it? It is easy to know that
it is deceitful, and in what it deceiues, though the deceits themselves cannot
be known, till too late; As we may see the ship, and the sea, and the ship
going on the sea, yet the way of a ship in the sea (as Solomon observes) we
know not: God asks, and God shall answer; What he asks by Jeremy, he shall
answer by S. Paul, Who knows the heart of man? 1 Cor. 2.11.
Even the spirit of man that is in him. If then the heart have but eyes enough to
see it self by the reflection of thoughts, it is enough: Ye shall easily see
and hear enough (out of the analogy and resemblance of hearts) to make you
both astonished and ashamed.

The heart of man lies in a narrow room, yet all the world cannot fill it; but
that which may be said of the heart, would more than fill a world: Here is a
double style given it; of deceitfulness; of wickedness; either of which
knows no end, whether of being, or of discourse. I spend my hour, and might
do my life, in treating of the first.

See then, I beseech you, the Impostor, and the Imposture; The Impostor
himself, The heart of man; The Imposture, Deceitful above all things.

As deceitful persons are wont ever to go under many names, and ambiguous,
and must be expressed with an [ alias] so does the heart of man; Neither man
himself, nor any part of man has so many names, as the heart alone; For every
faculty that it has, and every action it does, it has a several name:
Neither is there more multiplicitie, than doubt in this name; Not so many
terms are used to signify the heart, as the heart signifies many things.

When ye hear of the heart, ye think straight of that fleshie part in the
center of the body which lives first, and dies last; and whose beatings you
find to keep time all the body over; That is not it which is so cunning;
Alas, that is a poor harmless piece; merely passive; and if it do any
thing, as the subministration of Vital spirits, to the maintenance of the
whole frame, it is but good; no, it is the spiritual part that lurkes in this
flesh, which is guilty of such deceit. We must learn of witty Idolatry to
distinguish betwixt the stock and the invisible powers that dwell in it. It is
not for me to be a sticklor betwixt the Hebrews, and the Greek Philosophers,
and Physicians, in a question of natural learning, concerning the (...) of the
soul; nor to insist upon the reasons why the spirit of God rather places all
the spiritual powers in the heart, than in the brain; Doubtless in respect
of the affections there resident, whereby all those speculatiue abilities are
drawn to practice; It shall suffice us to take things as we find them, and to
hold it for granted, that this Monosyllable (for so it is in many languages)
comprises all that intellectiue and affectiue world which concerns man; and
in plain terms to say, that when God says The heart is deceitful, he
means, the understanding, will, affections are deceitful.

The understanding is doubly deceitful; It makes us believe it knows those
things which it does not; and that it knows not those things which it does: As
some foolish Mountebanke, that holds it a great glory to seem to know all
things; or some presuming Physician, that thinks it a shame not to profess
skill in any state of the body, or disease; so does our vain understanding;
therein framing it self according to the spirits it meets withal; if they be
proud and curious, it persuades them, they know every thing; if careless, that
they know enough.

In the first kind; What has not the fond heart of man dared to arrogate to
it self? It knows all the stars by their names; Tush, that is nothing; It
knows what the stars mean by their very looks, what the birds mean by
their chirping, as Apollonius did; What the heart means, by the features of
the face; it knows the events of life by the lines of the hand: the secrets of
Art, the secrets of Nature, the secrets of State, the secrets of others hearts,
yea the secrets of God in the closet of heaven; Yea, not only what God has
done, but what he will do: This is ( Sapiens stultitia) a wise folly, as
Irenaeus said of his Valentinians; All Figure-casters, Palmesters,
Physiognomers, Fortune Tellers, Alchymists, fantastic proiectors, and all the
rabble of professors of those (...), Acts 19.19.
not so much curious as idle Arts, have their word given them by the Apostle,
Deceiving and deceived; neither can these men make any worse fools, than their
hearts have made themselves; (...).
and well may that Alexandrian tax be set upon them in both names, whether of
active, or passive folly: And (as it commonly falls out, that superfluous things
rob the heart of necessary) in the mean while, those things which the heart
may and should know, it lightly mis-knowes: As our senses are deceived by
distance, or interpositions, to think the stars beamie and sparkling, the
Moon horned, the Planets equally remote, the Sun sometimes red, pale other
some: so does also our understanding err, in mis-opinion of divine things; It
thinks it knows God, when it is but an Idol of fancy, as Saul's messengers,
when they came into the room, thought they had the true David, when it was but
a Wispe; it knows the will of God, when it is nothing but gross
mis-construction: so as the common knowledge of men, though they think it a
Torch, is but an Ignis Fatuus to lead them to a ditch: How many thousand
Assyrians think they are in the way to the Prophet, when they are in the midst
of Samaria? How many millions think they walk fairly on to heaven, when
indeed they are in the broad way that leads to destruction? Oh poor blind
Pagans, halfe-sighted Turks, bleare-eied Jews, blind-folded Papists,
Squint-eied Schismatics, purblind ignorants, how well do they find
themselves pleased with their devotion, and think God should be so too; when
it is nothing but a mixture of mesprison, superstition, conceitednesse; and
(according to the seldome-reuerently-vsed proverb) whiles they think they have
God by the finger, they hold a devil by the toe; and all this, because their
heart deceiues them. If careless, and loath to be at the pains of knowing
more, it persuades them they know enough; that they cry out of more, as he did
on the ointment, ( Vt quid perditio haec?) What needs all this waste? and makes
them as conscionable for knowledge, as Esau was for cattle, I have enough, my
brother, keep that thou have to thy self; or as contentedly-resolute, as the
Epicure in the Gospel: Soul take thy ease, thou have knowledge enough laid up
for many years.

From whence it is, that too many rest simply (yea wilfully) in their own
measure, not so much as wishing more skill in Soule-matters; applauding their
own safe mediocritie; like the credulous blind man that thought he now saw a
shimmering of the Sunne-beames, when indeed his back was toward it: Hence it
is that they scoff at the foolishness of preaching, scorn the forward
bookishnesse of others, fearing nothing but a surfeit of Manna, and hating to
know more than their neighbors, than their forefathers; and thus are led on
muffled up in an unfelt ignorance, to their grave, yea, (without the mercy of
God) to their hell.

And as in these things there is a presumption of knowing what we do not; so
contrarily, a dissimulation and concealment of the knowledge of what we do
understand; The heart of man is a great lier to it self this way; Saint Paul
says that of Pagans, which I may boldly say of Christians, they have the
effect of the law written in their hearts; yet many of them will not be
acknowne of one letter engraven there by the finger of God: Certain common
principles there are (together with this law) interlinearily written in the
tables of the heart, as that we must do as we would be done to; That there is
a God; That this God is infinite in justice and truth, and must be served like
himself; these they either blot out, or lay their finger on, that they may not
be seen, purposely, that they may sin freely; and feign would persuade
themselves they never had any such evidence from God: so putting off the checks
of conscience with bold denyalls; like the harlot of Jericho, (but worse than
she) that has hid the Spies, and now out-faces their entertainment: Wherein
the heart does to it self, that which Nahash the Ammonite, would have done to
Israel, put out his own right eye, that it may not see that law whereby it
might be convinced, and find it self miserable. Thus the understanding of man
is every way deceitful in ouerknowing, mis-knowing, dissembling; in all which
it is like an evil and unfaithful eye, that either will be seeing by a false
glass, or a false light, or with distortion; or else wilfully closes the lids
that it may not see at all; and in all this deceiues us.

The will is no less cunning; which though it make fair pretenses of a
general inclination to good, yet ( hic and nunc) in particulars, hangs toward
a pleasing evil; Yea though the Understanding have sufficiently informed it of
the worthiness of good, and the turpitude of evil, yet being overcome with
the false delectablenesse of sin, it yields to a misse-assent; Reason being
(as Aquinas speaks) either swallowed up by some passion, or held down by some
vicious habit: It is true, still the Will follows the Reason, neither can do
otherwise; but therefore, if Reason misled be contrary to Reason, and a
schism arise in the soul, it must follow that the Will must needs be contrary
to Will and Reason; Wherein it is like a Planet, which though it be carried
about perpetually by the first mouer, yet slily creepes on his own way,
contrary to that strong circumuolution: And though the mind be sufficiently
convinced of the necessity, or profit of a good act, yet for the tediousness
annexed to it, in a dangerous spiritual acedie, it insensibly slips away from
it, and is content to let it fall; As some idle, or fearful Merchant, that
could be glad to have gold, if it would come with ease, but will not either
take the pains, or hazard the adventure to fetch it: Thus commonly the Will
(in both respects) Waterman-like looks forward, and rows backward; and under
good pretenses does nothing but deceive.

The affections are as deceitful as either; whether in misse-placing, measure,
or manner.

Mis-placing: They are fiery where they should be cool; and where they should
burn, freeze; Our heart makes us believe it loves God, and gives him pledges
of affection; whiles it secretly doats upon the world; like some false
strumpet, that entertaines her husband with her eyes, and in the mean time
treads upon the toe of an Adulterer under the board: That it loves justice,
when it is but revenge; That it grieves for the missing of Christ, when indeed
it is but for the loaves and fishes; That it fears God, when indeed it is but
afraid of our own torment; That it hates the sin, when it is the person;
That it hates the world, when it thrusts God out of doors to lodge it.

Measure: That we love God enough, and the world but enough, when as indeed the
one love is but as the cold fit of an ague, the other an hot; we chill in the
one, no less than we glow in the other; when we make God only a stale to draw
on the world; That we do enough hate our corruptions, when (at our sharpest)
we do but gently sneape them, as Hely did his sons; or as some indulgent
parent does an unthrifty darling, whom he chides, and yet feeds with the
fuel of his excess; That we have grieved enough for our sins, when they
have not cost us so much as one tear, nothing but a little fashionable wind,
that never came further than the roots of our tongue; That we do enough
compassionate the afflictions of Joseph, when we drink wine in bowls; That
we fear God more than men, when we are ashamed to do that in presence of a
child, which we care not to do in the face of God.

Manner: That our heart loves, and hates, and fears, and joys, and grieves
truly, when it is an hypocrite in all; That it delights constantly in God, and
holy things, when it is but an Ephraims morning dew; That our anger is zealous,
when it is but a flash of personal malice, or a superstitious fury; That we
fear as sons, when it is as cowards, or slaves; That we grieve as Gods
patients, when we fret, and repine, and struggle like franticks against the
hand of our Maker. Thus (to sum up all) the heart of man is wholly set upon
cozenage; the understanding ouer-knowing, mis-knowing, dissembling; The will
pretending, and inclining contrarily; The affections mocking us in the object,
measure, manner; and in all of them the heart of man is deceitful.

Ye have seen the face of this Cheater; look now at his hand; and now ye see
who this Deceiuer is, see also the sleights of his deceit; and therein, the
fashion, the subject, the sequel of it; from whence we will descend to our
Demeanure toward so dangerous an Impostor.

The fashion of his deceit is the same with our ordinary Iuglers; either
cunning conueyance, or false semblance. Cunning conueyance, whether into us, in
us, from us.

The heart admits sin, as Paradise did the Serpent; There it is, but by what
chinkes or cranies it entered, we know not; so as we may say of sin as the
Master of the feast in the Gospel said to his slouenly guest, Quomodo
intrasti? How came thou in hither? Corruption does not eat into the heart as
our first Parents did into the apple, so as the print of their teeth might be
seen, but as the worm eats into the core, insensibly; Neither is there less
closeness when it is entered; I would it were as untrue a word, as it is an
harsh one, that many a professedly-Christian heart, lodges a devil in the
blind rooms of it, and either knows it not, or will not be acknowne of it;
every one that harbors a willing sin in his breast, does so: The malicious
man has a furious devil; the wanton an unclean devil, a Beelphegor, or a
Tammuz; the proud man a Lucifer, the covetous a Mammon; Certainly, these foul
spirits are not more truly in hell, than in a wicked heart; there they are, but
so closely, that I know not if the heart it self know it; it being verified of
this citadell of the heart, which was said of that vast Niniue, that the enemy
had taken some parts of it, long ere the other knew it: What should I speak of
the most common, and yet most dangerous guest, that lodges in this Inn of the
heart, Infidelity? Call at the door, and ask if such a one host not there;
They within make strange of it, deny it, forswear it; Call the officers, make
privy search, you shall hardly find him: Like some Jesuit in a Popish dames
chamber, he is so closely contrived into false floores, and double walls, that
his presence is not more easily known, than hardly convinced, confessed. How
easy is it to say, that if infidelity did not lurk in the hearts of men, they
durst not do as they do; they could not but do, what they do not? Durst
they sin if they were persuaded of an hell? durst they buy a minute of pleasure
with everlasting torments? Could they so slight heaven if they believed it?
Could they be so loath to possess it? Could they think much of a little
painful goodness to purchase an eternity of happiness? No, no, men, fathers,
and brethren; if the heart were not Infidel, whiles the face is Christian,
this could not be. Neither does the heart of man more cunningly convey sin
into, and in it self, than from it; The sin that ye saw even now openly in the
hands, is so swiftly past under the board, that it is now vanished; Look for
it in his forehead, there it is not; look for it under his tongue, there is
none; look for it in his conscience, ye find nothing; and all this by the
legier-de-maine of the heart: Thus Achan has hid his wedge, and now he dares
stand out to a lot; Thus Salomons Harlot has wiped her mouth, and it was not
she: Thus Saul will lie-out his sacrilege, until the very beasts out-bleat,
and out-bellow him; Thus the swearer swears, and when he has done, swears
that he swore not; Thus the unclean fornicator bribes off his sin, and his
shame, and now makes challenges to the world of his honesty. It cannot be
spoken how peeuishly witty the heart of man is this way; neither doubt I but
this wiliness is some of the poison that the subtle serpent infected us with
in that fatal morsel: They were three cunning shifts which the Scripture
records of three women (as that sex has been ever noted for more sudden
pregnancie of wit) Rachel, Rahab, and the good wife of Bahurim; The first
hiding the Teraphim with a modest seat, the second, the spics with
flaxe-stalkes, and the third David's scouts with corn spread over the Well; but
these are nothing to the devices that nature has wont to use for the cloaking
of sin; God made man upright, says Solomon, but he sought many inventions:
Is Adam challenged for sin? Behold all on the sudden it is passed from his
hand, to Gods; The woman that thou gave me: Is Saul challenged for a covetous
and disobedient remissness? the sin is straight passed from the field to
the Altar; I saved the fattest for a sacrifice to the Lord thy God; So the one
begins his sin in God, and the other ends it in him: Is David bewitched with
lust to abuse the Wife? the Husband must be sent home drunk, to hide it, or
if not that, to his long home, in a pretended favor of his valor: Is a
griping Usurer disposed to put his money together to breed a monster? he has
a thousand quirks to cozen both law and conscience: Is a Simoniacall Patron
disposed to make a good match of his peoples souls? it shall be no bargain,
but a gift: he has a living to give, but an horse to sell. And sure I think
in this wise age of the world, Usurers and Simonists strive who shall find the
wittiest way to hell: What should I speak of the secret frauds in contracts,
booties in matches, subornation of instruments, hiring of oaths, feeing of
officers, equivocations of answers, and ten thousand other tricks that the
heart of man has devised for the conueiances of sin; in all which it too
well approues it self incomparably deceitful.

The false semblance of the heart is yet worse; for the former is most-what for
the smothering of evil; this is for the justifying of evil, or the disgrace
of good; In these two does this act of falsehood chiefly consist; in making
evil good, or good evil. For the first; The natural man knows well how
filthy all his brood is, and therefore will not let them come forth, but
disguised with the colors and dresses of good; so as now every one of natures
birds is a Swan; Pride is handsomnesse, desperate fury, valor; lavishness is
noble munificence, drunkenness ciuility, flattery complement, murderous
revenge, justice; the Curtizan is bona foemina, the Sorcerer a wise man, the
oppressor a good husband; Absalom will go pay his vows; Herod will worship
the Babe. For the second; such is the envy of nature, that where she sees a
better face than her own, she is ready to scratch it, or cast dirt in it; and
therefore knowing that all virtue has a native beauty in it, she labors to
deforme it by the foulest imputations. Would the Israelites be devout? they are
idle; Does David dance for joy before the Arc? he is a fool in a Morris:
Does Saint Paul discourse of his heavenly Vision? too much learning has made
him mad. Do the Disciples miraculously speak all the tongues of Babel? They
are full of new wine: Do they preach Christ's Kingdom? they are seditious; The
resurrection? they are bablers. Is a man conscionable? he is an Hypocrite: Is
he conformable? he is unconscionable: Is he plain dealing? he is rudely
uncivil: Is he wisely insinuatiue? he is a flatterer: In short, such is the
wicked craft of the heart, that it would let us see nothing in it own form;
but feign would show us evil fair, that we might be inamored of it, and
virtue ugly, that we might abhor it; and as it does for the way, so does it
for the end; hiding from us the glory of heaven, that is laid up for
ouer-commers, and showing us nothing but the pleasant closure of wickedness;
making us believe that hell is a palace, and heaven a dungeon, that so we might
be in love with death; and thus both in cunning conueyance, and false
semblance, The heart of man is deceitful above all things.

Ye have seen the fashion of this deceit; cast now your eyes upon the subject:
And whom does it then deceive? It does deceive others, it can deceive it self,
it would deceive Satan, yea God himself. Others, first: How many do we take
for honest and sound Christians, who yet are but errant hypocrites? These Apes
of Satan have learned to transform themselves into Angels of light; The heart
bids the eyes look upward to heaven, when they are full of adultery; It bids
the hands to raise up themselves toward their Maker, when they are full of
blood; It bids the tongue wagge holily, when there is nothing in the bosom but
Atheous profaneness; It bids the knee to bow like a Camel, when the heart is
stiff as an Elephant; yea if need be it can bid a tear fall from the eye, or
an alms or just action fall from the hand, and all to gull the world with a
good opinion; In all which, false chapmen and horse-coursers do not more
ordinarily deceive their buyers in shops and faires, than we do one another
in our conversation: Yea, so crafty is the heart that it can deceive it self;
By ouer-weening his own powers, as the proud man; by vnder-valuing his graces,
as the modest; by mis-taking his estate, as the ignorant; How many hearts do
thus grossly beguile themselves? The first thinks he is rich, and fine, when
he is beggarly and naked; so did the Angel of Laodicea: The second is poor
in his own spirit, when he is rich of Gods spirit: The third thinks that he
is a great favorite of heaven, when he is rather branded for an outcast; that
he is truly noble, when he is a slave to that, which is baser than the worst of
Gods creatures, sin: Let the proud and ignorant worldling therefore know,
that though others may mock him with applauses, yet that all the world cannot
make him so much a fool as his own heart.

Yea, so cunning is the heart, that it thinks to go beyond the devil
himself: I can (thinks it) swallow his bait, and yet avoid his hook; I can
sin, and live; I can repent of sinning, and defeat my punishment by
repenting; I can run upon the score, and take up the sweet and rich
commodities of sinful pleasure; and when I have done, I can put my self under
the protection of a Savior, and escape the arrest: Oh the world of souls that
perish by this fraud, fondly beguiling themselves, whiles they would beguile
the Tempter.

Yet higher: Lastly, as Satan went about to deceive the Son of God; so this
foolish consort and client of his goes about to deceive God himself: The first
pair of hearts that ever was, were thus credulous, to think they should now
meet with a means of knowledge and Deifying, which God either knew not of, or
grudged them, and therefore they would be stealing it out of the side of the
apple, without God, yea against him: Tush, none eye shall see us; Is there
knowledge in the most high, says the sottish Atheist? Lord, have not we heard
thee preach in out streets? have not we cast out Devils in thy name? says the
smoothing hypocrite; as if he could fetch God over for an admission into
heaven. Thou have not lied to man, but to God, says S. Peter to Ananias. And
pettish Jonas, after he had been cooled in the belly of the Whale, and the
Sea, yet will be bearing God down in an argument to the justifying of his idle
choler, I do well to be angry to the death. But as the greatest Politicians
are often overtaken with the grossest follies (God owes proud wits a shame) the
heart of man could not possibly devise how so much to be fool it self, as by
this wicked presumption: Psalm. 94.10, 11.
Oh ye fools, when will ye understand? He that formed the eye, shall he not
see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he understand? The Lord knows
the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. A rod for the back of fools, yea
a rod of iron for such presumptuous fools, to crush them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.

Ye have seen the fashion and the subject of this deceit: the sequel, or
effect follows; every way lamentable; For hence it comes to pass that many a
one has had his heart in keeping forty, fifty, threescore years, and more,
and yet is not acquainted with it; and all because this craft has kept it at
the Priscillianists lock, Tu omnes, te nemo; It affects to be a searcher of
all men, no man is allowed to come aboard of it; And if a man whether out of
curiosity, or conscience, be desirous to inquire into it (as it is a shame
for a man to be a stranger at home; Know ye not your own hearts, says the
Apostle;) it casts it self, Proteus-like, into so many forms, that it is very
hard to apprehend it. One while the man has no heart, ((...)) says Solomon;
Then he has ((...)) an heart, and an heart, Psalm. 12.
says David; and one of his hearts contradicts another; and then how knows he
whether to believe? And what certainty, what safety can it be for a man to live
unacquainted with himself? O^ this vnacquaintance, secondly, arises a
dangerous mes-prison of a man's self, in the nature and quantity of his sin,
in the quality of his repentance, in his peace and entireness with God, in his
right to heaven, and (in a word) in his whole spiritual estate. Of this
mes-prison, thirdly, arises a fearful disappointment of all his hopes, and a
plunging into unavoidable torments: Wherein it is miserable to see, how
cunningly the traitorous hearts of many men bear them in hand all their lives
long; soothing them in all their courses, promising them success in all their
ways, securing them from fear of evils, assuring them of the favor of God,
and possession of heaven (as some fond Bigot would brag of his Bull, or
Medall, or Agnus Dei; or, as those Priests that Gerson Qui public volunt
dogmatizarescupraedicare popu^o, quod si quis audit missam in illo die non
(...) coe^us, nec moriet^r morte subitanea, nec carebit sufficienti
sustetatione, etc
taxes, who made the people believe that the Mass was good for the eyesight,
for the mawe, for bodily health, and preservation) till they come to their
deathbeds; But then when they come to call forth the comforts they must trust
to, they find them like to some unfaithful Captain, that has all the while
in Garrison filled his purse with dead paies, and made up the number of his
companies with borrowed men; and in time of ease showed fair; but when he is
called forth by a sudden alarm, bewraies his shame and weakness, and fails
his General when he has most need of him; right thus do the perfidious
hearts of many, after all the glorious bragges of their security, on the bed of
their last reckoning, find nothing but a cold despair, and a woeful horror of
conscience; and therefore too justly may their hearts say to them, as the heart
of Apollodorus the Tyran seemed to say unto him; who dreamed one night that he
was fleaed by the Scythians, and boiled in a Caldron; and that his heart spoke
to him out of the kettle ((...) (...)) It is I that have drawn thee to all
this. Certainly never man was, or shall be frying in hell, but cries out of
his own heart, and accuses that deceitful piece as guilty of all his torment:
For let Satan be never so malicious, and the world never so parasiticall, yet
if his own heart had been true to him, none of these could have hurt him. Let
the rest of our enemies do their worst, only from the evil of our own
hearts, good Lord deliver us.

It were now time for our thoughts to dwell a little upon the meditation, and
deploration of our own danger and misery, who are every way so environed with
subtlety. If we look at Satan, his old title is, that old Serpent; who must
needs therefore now, by so long time and experience, be both more old and more
Serpent. If we look at sin, it is as crafty as he; Lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: If at our own hearts, we hear
(that which we may feel) that the heart is deceitful above all things. Oh
wretched men that we are, how are we beset with Impostors on all hands; If it
were more seasonable for us to bewail our estate, than to seek the redress
of it; But since it is not so much worth our labor to know how deep the pit
is, into which we are fallen, as how to come out of it, hear rather (I
beseech you) for a conclusion, how we may avoid the danger of the deceit of
our false heart; even just so as we would prevent the nimble feats of some
cheating Iugler, Search him, watch him, Trust him not.

Look well into his hands, pockets, boxes, sleeves, yea, under his very tongue
it self; There is no fraud so secret, but may be descried; were our hearts as
crafty as the devil himself, they may be found out; (...).
We are not ignorant (says Saint Paul) of Satan's devices; much more then may
we know our own; Were the hearts of men (as Solomon speaks of Kings) like
unto deep waters, they have a bottom, and may be fathomed; Were they as dark
as hell it self, and never so full of windings, and blind ways, and obscure
turnings, do but take the lantern of Gods law in your hand, and you shall
easily find all the false and foul corners of them; As David says of the
Sun, nothing is hid from the light thereof; Prove your selves, says the
Apostle; It is hard if falsehood be so constant to it self that by many
questions it be not tripped: Where this duty is slackened, it is no wonder if
the heart be ouer-run with spiritual fraud; Often privy searches scarre away
vagrant, and disorderly persons, where no inquiry is made, is a fit harbor for
them; If ye would not have your hearts, therefore, become the lawless
Ordinaries of unclean spirits, search them often; Leave not a straw unshaken to
find out these Labanish Teraphim that are stolen, and hid within us; And, when
we have searched our best, if we fear there are yet some unknown evils
lurking within us (as the man after Gods own heart prays against secret
sins) let us call him in that cannot be deceived; and say to God with the
Psalmist, Search thou me o Lord, and try me; Oh let us yield our selves over
to be ransackt by that all-seeing eye, and effectual hand of the Almighty.
All our daubing, and cogging, and packing, and shuffling lies open before him,
and he only can make the heart ashamed of it self.

And when our hearts are once stripped naked, and carefully searched, let our eyes
be ever fixedly bent upon their conueyances, and inclinations; If we search and
watch not, we may be safe for the present, long we cannot; for our eye is no
sooner off, than the heart is busy in some practice of falsehood; It is well if
it forbear whiles we look on, for The thoughts of man's heart are only evil
continually; and many a heart is like some bold and cunning thief, that looks
a man in the face, and cuts his purse: But surely, if there be any guardian of
the soul, it is the eye; The wise man's eye (says Solomon) is in his head;
doubtless, on purpose to look into his heart: My son, above all keepings
keep thy heart, says he; If we do not dog our hearts then in all our
ways, but suffer our selves to lose the sight of them, they run wild, and we
shall not recover them till after many slippery tricks on their parts, and much
repentance on ours. Alas, how little is this regarded in the world? wherein the
most take no keep of their souls, but suffer themselves to run after the
ways of their own hearts, without observation, without controlement; What
should I say of these men, but that they would feign be deceived, and perish?
For after this loose licentiousness (without the great mercy of God) they
never set eye more upon their hearts, till they see them either fearfully
intoyled in the present judgments of God, or fast chained in the pit of hell,
in the torments of final condemnation.

Thirdly, If our searches and watches should fail us, we are sure our
distrust cannot; It is not possible our heart should deceive us, if we trust it
not; We carry a remedy within us of others fraud; and why not of our own? The
Italians not unwisely pray God (in their known proverb) to deliver them from
whom they trust; for we are obnoxious to those we rely upon, but nothing can
leese that which it had not; Distrust therefore can never be disappointed: If
our hearts then shall promise us ought (as it has learned to profer largely,
of him that said, All these will I give thee) although with vows and oaths,
ask for his assurances; if he cannot fetch them from the evidences of God,
trust him not: If he shall report ought to us, ask for his witnesses; if he
cannot produce them from the records of God, trust him not: If he shall advise
us ought, ask for his warrant; if he cannot fetch it from the Oracles of God,
trust him not; And in all things so bear our selves to our heart, as those
that think they live amongst thieves and cozeners; ever iealously and
suspiciously; taking nothing of their word, scarce daring to trust our own
senses; making sure work in all matters of their transactions. I know I speak
to wise men, whose counsel is wont to be asked, and followed, in matter of the
assurances of estates; whose wisdom is frequently employed in the trial,
euiction, dooming of malefactors: Alas, what shall it avail you that you can
advise for the prevention of others fraud, if in the mean time you suffer your
selves to be coz^^^d at home? What comfort can you find in public service to
the state against offenders, if you should carry a fraudulent and wicked heart
in your own bosoms? There is one above whom we may trust, whose word is more
firm than heaven; When heaven shall pass, that shall stand; It is no trusting
ought besides, any further than he gives his word for it. Man's Epithet is, Homo
mendax, and his best part, the hearts, deceitful. Alas, what shall we think,
or say of the condition of those men, which never follow any other advice than
what they take of their own heart? Such are the most; that make not Gods Law
of their counsel; As Esaias said of Israel, Esa. 57.17.
Abijt vagtis in viacordis sui: Surely they are not more sure they have an
heart, than that they shall be deceived with it, and betrayed unto death; Of
them may I say, as Solomon does of the wanton fool, that follows an harlot;
Pro. 7.21.
Thus with her great craft she caused him to yield, and with her flattering
lips she intised him: And he followed her straightwayes, as an Ox that goes to
the slaughter, or as a fool to the stocks for correction. Oh then, dear
Christians, as ever ye desire to avoid that direful slaughterhouse of hell,
those wailings, and gnashings, and gnawings, and everlasting burnings, ^^^ke
carefully to your own he^rts; and what ever suggestions they shall make unto
you, trust them not, till you have tried them by that vnfaileable rule of
righteousness, the royal law of your Maker, which can no more deceive you,
than your hearts can free you from deceit.

Lastly, that we may avoid not only the events, but the very enterprises of
this deceit, let us countermine the subtle workings of the heart. Our Savior
has bidden us be wise as Serpents; What should be wise but the heart? And can
the heart be wiser than it self? (...) wisdom of the heart remedy the craft
of the heart? Certainly it may. There are two men in every regenerate breast,
the old and the new; And of these (as they are ever plotting against each
other) we must take the better side, and labor that the new man, by being
more wise in God, may outstrip the old: And how shall that be done? If we
would dispossess the strong man that keeps the house, our Savior bids us
bring in a stronger than he; and if we would ouer-reach the subtlety of the
old man, yea, the old Serpent, bring in a wiser than he, even the Spirit of
God, the God of wisdom; (...) would have Achitophels wicked counsels crossed,
set up an Hushai within us: The foolishness of God is wiser than the wisdom
of men. Could we but settle God within us, our crafty hearts would be out of
countenance, and durst not offer to play any of their deluding tricks before
him from whom nothing is hid; and if they could be so impudently presumptuous,
yet they should be so soon controlled in their first motions, that there would
be more danger of their confusion, than of our deceit. As ye love your selves
therefore, and your own safety, and wo^ld be free from the peril of this
secret broaker of Satan, your own hearts, render them obediently into the
hands of God; give him the keys of these closets of his own making; beseech
him that he will vouchsafe to dwell and reign in them; so shall we be sure
that neither Satan shall deceive them, nor they deceive us; but both we and
they shall be kept safe and inviolable, and presented glorious to the
appearance of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: To whom with the FATHER, and the HOLY
GHOST ^e all honor and glor^^ for ever and ever AMEN.

FINIS.

