Contemplations UPON THE PRINCIPAL PASSAGES OF THE HOLY STORY. THE SECOND
VOLVME; In four Books.

By I. HALL, Dr. of Divinity.

At London printed by H. L. for S. Macha^, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Bul-head. 1614.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Most excellent Prince;
ACcording to the true duty of a servant, I intended all my Contemplations to
your now-glorious Brother, of sweet and sorrowful memory. The first part
whereof, as it was the last Book that ever was dedicated to that dear, and
immortal name of his: so it was the last, that was turned over by his gracious
hand.

Now, since it pleased the GOD of spirits to call him from these poor
Contemplations of ours, to the blessed Contemplation of himself, to see him as
he is, to see, as he is seen; to whom is this sequel of my labors due, but to
your Highness, the heir of his Honor, and virtues? Every year of my short
pilgrimage, is like to add something to this Work; which in regard of the
subject, is scarce finite: The whole does not only crave your Highnesses
Patronage, but promises to requite your Princely acceptance, with many sa^red
examples* and rules, both for piety, and wisdom; toward the decking up of
this flourishing spring of your Age; in the hopes whereof, not only we live,
but he that is dead, lives still in you: And if any piece of these endeavors
come short of my desires, I shall supply the rest with my prayers: which
shall never be vvanting to the GOD of Princes, that your* happy proceedings
may make glad the Church of GOD, and your self in either World, glorious.

Your Highnesses in all humble devotion, and faithful observance, J. HALL.

Contemplations. THE FIFTH BOOK. The waters of Marah. The Quayles and Manna.
The Rock of Rephidim. The Foil of Amalek, or, The hand of Moses lift up. The
Law. The Golden Calfe.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, EARL OF HVNTINGDON; LORD Hastings, Botreaux,
Molines, and Moiles; His Majesty's Lieutenant in the County of Leicester, A
Bountiful Favorer of all good Learning, A Noble Precedent of Virtue; The First
Patron of my poor studies; I. H. Dedicates this first piece of his Labors,
and wishes all Honor and Happiness.

CONTEMPLATIONS. THE FIFTH BOOK.
The waters of Marah.
ISRAEL was not more loath to come to the red Sea, then to part from it. How
soon can God turn the horror of any evil into pleasure? One shore resounded
with shrieks of fear; the other with timbrels, and dances, and songs of
deliverance. Every maine affliction is our red Sea, which whiles it threats to
swallow, preserues us: At last our songs shall be louder then our cries. The
Israelitish Dames, when they saw their danger, thought they might have left
their timbrels behind them; how unprofitable a burden seemed those instruments
of Music? yet now they live to renew that forgotten minstralsie, and dancing,
which their bondage had so long discontinued: and well might those feet dance
upon the shore, which had walked through the Sea. The Land of Goshen was not so
bountiful to them, as these waters. That affoorded them a servile life: This
gave them at once freedom, victory, riches; bestowing upon them the remainder
of that wealth, which the Egyptians had but lent. It was a pleasure to see the
floating carcasses of their adversaries; and every day offers them new booties;
It is no marvel then if their hearts were tied to these banks. If we find
but a little pleasure in our life, we are ready to dote upon it. Every small
contentment glewes our affections to that we like: And if here our imperfect
delights hold us so fast, that we would not be loosed; how forceable shall
those infinite joys be above, when our souls are once possessed of them?

Yet if the place had pleased them more, it is no marvel they were willing to
follow Moses; that they durst follow him in the wilderness, whom they
followed through the Sea: It is a great confirmation to any people, when they
have seen the hand of God with their guide* O Savior which have undertaken to
carry me from the spiritual Egypt, to the Land of promise; how faithful, how
powerful, have I found thee? How fearlesly should I trust thee? how
cheerfully should I follow thee through contempt, poverty, death it self?
Master, if it be thou, bid us come unto thee.

Immediately before, they had complained of too much water: now they go three
days without. Thus God meant to punish their infidelity, with the defect of
that whose abundance made them to distrust. Before, they saw all water, no
land; now all dry, and dusty land, and no water. Extreamities are the best
trials of men: As in bodies, those that can bear sudden changes of heats and
cold without complaint, are the strongest. So much as an evil touches upon the
mean, so much help it yields toward patience; Every degree of sorrow is a
preparation to the next: but when we pass to extremes without the mean, we
want the benefit of recollection; and must trust to our present strength. To
come from all things to nothing, is not a descent but a downfall; and it is a
rare strength and constancy, not to be maimed at least. These headlong evils,
as they are the sorest, so they must be most provided for; as on the contrary a
sudden advancement from a low condition to the height of honor, is most hard
to menage. No man can marvel how that tyrant blinded his captives, when he
hears that he brought them immediately, out of a dark dungeon, into rooms
that were made bright, and glorious. We are not worthy to know, fot what we
are reserved; no evil can amate us, if we can ouercom sudden extremities.

The long differring of a good (though tedious) yet makes it the better, when
it comes. Well did the Israelites hope that the waters which were so long in
finding, would be precious when they were found: Yet behold they are crossed,
not only in their desires, but in their hopes; for after three days travel,
the first fountains they find are bitter waters. If these wells had not run
pure gall, they could not have so much complained. Long thirst will make bitter
waters sweet; yet such were these springs, that the Israelites did not so mnch
like their moisture, as abhor their relish. I see the first handsell that God
gives them in their voyage to the Land of promise; Thirst, and bitterness.
Satan gives us pleasant entrances into his ways, and reserues the bitterness
for the end^* God ^nures us to our worst at first; and sweetens our conclusion
with pleasure.

The same GOD, that would not lead Israel through the Philistines Land, least
they should shrink at the sight of war, now leads them through the
Wilderness, and fears not to try their patience with bitter potions. If he
had not loved them, the Egyptian furnace or sword had prevented their thirst,
or that Sea whereof their enemies drunk dead; and yet see how he diets them.
Never any have had so bitter draughts upon earth as those he loves best: The
palate is an ill judge of the favors of God. O my Savior, thou did drink a
more bitter cup from the hands of thy Father, then that which thou refusedst of
the Jews, or then that which I can drink from thee.

Before, they could not drink if they would; now they might and would not. God
can give us blessings with such a tang, that the fruition shall not much differ
from the want: So, many a one has riches, not grace to use them; many have
children, but such, as they prefer barrennes. They had said before, Oh that
we had any water; now, Oh that we had good water. It is good so to desire
blessings from God, that we may be the better for inioying them; so to crave
water, that it may not be sauced with bitterness.

Now these fond Israelites in steed of praying, murmur; in steed of praying to
God, murmur against Moses. What has the righteous done? He made not either the
Wilderness dry, or the waters bitter; Yea (if his conduct were the matter)
what one foot went he before them without God? The pillar led them, and not
he; yet Moses is murmured at. It is the hard condition of authority, that
when the multitude fare well, they applaud themselves; when ill, they repine
against their governors. Who can hope to be free, if Moses escape not? Never
any Prince so merited of a people. He thrust himself upon the pikes of
Pharaohs tyranny. He brought them from a bondage worse then death. His rod
divided the Sea, and shared life to them, death to their pursuers. Who would
not have thought these men, so obliged to Moses, that no death could have
opened their mouths, or raised their hands against him? Yet now, the first
occasion of want makes them rebel: No benefit can stop the mouth of
Impatience. If our turn be not served for the present, former favors are
either forgotten, or contemned. No marvel if we deal so with men, when God
receives this measure from us. One year of famine, One summer of pestilence,
One moon of unseasonable weather, makes us ouer-look all the blessings of God;
and more to mutine at the sense of our evil, then to praise him for our
varieties of good: whereas, favors well bestowed leave us both mindful and
confident; and will not suffer us either to forget or distrust. O God, I have
made an ill use of thy mercies, if I have not learned to be content with thy
corrections.

Moses was in the same want of water with them, in the same dis^aste of
bitterness, and yet they say to Moses, What shall we drink? If they had seen him
furnished with full vessels of sweet water, and themselves put over to this
unsavory liquor; envy might have given some color to this mutiny: but now
their leaders common misery, might have freed him from their murmurs. They
held it one piece of the late Egyptian tyranny, that a task was required of
them, which the imposers knew they could not perform; to make brick when they
had no straw^; Yet they say to Moses, what shall we drink? Themselves are
grown exactors, and are ready to menace more then stripes, if they have not
their ends, without means: Moses took not upon him their provision, but their
deliverance: and yet, as if he had been the common victualer of the Camp, they
ask, what shall we drink? When want meets with impatient minds, it transports
them to fury; Every thing disquiets, and nothing satisfies them.

What course does Moses now take? That which they should have done, and did
not; They cried not more fervently to him, then he to God: If he were their
leader, God was his. That which they unjustly required of him, he justly
requires of God, that could do it; He knew whence to look for redress of all
complaints; this was not his charge, but his Makers, which was able to
maintain his own act. I see and acknowledge the harbor, that we must put
into, in all our ill weather. It is to thee, O God, that we must pour out our
hearts, which only can make our bitter waters sweet.

Might not that rod which took away the liquid nature from the waters, and made
them solid; have also taken away the bitter quality from these waters, and made
them sweet? since to flow is natural unto the water; to be bitter is but
accidental. Moses durst not employ his rod without a precept; he knew the
power came from the commandment. We may not presume on likelyhoods, but
depend upon warrants; therefore Moses does not lift up his rod to the waters,
but his hand and voice to GOD.

The hand of faith never knocked at heaven in vain: No sooner has Moses showed
his grieuance, then God shows him the remedy: yet an unlikely one, that it
might be miraculous. He that made the waters, could have given them any savor:
How easy is it for him that made the matter, to alter the quality? It is not
more hard to take away, then to give. Who doubts but the same hand that created
them, might have immediately changed them? Yet that almighty power will do it
by means. A piece of wood must sweeten the waters: What relation has wood to
water; or that which has no savor; to the redress of bitterness? Yet here is
no more possibility of failing, then proportion to the success: All things are
subject to the command of their Maker; He that made all of nothing, can make
every thing of any thing: There is so much power in every creature, as he will
please to give. It is the praise of omnipotency to work by improbabilities;
Elisha with salt, Moses with wood, shall sweeten the bitter waters; Let no man
despise the means, when he knows the author.

God taught his people by actions, as well as words. This entrance showed them
their whole journey; wherein they should taste of much bitterness: but at last
through the mercy of GOD, sweetened with comfort. Or did it not represent
themselves rather, in the journey? in the fountains of whose hearts, were the
bitter waters of manifold corruptions, yet their unsavory souls are sweetened
by the graces of his Spirit. O blessed Savior: the wood of thy Cross, that
is, the application of thy sufferings, is enough to sweeten a whole sea of
bitterness. I care not how unpleasant a potion I find in this wilderness, if
the power and benefit of thy precious death may season it to my soul.

The Quayles, and Manna.
THe thirst of Israel is well quenched: for besides the change of the wate^s of
Marah, their station is changed to Elim; where were twelve fountains, for
their twelve Tribes; and now they complain, as fast, of hunger.

Contentation is a rare blessing; because it arises either from a fruition of
all comforts, or a not desiring of some which we have not. Now, we are never
so bare, as not to have some benefits; never so full as not to want something,
yea as not to be full of wants. God has much ado with us: Either we lack
health, or quietness, or children, or wealth, or company, or our selves in all
these. It is a wonder these men found not fault with the want of (...) their
quayles, or with their old clothes, or their solitary way Nature is moderate
in (...) desires: but conceit is insatiable. Yet who can deny (...) be a sore
vexation? Before (...) they were forbidden sour bread; but now what ^eauen
is so ^^wr as want? When meane^ hold out, it is easy to be (...). Whiles their
dough, and other c^^es lasted, vvhiles they were gathering of the dates of
Elim, we hear no news of them. Who cannot pray for his daily bread, when
he has it in his cup-bord? But when our own provision fails us, then not to
distrust the provision of God, is a noble trial of faith. They should have
said; He that stopped the mouth of the sea, that it could not devour us, can as
easily stop the mouth of our stomachs; It was no easier matter to kill the
first borne of Egypt, by his immediate hand, then to preserve us: He that
commanded the Sea to stand still and guard us, can as easily command the earth
to nourish us: He that made the rod a serpent, can as well make these stones,
bread: He that brought armies of frogs and caterpillars to Egypt, can as well
bring whole drifts of birds and beasts, to the desert: He that sweetened the
waters with wood, can as well refresh our bodies, with the fruits of the earth.
Why do we not wait on him whom we have found so powerful? Now they set the
mercy and love of GOD upon a wrong last; whiles they measure it only by their
present sense. Nature is iocond and cheereful, whiles it prospers: let God
withdraw his hand; no sight, no trust. Those can praise him with timbrels for a
present favor, that cannot depend upon him, in the want of means for a future.
We all are never weary of receiving, soon weary of attending.

The other mutiny, was of some few malcontents, perhaps those strangers,
which sought their own protection under the wing of Israel; this, of the whole
troup. Not that none were free: Caleb, Joshua, Moses, Aaron, Miriam were not
yet tainted: usually God measures the state of any Church, or country by the
most; The greater part carries both the name and censure. Sins are so much
greater, as they are more universal: so far is evil from being extenuated
by the multitude of the guilty, that nothing can more aggrauate it. With men,
commonness may plead for favor; with God it pleads for judgment. Many hands
draw the cable with more violence, then few: The leprosy of the whole body
is more loathsome then that of a part.

But what do these mutiners say? Oh that we had died by the hand of the Lord.
And whose hand was this, O ye fond Israelites, if ye must perish by famine?
God carried you forth; God restrained his creatures from you: and while you are
ready to die thus; ye say, Oh that we had dyed by the hand of the Lord.

It is the folly of men, that in immediate judgment they can see Gods hand:
not in those, whose second causes are sensible; whereas God holds himself
equally interessed in all: challenging that there is no evil in the city, but
from him. It is but one hand, and many instruments, that God strikes us with:
The water may not lose the name, though it come by channels and pipes from the
spring. It is our faithlesnesse, that in visible means, we see not him that
is invisible.

And when would they have wished to die? When we sat by the fleshpots of
Egypt: Alas, what good would their fleshpots have done them, in their death?
If they might sustain their life, yet what could they avail them in dying?
For if they were unpleasant, what comfort was it, to see them? If pleasant,
what comfort to part from them? Our greatest pleasures are but pains in their
loss. Every mind affects that which is like it self. Carnal minds are for
the fleshpots of Egypt, though bought with servitude; spiritual are for the
presence of GOD, though redeemed with famine: and would rather die in Gods
presence, then live without him, in the sight of delicate or full dishes.

They loved their lives well enough: I heard how they shrieked, when they were
in danger of the Egyptians; yet now they say, Oh that we had died: Not, oh that
we might live by the fleshpots; but oh that we had dyed. Although life be
naturally sweet, yet a little coffeehouse makes us weary. It is a base
cowardlinesse, so soon as ever we are called from the garrison to the field,
to think of running away. Then is our fortitude worthy of praise, when we can
endure to be miserable.

But what? can no fleshpots serve but those of Egypt? I am deceived, if that
Land affoorded them any fleshpots save their own: Their Landlords of Egypt
held it abomination to eat of of their dishes, or to kill that which they
did eat. In those times then they did eat of their own; and why not now?
They had droues of cattle in the Wilderness; why did they not take of them?
Surely if they would have been as good husbands of their cattle, as they were
of their dough, they might have had enough to eat without need of murmuring:
for if their back-burden of dough lasted for a month; their herds might have
served them many years. All grudging is odious; but most* when our hands are
full. To whine in the midst of abundance, is a shameful unthankfulness.

When a man would have looked that the anger of GOD should have appeared in
fire; now behold his glory appears in a cloud. Oh the exceeding long suffering
of God, that hears their murmurings; and as if he had been bound to content
them, in steed of punishing, pleases them; as a kind mother would deal with a
rabid child, who rather stils him with the breast, then calls for the ^odde.
One would have thought that the sight of the cloud of God should have
dif^pell'd the cloud of their distrust; and this glory of GOD should have made
them ashamed of themselves, and afraid of him: Yet I do not hear them once
say, What a mighty and gracious God have we distrusted? Nothing will content
an impotent mind, but fruition. When an heart is hardened with any passion, it
will endure much, ere it will yield to relent.

(...) up for them that love him! As on the contrary, if the righteous scarce
be saved, where will the sinners appear? Oh God thou can, thou will make
this disterence. Howsoever with us men the most crabbed and stubborn
oftentimes fare the best; the righteous Judge of the world frames his
remunerations as he finds us* And if his mercy sometimes provoke the worst to
repentance by his temporal favors, yet he ever reserues so much greater
reward for the righteous, as eternity is beyond time, and heaven above earth.

It was not of any natural instinct, but from the ouer-ruling power of their
Creator, that these Quayles came to the desert. Needs must they come whom God
brings. His hand is in all the motions of his meanest creatures. Not only we,
but they move in him. As not many Quayles, so not one Sparrow falls without
him: How much more are the actions of his best creature, Man, directed by his
providence? How ashamed might these Israelites have been, to see these
creatures so obedient to their Creator, as to come and offer themselves to
their slaughter; whiles they went so repiningly to his service, and their own
preferment? Who can distrust the provision of the great housekeeper of the
world, when he sees how he can furnish his tables at pleasure. Is he grown
now careless, or we faithless rather? Why do we not repose upon his mercy?
Rather then we shall want, when we trust him, he will fetch Quayles from
all the coasts of heaven to our board. Oh Lord thy hand is not shortened to
give: let not ours be shortened, or shut in receiving.

Eliahs seruitors the Ravens brought him his full service of bread, and flesh
at once; each morning and evening. But these Israelites have their flesh at
eeuen, and their bread in the morning: Good reason there should be a
difference. Eliahs table was upon Gods direct appointment; The Israelites upon
their mutiny: Although God will relieve them with provision, yet he will punish
their impatience with delay; so shall they know themselves his people, that
they shall find they were murmurers. Not only in the matter, but in the
order, God answers their grudging; First they complain of the want of
fleshpots, then of bread. In the first place therefore they have flesh, bread
after. When they have flesh, yet they must stay a time, ere they can have a
full meal; unless they would eat their meat breadlesse, and their bread dry.
GOD will be waited on; and will give the consummation of his blessings at his
own leisure. In the evening of our life, we have the first pledges of his
favor: but in the morning of our resurrection, must we look for our perfect
satiety of the true Manna, the bread of life.

Now the Israelites sped well with their Quayles; They did eat, and digest, and
prosper: not long after they have Quayles with a vengeance; the meat was
pleasant, but the sauce was fearful. They let down the Quayles at their
mouth, but they came out at their nostrils. How much better had it been to have
dyed of hunger, through the chastisement of God, then of the plague of God,
with the flesh betwixt their teeth? Behold they perish of the same disease
then, whereof they now recover. The same sin repeated is death, whose first
act found remission: Relapses are desperate, where the sickness it self is
not. With us men, once, goes away with a warning, the second act is but
whipping, the third is death. It is a mortal thing to abuse the lenity of God;
we should be presumptuously mad, to hope that God will stand us for a
sinning-stock to provoke him how we will. It is more mercy then he owes us, if
he forbear us once; it is his justice to plague us the second time: We may
thank our selves, if we will not be warned.

Their meat was strange, but nothing so much as their bread. To find Quayles in
a Wilderness was unusual; but for bread to com down from heaven was yet more.
They had seen Quayles before (though not in such number): Manna was never
seen till now. From this day till their settling in Canaan, God wrought a
perpetual miracle in this food. A miracle in the place: Other bread rises up
from below, this fell down from above; neither did it ever rain bread till
now; Yet so did this heavenly shower fall, that it is confined to the Camp of
Israel. A miracle in the quantity; that every morning should fall enough to
fill so many hundred thousand mouths and mawes. A miracle in the composition;
that it was sweet like honycakes, round like corianders, transparent as deaw. A
miracle in the quality; that it melted by one heat, by another hardened. A
miracle in the difference of the fall; that (as if it knew times, and would
teach them, as well as feed them) it fell double in the eeuen of the Sabbath,
and on the Sabbath fell not. A miracle in the putrefaction and preservation;
that it was full of worms when it was kept beyond the due hour for distrust:
full of sweetness when it was kept a day longer for religion; Yea many Ages, in
the Ark, for a monument of the power and mercy of the giver. A miracle in the
continuance and ceasing; That this shower of bread followed their camp in all
their remoualls, till they came to taste of the bread of Canaan; and then
withdrew it self, as if it should have said: Ye need no miracles, now ye have
means. They had the Types; we have the substance. In this Wilderness of the
world, the true Manna is rained upon the tents of our hearts. He that sent the
Manna, was the Manna, which he sent: He has said, I am the Manna that came
down from heaven. Behold their whole meals were sacramental: Every morsel
they did eat, was spiritual. We eat still of their Manna: still he coms down
from heaven. He has substance enough for worlds of souls; yet only is to be
found in the lists of the true Church: He has more sweetness then the honey, and
the honycombe. Happy are we if we can find him, so sweet as he is.

The same hand that rayned Manna upon their tents, could have rayned it into
their mouths, or laps. God loves we should take pains for our spiritual
food. Little would it have auayled them, that the Manna lay about their tents,
if they had not gone forth and gathered it, beaten it, baked it: Let salvation
be never so plentiful, if we bring it not home, and make it ours by faith, we
are no whit the better. If the work done, and means used, had been enough to
give life, no Israelite had dyed: Their bellies were full of that bread,
whereof one crum gives life: yet they dyed many of them in displeasure. As in
natural, so in spiritual things, we may not trust to means: The carcass of
the Sacrament cannot give life, but the soul of it; which is the thing
represented. I see each man gather, and take his just measure out of the common
heap; We must be industrious, and helpful each to other: but when we have
done, Christ is not partial. If our sanctification differ, yet our
justification is equal in all.

He that gave a Gomer to each, could have given an Ephah: As easily could he
have rayned down enough for a month, or a year at once, as for a day. God
delights to have us live in a continual dependence upon his providence, and
each day renew the acts of our faith and thankfulness. But what a covetous
Israelite was that, which in a foolish distrust would be sparing the charges of
God; and reserving that for morning which he should have spent upon his
supper? He shall know, that even the bread that came down from heaven, can
corrupt: The Manna was from above, the worms and stink from his diffidence.
Nothing is so sovereign, which being perverted, may not annoy in stead of
benefiting us.

Yet I see some difference betwixt the true and typical Manna; God never meant
that the shadow and the body should agree in all things. The outward Manna
reserved was poison: the spiritual Manna is to us, as it was to the Arc; not
good, unless it be kept perpetually. If we keep it, it shall keep us from
putrefaction. The outward Manna fell not at all, on the Sabbath: The spiritual
Manna (though it balks no day) yet it falls double on Gods day: and if we
gather it not then, we famish. In that true Sabbath of our glorious rest, we
shall for ever feed of that Manna, which we have gathered in this eeuen of our
life.

The Ro^k of Rephidim.
BEfore, Israel thirsted and was satisfied; after that, they hungered and were
filled; now they thirst again. They have bread and meat, but want drink: It
is a marvel if God do not evermore hold us short of something, because he
would keep us still in exercise. We should forget at whose cost we live, if
we wanted nothing. Still God observes a vicissitude of evil, and good; and
the same evils that we have passed, return upon us in their courses. Crosses
are not of the nature of those diseases, which they say a man can have but
once. Their first seizure does but make way for their reentry. None but our
last enemy comes once for all; and I know not, if that: for even in living,
we die daily. So must we take our leaves of all afflictions, that we reserve
a lodging for them, and expect their return.

All Israel murmured when they wanted bread, meat, water; and yet all Israel
departed from the Wilderness of Sin to Rephidin at Gods command. The very
worst men will obey God in something; none but the good in all: He is rarely
desperate that makes an universal opposition to God. It is an unsound praise
that is given a man, for one good action: It may be safely said of the very
devils themselves, that they do something well: They know, and believe, and
tremble. If we follow God and murmur, it is all one, as if we had staid
behind.

Those distrust his providence in their necessity, that are ready to follow
his guidance in their welfare. It is an harder matter to endure an extreme
want, then to obey an hard commandment. Sufferings are greater trials, then
actions: How many have we seen ieopard their lives, with cheerful resolution,
which cannot endure in cold blood to lose a lim with patience. Because God will
have his thoroughly tried, he puts them to both: and if we cannot endure both
to follow him from Sin, and to thirst in Rephidim, we are not sound Israelites.

God led them, on purpose, to this dry Rephidim: He could as well have
conducted them to another Elim, to convenient waterings: Or he that gives the
waters of all their channels, could as well have derived them to meet Israel:
But God does purposely carry them to thirst. It is not for necessity, that we
fare ill, but out of choice: It were all one with God to give us health, as
sickness; abundance as poverty. The treasury of his riches has more store then
his creature can be capable of; we could not complain, if it were not good
for us to want.

This should have been a contentment able to quench any thirst: GOD has led
us hither; If Moses out of ignorance had misguided us, or we chanceably fallen
upon these dry deserts, though this were no remedy of our grief, yet it
might be some ground of our complaint. But now the counsel of so wise and
merciful a God, has drawn us into this want; and shall not he as easily find
the way out? It is the Lord, let him do what he will. There can be no more
forceable motive to patience then the acknowledgement of a divine hand that
strikes us. It is fearful to be in the hand of an adversary; but who would
not be confident of a father? Yet in our frail humanity, choler may transport
a man from remembrance of nature; but when we feel our selves under the
discipline of a wise God, that can temper our afflictions to our strength, to
our benefit; who vvoulde not rather murmur at himself, that he should swerue
toward impatience? Yet these sturdy Israelites wilfully murmur: and will not
have their thirst quenched with faith, but with water. Give us water.

I looked to hear when they would have entreated Moses to pray for them; but
in stead of entreating they contend, and in stead of prayers I find commands.
Give us water. If they had gone to God without Moses, I should have praised
their faith: but now they go to Moses. without God, I hate their stubborn
faithlesnes. To seek to the second means with neglect of the first, is the
fruit of a false faith.

The answer of Moses is like himself, mild, and sweet; Why contend ye with
me? Why tempt ye the Lord? In the first expostulation, condemning them of
injustice; since not he, but the Lord had afflicted them. In the second, of
presumption; that since it was GOD* that tempted them, by want, they should
tempt him by murmuring. In the one, he would have them see their wrong; in the
other, their danger. As the act came not from him, but from God; so he puts it
off to God, from himself. Why tempt ye the Lord? The opposition which is
made to the instruments of God, redounds ever to his person. He holds himself
smitten through the sides of his ministers: So has God incorporated these
respects, that our subtlety cannot divide them.

But what temptation is this? Is the Lord among us, or no? Infidelity is
crafty, and yet foolish; Crafty in her insinuations, foolish in her conceits.
They imply, If we were sure the Lord were with us we would not distrust; They
conceive doubts of his presence, after such confirmations. What could God do
more, to make them know him present, unless every moment should have renewed
miracles? The plagues of Egypt, and the division of the Sea were so famous,
that the very Innes of Jericho rang of them. Their waters were lately sweetened;
the Quayles were yet in their teeth; the Manna was yet in their eye; yea they
saw God, in the pillar of the cloud, and yet they say, Is the Lord amongst us?
No argument is enough to an incredulous heart; not reason, not sense, not
experience. How much better was that faith of Thomas, that would believe his
eyes and hands, though his ears he would not? Oh the deep infidelity of these
Israelites, that saw, and believed not!

And how will they know if God be amongst them? As if he could not be with
them, and they be athirst: Either God must humor carnal minds, or be
distrusted: If they prosper (though it be with wickedness) God is with them; If
they be thwarted in their own designs, straight, Is God with us? It was the
way to put God from them, to distrust, and murmr. If he had not been with
them, they had not lived; If he had been in them, they had not mutined. They
can think him absent in their want, and cannot see him absent in their sin:
and yet wickedness, not affliction, argues him gone; Yet then is he most
present, when he most chastises.

Who would not have looked, that this answer of Moses should have appeased
their fury: As what can still him that will not be quiet to think he has God
for his adversary? But, as if they would wilfully war against heaven, they
proceed; yet with no less craft, then violence; bending their exception to one
part of the answer: and smoothly omitting, what they could not except against.
They will not hear of tempting God; they maintain their strife with Moses,
both with words, and stones: How malicious, how heady is impatience? The act
was Gods, they cast it upon Moses: Wherefore have thou brought us? The act of
God was merciful, they make it cruel; To kill us and our children: As if GOD
and Moses meant nothing but their ruin; who intended nothing, but their life
and liberty. Foolish men! What needed this journey to death? Were they not as
obnoxious to God, in Egypt? Could not God by Moses as easily have killed them
in Egypt, or in the Sea, as their enemies? Impatience is full of
misconstruction; If it be possible to find out any gloss to corrupt the text
of Gods actions, they shall be sure not to escape untainted.

It was no expostulating with an unreasonable multitude; Moses runs straight
to him, that was able at once to quench their thirst, and their fury: What
shall I do to this people? It is the best way, to trust God with his own
causes: when men will be intermedling with his affairs, they undo themselves
in vain. We shall find difficulties in all great enterprises; If we be sure, we
have begun them from God, we may securely cast all events upon his providence,
which knows how to dispose, and how to end them.

Moses perceived rage, not in the tongues only, but in the hands of the
Israelites. Yet a while longer and they will stone me. Even the leader of Gods
people, feared death; and sinned not in fearing. Life is worthy to be dear to
all: especially to him, whom public charge has made necessary: Mere fear
is not sinful; It is impotence and distrust that accompany it, which make it
evil. How well is that fear bestowed, that sends us the more importunately to
GOD! Some man would have thought of flight; Moses flies to his prayers; and
that not for revenge, but for help. Who but Moses would not have said; This
twice they have mutined, and been pardoned; and now again, thou see, O
Lord, how madly they rebel; and how bloodily they intend against me; preserve
me, I beseech thee, and plague them. I hear none of this: but imitating the
long suffering of his God, he seeks to God, for them, which sought to kill
him, for the quarrel of God.

Neither is God sooner sought, then found: All Israel might see Moses go
toward the rock: None but the Elders might see him strike it: Their
unbelief made them unworthy of this privilege. It is no small favor of God,
to make us witnesses of his great works; That he crucifies his Son before us;
that he serches the water of life, out of the true rock, in our sight, is an
hie prerogative; If his rigor would have taken it, our infidelity had
equally excluded us, whom now his mercy has received.

Moses must take his rod; God could have done it by his will, without a word;
or by his word* without the rod; but he will do by means, that which he can
as easily do without. There was no virtue in the rod; none in the stroke, but
all in the command of God. Means must be used, and yet their efficacy must
be expected, out of themselves.

It does not suffice GOD to name the rod, without a description; ( Whereby thou
smotest the river:) Wherefore? but to strengthen the faith of Moses, that he
might well expect this wonder from that, which he had tried to be miraculous.
How could he but firmly believe, that the same means which turned the waters
into blood, and turned the Sea into a wall, could as well turn the stone into
water? Nothing more rayses up the heart in present affiance, then the
recognition of favors, or vvoonders passed. Behold the same rod that brought
plagues to the Egyptians, brings deliverances to (...). By the same means can
God save and condemn: Like as the same sword defends and kil^s.

That power, which turned the wings of the Quayles to the Wilderness, turned the
course of the water through the rock: He might (if he had pleased) have
caused a spring to well out of the plain earth; but he will now fetch it out
of the stone, to convince and shame their infidelity. What is more hard and
dry then the rock? What more moist, and supple then water? That they might be
ashamed to think, they distrusted least God could bring them water out of the
clouds, or springs, the very rock shall yield it. And now, unless their
hearts had been more rockie, then this stone, they could not but have resolved
into tears, for this diffidence.

I wonder to see these Israelites fed with Sacraments: Their bread was
Sacramental, whereof they communicated every day: least any man should
complain of frequence, the Israelites received daily; and now their drink was
Sacramental, that the ancient Church may give no warrant of a dry Communion.
Twice therefore has the rock yielded them water of refreshing; to signify,
that the true spiritual rock yields it always. The rock that followed them
was Christ: Out of thy side, O Savior, issued that bloody stream, whereby the
thirst of all believers is comfortably quenched: Let us but thirst; not with
repining, but with faith; this rock of thine shall abundantly flow forth to
our souls, and follow us, till this water be changed into that new wine,
which we shall drink with thee in thy Fathers Kingdom.

The Foil of Amalek: or The hand of Moses, lift up.
NO sooner is Isreal's thirst slaked, then God has an Amalekite ready to
assault them. The Almighty has choice of rods, to whip us with; and will not
be content with one trial. They would needs be quarrelling with Moses, without
a cause; and now, God sends the Amalekites to quarrel with them. It is just
with God, that they, which would be contending with their best friends should
have work enough, of contending with enemies.

In their passage out of Egypt, God would not lead them the nearest way, by
the Philistims Land, least they should repent at the sight of war; now they
both see, and feel it. He knows how to make the fittest choice of the times
of evil: and withholds that one while, which he sends another, not without a
just reason, why he sends, and withholds it: And though to us, they come ever
(as we think) unseasonably, and at sometimes more unfitly, then others; yet
he that sends them, knows their opportunities. Who would not have thought,
a worse time could never have been picked for Isreal's war, then now; In the
feebleness of their troops, when they were wearied, thirsty, unweaponed; Yet
now, must the Amalekites do that, which before the Philistims might not do:
We are not worthy, not able to choose for our selves. To be sick, and die in
the strength of youth, in the minority of children: To be pinched with
poverty, or miscarriage of children in our age, how harshly unseasonable it
seems? But the infinite wisdom, that orders our events, knows how to order
our times. Unless we will be shameless unbelievers, O Lord, we must trust
thee with our selves and our seasons, and know, that not that which we desire,
but that, which thou have appointed, is the fittest time for our sufferings.

Amalek was Esaues grandchild; and these Israelites, the Sons of Jacob. The
abode of Amalek was not so far from Egypt, but they might well hear what
became of their cozens of Israel; and now, doubtless, out of envy watched
their opportunity of revenge for their old grudge. Malice is commonly
hereditary, and runs in the blood; and (as we use to say of runnet) the older
it is, the stronger. Hence is that foolish hostility, which some men unjustly
nourish upon no other grounds, then the quarrels of their forefathers. To
wreak ou^ malice upon posterity, is at the best but the humor of an Amalekite.

How cowardly, and how crafty was this skirmish of Amalek? They do not bid
them battle in fair terms of war, but without all noise of warning, come
stealing upon the hindmost; and fall upon the weak, and scattered remnants of
Israel. There is no looking for favor at the hands of malice: The worst that
either force or fraud can do, must be expected of an adversary; but much more
of our spiritual enemy; by how much his hatred is deeper. Behold, this Amalek
lie^ in ambush to hinder our passage unto our Land of promise and subtly
takes all advantages of our weaknesses. We cannot be wise, or safe, if we stay
behind our colors; and strengthen not those parts, where is most peril of
opposition.

I do not hear Moses say to his Joshua: Amalek is come up against us; it
matters not whether thou go against him, or not; or if thou go, whether alone
or with company; or if accompanied, whether with many or few, strong or
weak; Or if strong men, whether they fight or no: I will pray on the hill;
but, Choose us out men, and go fight: Then only can we pray with hope,
when we have done our best. And though the means cannot effect that, which
we desire; yet God will have and use the likeliest means on our part, to
effect it. Where it comes immediately from the charge of GOD, any means are
effectual; One stick of wood shall fetch water out of the rock, another shall
fetch bitterness out of the water: But in those proiects, which we make for
our own purposes, we must choose those helps, which promise most efficacy.
In vain shall Moses be upon the hill, if Joshua be not in the valley. Prayer
without means, is a mockery of GOD.

Here are two shadows of one substance; The same Christ in Joshua fights
against our spiritual Amalek, and in Moses spreads out his arms upon the
hill; and in both, conquers. And why does he climb up the hill rather, then
pray in the valley? Perhaps that he might have the more freedom to his
thoughts; which, following the sense, are so much more heavenly, as the eye
sees more of heaven? Though virtue lies not in the place, yet choice must be
made of those places, which may be most help to our devotion: Perhaps, that
he might be in the eye of Israel. The presence and sight of the leader gives
heart to the people: neither does any thing more move the multitude, then
example. A public person cannot hide himself in the valley: but yet it
becomes him best to show himself upon the hill.

The hand of Moses must be raised, but not empty; neither is it his own rod
that he holds, but Gods. In the first meeting of God with Moses, the rod was
Moseses; it is like, for the use of his trade: now the propriety is altered;
God has so wrought by it, that now he challenges it; and Moses dare not call
it his own. Those things which it pleases God to use for his own service, are
now changed in their condition. The bread of the Sacrament was once the Bakers,
now it is Gods: the water was once every man's, now it is the Laver of
Regeneration. It is both unjust, and unsafe to hold those things common
wherein God has a peculiarity.

At other times, upon occasion of the plagues, and of the Quayles, and of the
rock, he was commanded to take the rod in his hand; now he does it unbidden:
He does it not now for miraculous operation, but for encouragement. For when
the Israelites should cast up their eyes to the hill, and see Moses, and his
rod (the man, and the means that had wrought so powerfully for them) they
could not but take heart to themselves, and think, There is the man that
delivered us from the Egyptian, Why not now from the Amalekite? There is the
rod, which turned waters to blood, and brought varieties of plagues on Egypt,
Why not now on Amaleck? Nothing can more hearten our faith, then the view of
the monuments of Gods favor: If ever we have found any word, or act of God
cordial to us, it is good to fetch it forth often to the eye. The renewing of our
sense, and remembrance, makes every gift of God perpetually beneficial.

If Moses had received a command, that rod which fetched water from the rock,
could as well have fetched the blood of the Amalekites out of their bodies: God
will not work miracles always; neither must we expect them unbidden.

Not as a standerd-bearer so much, as a suppliant does Moses lift up his hand:
The gesture of the body should both express, and further the piety of the
soul. This flesh of ours, is not a good servant, unless it help us in the best
offices: The God of spirits does most respect the soul of our devotion; yet,
it is both unmannerly, and irreligious, to be misgestured in our prayers. The
careless and uncomely carriage of the body helps both to signify, and make a
profane soul.

The hand, and the rod of Moses never moved in vain; Though the rod did not
strike Amalek, as it had done the rock: yet it smote heaven, and fetched down
victory. And that the Israelites might see, the hand of Moses had a greater
stroke in the fight, then all theirs, The success must rise and fall with it:
Amalek rose, and Israel fell, with his hand falling: Amalek fell, and Israel
rises, with his hand raised; Oh the wondrous power of the prayers of faith! All
heavenly favors are derived to us from this channel of grace: To these are we
beholden for our peace, preseruations, and all the rich mercies of GOD, which
we enioie. We could not want, if we could ask.

Every man's hand would not have done this; but the hand of a Moses. A
faithless man may as well hold his hand, and tongue still; he may babble,
but prays not; he prays ineffectually, and receives not: Only the prayer of
the righteous avails much; and only the believer, is righteous. There can be
no merit, no recompense answerable to a good man's prayer; for heaven, and the
ear of God is open to him: but the formal devotions of an ignorant, and
faithless man, are not worth that crust of bread which he asks: Yea, it is
presumption in himself; how should it be beneficial to others? it profanes
the name of God, in stead of adorning it.

But how justly is the feruency of the prayer added to the righteousness of the
person? When Moses hand slackned, Amalek prevailed. No Moses can have his hand
ever up; It is a title proper to God, that his hands are stretched out still:
whether to mercy, or vengeance. Our infirmity will not suffer any long
intention, either of body, or mind. Long prayers can hardly maintain their
vigor; as in tall bodies the spirits are diffused. The strongest hand will
languish, with long extending: And when our devotion tyres, it is seen in the
success; then straight our Amalek pruayles. Spiritual vvickednesses are
maistered by vehement prayer; and by heartlesnes in prayer, overcome us.

Moses had two helps, A stone to sit on, and an hand to raise his: And his
sitting, and helped hand is no whit less effectual. Even in our prayers will
God allow us to respect our own infirmities. In cases of our necessity, he
regards not the posture of body, but the affections of the soul. Doubtless
Aaron and Hur, did not only raise their hands, but their minds, with his: The
more cords, the easier draught. Aaron was brother to Moses: there cannot be a
more brotherly office, then to help one another in our prayers; and to excite
our mutual devotions. No Christian may think it enough to pray alone; He is
no true Israelite, that will not be ready to lift up the weary hands of Gods
Saints.

All Israel saw this: or if they were so intent upon the slaughter, and spoil,
that they observed it not, they might hear it after, from Aaron, and Hur: yet
this contents not God; It must be written. Many other miracles had God done
before; not one, directly commanded to be recorded: The other were only for
the wonder; this for the imitation of Gods people. In things that must live by
report, every tongue adds or detracts something; The word once written is both
inalterable, and permanent.

As God is careful to maintain the glory of his miraculous victory: so is
Moses desirous to second him; God by a book, and Moses by an altar, and a name.
God commands to enroll it in parchment; Moses registers it in the stones of
his altar; which he raises not only for future memory, but for present use.
That hand which was weary of lifting up, straight offers a sacrifice of praise
to God: How well it becomes the just to be thankful! Even very nature teaches
us men to abhor ingratitude in small favors. How much less can that fountain
of goodness abide to be laded at with unthankful hands? O God we cannot but
confess our deliverances: where are our atars? where are our sacrifices? where
is our Iehouah-nissi? I do not more wonder at thy power in preserving us, then
at thy mercy, which is not weary of casting away favors upon the ungrateful.

The Law.
IT is but about seven weeks, since Israel came out of Egypt: In which space
God had cherished their faith by five several woonders; yet now he thinks it
time to give them statutes from heaven, as well as bread. The Manna and water
from the rock (which was Christ in the Gospel) were given before the Law. The
Sacraments of grace before the legal covenant. The grace of GOD preuenteth our
obedience; Therefore should we keep the law of God, because we have a Savior.
Oh the mercy of our God! which before we see, what we are bound to do,
shows us our remedy, if we do it not: How can our faith disannul the Law,
when it was before it? It may help to fulfill that, which shall be: it cannot
frustrate that which was not. The letters, which GOD had written in our fleshy
tables, were now (as those which are carved in some barks) almost grown out;
he saw it time to write them in dead Tables, whose hardness should not be
capable of alteration: He knew, that the stone would be more faithful then
our hearts.

Oh marvelous accordance betwixt the two Testaments; In the very time of their
delivery, there is the same agreement, which is in the substance. The ancient
Jews kept our feasts; and we still keep theirs. The feast of the Passe-ouer is
the time of Christ's resurrection; then did he pass from under the bondage of
Death. Christ is our Passe-ouer; the spotless Lamb, whereof not a bone must
be broken. The very day, wherein God came down in fire and thunder to deliver
the Law, Even the same day came also the Holy Ghost down upon the disciples in
fiery tongues, for the propagation of the Gospel. That other was in fire and
smoke, obscurity was mingled with terror; This was in fire without smoke,
befitting the light and clearness of the Gospel: Fire, not in flashes, but in
tongues; not to terrify, but to instruct. The promulgation of the Law makes
way for the Law of the Gospel; No man receives the Holy Ghost, but he which
has felt the terrors of Sinai.

God might have imposed upon them a law perforce; They were his creatures, and
he could require nothing but justice. It had been but equal that they should
be compelled to obey their Maker; yet that God which loves to do all things
sweetly, gives the law of justice in mercy; and will not imperiously command,
but craves our assent for that, which it were rebellion not to do.

How gentle should be the proceeding of fellow creatures who have an equality
of being, with an inequality of condition; when their infinite Maker requests,
where he might constrain. GOD will make no covenant with the unwilling; How
much less the covenant of grace, which stands all upon love? If we stay til
God offer violence to our will, or to us, against our will, we shall die
strangers from him. The Church is the spouse of Christ; he will enjoy her love
by a willing contract, not by a rauishment: The obstinate have nothing to do
with God; The title of all conuerts, is, a willing people.

That Israel inclined to God, it was from God; he inquires after his own
gifts in us, for our capacity of more. They had not received the Law, unless
they had first received a disposition fit to be commanded. As there was an
inclination to hear, so there must be a preparation for hearing. Gods justice
had before prepared his Israelites, by hunger, thirst, fear of enemies; his
mercy had prepared them by deliverances, by provisions of water, meat, bread:
and yet besides all the sight of God in his miracles, they must be three days
prepared to hear him. When our souls are at the best, our approach to God
requires particular addresses: And if three days were little enough to prepare
them to receive the Law; how is all our life short enough, to prepare for the
reckoning of our observing it? And if the word of a command expected such
readiness, what shall the word of promise, the promise of Christ and salvation?

The moraine of Egypt was not so infectious as their vices; the contagion of
these stuck still by Israel: All the water of the red Sea, and of Marah, and
that which gushed out of the rock, had not washed it off. From these, they
must now be sanctified. As sin is always dangerous; so most, when we bring
it into Gods sight: It enuenometh both our persons and services, and turns our
good into evil. As therefore we must be always holy: so most, when we present
our selves to the holy eyes of our Creator. We wash our hands every day: but
when we are to sit with some great person, we scour them with balls. And if
we must be so sanctified, only to receive the Law, how holy must we be to
receive the grace promised in the Gospel?

Neither must themselves only be cleansed, but their very clothes: Their
garments smelt of Egypt, even they must be washed: Neither can clothes be
capable of sin, nor can water cleanse from sin: The danger was neither in
their garments, nor their skin; yet they must be washed, that they might learn
by their clothes, with what souls to appear before their God. Those garments
must be washed, which should never wax old, that now they might begin their
age in purity; as those which were in more danger of being foul, then bare. It
is fit that our reverence to Gods presence should appear in our very garments;
that both without and within we may be cleanly: but little would neatness of
vestures avail us with a filthy soul. The God of spirits looks to the inner
man, and challenges the purity of that part which resembles himself: Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye double minded.

Yet even when they were washed, and sanctified, they may not touch the mount;
not only with their feet, but, not with their eyes: The smoke keeps it from
their eyes; the marks from their feet. Not only men that had some impurity at
their best, are restrained, but even beasts which are not capable of any
vnholines. Those beasts which must touch his altars, yet might not touch his
hill: And if a beast touch it, he must die: yet so, as no hands may touch that,
which has touched the hill. Unreasonableness might seem to be an excuse in
these creatures: that therefore which is death to a beast, must needs be
capital to them, whose reason should guide them to avoid presumption. Those
Israelites which saw God every day in the pillar of fire, and the cloud, must
not come near him in the mount. God loves at once familiarity and fear:
Familiarity in our conversation, and fear in his commands. He loves to be
acquainted with men, in the walks of their obedience: yet he takes state upon
him in his ordinances; and will be trembled at, in his word and judgments.

I see the difference of Gods carriage to men in the Law, and in the Gospel:
There, the very hill where he appeared, may not be touched of the purest
Israelite; Here, the hemme of his garment is touched by the woman, that had the
flux of blood; yea, his very face was touched with the lips of Judas. There
the very earth was prohibited them, on which he descended: Here, his very body
and blood is proffered to our touch and taste. Oh the marvelous kindness of our
God! How unthankful are we, if we do not acknowledge this mercy above his
ancient people! They were his own; yet strangers in comparison of our
liberty. It is our shame and sin, if in these means of entireness we be
no better acquainted with God, then they, which in their greatest
familiarity, were commanded aloof.

God was ever wonderful in his works, and fearful in his judgments: but he
was never so terrible in the execution of his will, as now in the promulgation
of it. Here was nothing, but a maiesticall terror in the eyes, in the ears of
the Israelites; as if God meant to show them by this, how fearful he could be.
Here was the lightning darted in their eyes, the thunders roaring in their
ears, the trumpet of GOD drowning the thunderclaps, the voice of God
out-speaking the trumpet of the Angel: The cloud enwrapping, the smoke
ascending, the fire flaming, the mount trembling, Moses climbing and quaking,
palenesse and death in the face of Israel, uproar in the Elements, and all the
glory of heaven turned into terror. In the destruction of the first World,
there were clouds, without fire: In the destruction of Sodom, there was fire
raining without clouds; but here was fire, smoke, clouds, thunder, earthquakes,
and whatsoever might work more astonishment, then ever was in any vengeance
inflicted.

And if the Law were thus given, how shall it be required? If such were the
proclamation of Gods statutes, what shall the sessions be? I see and tremble at
the resemblance. The Trumpet of the Angel called unto the one: The voice of an
Archangell, the Trumpet of God shall summon us to the other. To the one, Moses
(that climbd up that hill, and alone saw it) says, God came with ten
thousands of his Saints; In the other, thousand thousands shall minister to
him, and ten thousand thousands shall stand before him. In the one, mount
Sinai only was on a flame; all the world shall be so, in the other. In the one
there was fire, smoke, thunder and lightning: In the other, a fiery stream
shall issue from him, wherewith the heavens shall be dissolved, and the
Elements shall melt away with a noise. Oh God, how powerful art thou to
inflict vengeance upon sinners, who did thus forbid sin? and if thou were
so terrible a Lawgiuer, what a Judge shall thou appear? What shall become of
the breakers of so fiery a Law? Oh where shall those appear, that are guilty
of the transgressing that Law, whose very delivery was little less then death?
If our God should exact his Law, but in the same rigor wherein he gave it,
sin could not quite the cost: But now the fire wherein it was delivered was
but terrifying; the fire wherein it shall be required, is consuming. Happy are
those that are from under the terrors of that Law, which was given in fire,
and in fire shall be required.

God would have Israel see, that they had not to do with some impotent
commander, that is feign to publish his Laws without noise, in dead paper;
which can more easily inioyne, then punish; or descry, then execute; and
therefore, before he gives them a Law, he shows them that he can command
heaven, earth, fire, air, in revenge of the breach of the Law; That they could
not but think it deadly to displease such a Lawgiuer, or violate such dreadful
statutes; That they might see all the Elements, examples of that obedience,
which they should yield unto their Maker.

This fire, wherein the Law was given, is still in it; and will never out:
Hence are those terrors which it flashes in every conscience, that has felt
remorse of sin. Every man's heart is a Sinai, and resembles to him both heaven
and hell. The sting of death is sin: and the strength of sin, is the Law.

That they might see, he could find out their closest sins, he delivers
his Law in the light of fire, from out of the smoke: That they might see, what
is due to their sins, they see fire above, to represent the fire that should
be below them: That they might know he could waken their security, the
thunder, and louder voice of GOD speaks to their hearts. That they might see
what their hearts should do, the earth quakes under them. That they might see
they could not shift their appearance, the Angels call them together. Oh royal
Law, and mighty Lawgiuer! How could they think of having any other God, that
had such proofs of this? How could they think of making any resenblance of
him, whom they saw could not be seen, and whom they saw, in not being seen,
infinite? How could they think of daring to profane his name, whom they heard
to name himself, with that voice, Jehovah? How could they think of standing
with him for a day, whom they saw to command that heaven, which makes and
measures day? How could they think of disobeying his deputies, whom they saw
so able to revenge? How could they think of killing, when they were half dead
with the fear of him, that could kill both body and soul? How could they
think of the flames of lust, that saw such fires of vengeance? How could they
think of stealing from others, that saw whose the heaven and earth was to
dispose of at his pleasure? How could they think of speaking falsely, that
heard God speak in so fearful a tone? How could they think of coveting
others goods, that saw how weak and uncertain right they had to their own?
Yea to us, was this Law so delivered; to us in them: neither had there bin such
state in the promulgation of it, if God had not intended it for Eternity. We
men, that so fear the breach of humane Laws for some small mulcts of
forfaiture; how should we fear thee (O Lord) that can cast body and soul
into hell!

The Golden Calfe.
IT was not much above a month, since Israel made their covenant with God;
since they trembled to hear him say, Thou shall have no other Gods, but me;
Since they saw Moses part from them, and climb up the hill to God: and now
they say, Make us Gods; we know not what is become of this Moses. Oh, ye mad
Israelites, have ye so soon forgotten that fire, and thunder which you heard
and saw? Is that smoke vanished out of your mind, as soon as out of your
sight? Could your hearts cease to tremble with the earth? Can ye in the very
sight of Sinai, call for other Gods? And, for Moses; was it not for your sakes,
that he thrust himself into the midst of that smoke and fire, which ye feared
to see afar off? Was he not now gone, after so many sudden embassages, to be
your lieger with God? If ye had seen him take his heels, and run away from
you into the Wilderness, what could ye have said, or done more? Behold, our
better Moses was with us awhile upon earth: he is now ascended into the mount
of heaven, to mediate for us; shall we now think of another Savior? shall we
not hold it our happiness that he is for our sakes above?

And what if your Moses had been gone for ever? Must ye therefore have Gods
made? If ye had said, Choose us another governor, it had been a wicked and
unthankful motion; ye were too unworthy of a Moses, that could so soon forget
him: but to say, Make us Gods, was absurdly impious* Moses was not your God,
but your governor: Neither was the presence of God tied to Moses: You saw God
still, when he was gone, in his pillar, and in his Manna; and yet ye say, Make
us Gods: Every word is full of senseless wickedness. How many Gods would you
have? Or what Gods are those that can be made? Or (what ever the Idolatrous
Egyptians did) with what face can ye, after so many miraculous obligations,
speak of another God? Had the voice of God scarce done thundering in your
ears? Did ye so lately hear and see him to be an infinite God? Did ye quake
to hear him say out of the midst of the flames, I am JEHOVAH, the GOD: thou
shall have no gods but me? Did ye acknowledge GOD your Maker, and do ye
now speak of making of gods? If ye had said, Make us another man to go before
us, it had been an impossible suite. Aaron might help to mar you, and
himself; He could not make one hair of a man: and do ye say, Make us Gods?
And what should those Gods do? Go before you. How could they go before you,
that cannot stand alone? your help makes them to stand, and yet they must
conduct you. Oh the impatient ingratitude of carnal minds! Oh the sottishnes
of Idolatry! Who would not have said: Moses is not with us; but he is with God
for us: He stays long: He that called him, withholds him: His delay is for
our sakes, as well as his ascent. Though we see him not, we will hope for him*
His favors to us have deserved, not to be rejected: Or, if God will keep him
from us; he that withholds him, can supply him: He that sent him, can lead us
without him; His fire and cloud is alsufficient; God has said and done enough
for us, to make us trust him: We will, we can have no other God; we care not
for any other guide. But behold, here none of this: Moses stays but some five
and thirty days, and now he is forgotten, and is become but, This Moses: Yea
God is forgotten with him; and: as if God and Moses had been lost at once, they
say, Make us Gods. Natural men must have God at their bent: and if he come not
at a call, he is cast off; and they take themselves to their own shifts: like
as the Chinois whip their God^ when they answer them not; Whereas, his holy
ones wait long, and seek him; and not only in their sinking, but from the
bottom of the deeps, call upon him; and though he kill them, will trust in him.

Superstition besots the minds of men, and blinds the eye of reason; and first
makes them not men, ere it makes them Idolaters. How else could he, that is the
image of God, fall down to the images of creatures? How could our forefathers
have so doted upon stocks and stones, if they had been themselves? As the
Syrians were first blinded, and then led into the midst of Samaria: so are
Idolaters first bereaved of their wits and common sense, and afterward are
carried brutishly into all palpable impiety.

Who would not have been ashamed to hear this answer from the brother of
Moses; Pluck off your Earings? He should have said, Pluck this Idolatrous
thought out of your hearts: and now in stead of chiding, he soothes them. And,
as if he had been no kin to Moses, he helps to lead them back again from God,
to Egypt. The people importuned him, perhaps with threats. He that had waded
through all the menaces of Pharaoh, does he now shrink at the threats of his
own? Moses is not afraid of the terrors of GOD: His faith that carried him
through the water, led him up to the fire of Gods presence; whiles his brother
Aaron fears the faces of those men, which he lately saw pale with the fear
of their glorious Lawgiver. As if he that forbad other Gods, could not have
maintained his own act, and agent, against men. Sudden fears when they have
possessed weak minds, lead them to shameful errors. Importunity or violence
may lessen, but they cannot excuse a fault. Wherefore was he a governor, but
to repress their disordered motions? Facility of yielding to a sin, or
wooing it with our voluntary suit, is an hyer stayre of evil: but, even at
last to be won to sin, is damnable. It is good to resist any onset of sin;
but one condescent loses all the thanks of our opposition. What will it avail
a man, that others are plagued for soliciting him, whiles he smarteth for
yielding; if both be in hell, what ease is it to him, that another is deeper in
the pit?

What now did Aaron? Behold, he that alone was allowed to climb up the
trembling and fiery hill of Sinai, with Moses, and heard God say, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven Image, for I am a jealous God (as if he meant
particularly to prevent this act) within one month, calls for their earings,
makes the graven image of a Calfe; erects an altar, consecrates a day to it,
calls it their God, and weeps not, to see them dance before it. It is a
miserable thing, when governors humor the people in their sins, and in stead
of making up the breach, enlarge it. Sin will take heart by the approbation
of the meanest looker on; but if authority once second it, it grows impudent:
As contrarily, where the public government opposes evil, (though it be under
hand practiced, not without fear) there is life in that state.

Aaron might have learned better counsel of his brothers example: When they
came to him with stones in their hands, and said, Give us water, he ran as
roundly to God, with prayers in his mouth; So should Aaron have done, when they
said, Give us Gods: but he weakly runs to their earings, that, which should
be made their God; not to the true God, which they had and forsook. Who can
promise to himself freedom from gross infirmities, when he that went up
into the mount, comes down, and does that in the valley, which he heard
forbidden in the hill?

I see yet, and wonder at the mercy of that God, which had justly called himself
jealous. This very Aaron, whose infirmity had yielded to so foul an idolatry;
is after chosen by God, to be a Priest to himself: He that had set up an
altar to the Calfe, must serve at the altar of God: He that had melted, and
carved out the Calfe for a god, must sacrifice calves and rams, and bullocks
unto the true God: He that consecrated a day to the Idol, is himself
consecrated to him which was dishonored by the Idol. The grossest of all
sins cannot prejudice the calling of GOD; Yea, as the light is best seen in
darkness, the mercy of God is most magnified in our unworthiness.

What a difference God puts between persons, and sins! While so many thousand
Israelites were slain, that had stomachfully desired the Idol; Aaron that in
weakness condescended, is both pardoned the fact, and afterward laden with
honor from GOD. Let no man take heart to sin from mercy: He that can purpose
to sin upon the knowledge of Gods mercy in the remission of infirmities,
presumes, and makes himself a wilful offender. It is no comfort to the
wilful, that there is remission to the weak and penitent.

The earings are plucked off: Egyptian Jewels are fit for an idolatrous use.
This very gold was contagious. It had been better the Israelites had never
borrowed these ornaments, then that they should pay them back to the Idolatry
of their first owners. What cost the superstitious Israelites are content to be
at for this lewd devotion? The riches, and pride of their outward habit are
they willing to part with, to their molten god; as glad to have their ears
bare, that they might fill their eyes. No gold is too dear for their Idol;
each man is content to spoil his wives and children of that whereof they
spoiled the Egyptians.

Where are those worldlings, that cannot abide to be at any cost for their
religion; which could be content to do GOD chargelesse service? These very
Israelites that were ready to give gold, not out of their purses, but from
their very ears, to mis-deuotion, shall once condemn them. O sacrilege
succeeding to superstition! Of old they were ready to give gold to the false
service of God; we to take away gold from the true: How do we see men prodigal
to their lusts and ambitions, and we hate not to be niggards to God?

This gold is now grown to a Calfe; Let no man think that form came forth
casually, out of the melted earings. This shape was intended by the Israelites,
and perfected by Aaron: They brought this God in their hearts with them out of
Egypt, and now they set it up in their eyes. Still does Egypt hurt them:
Servitude was the least evil, that Israel receives from Egypt; for that sent
them still to the true God, but this Idolatrous example led them to a false. The
very sight of evil is dangerous: and it is hard for the heart not to run
into those sins to which the eye and ear is inured: Not out of love, but
custom, we fall into some offenses.

The Israelites wrought so long in the furnaces of the Egyptians brick, that
they have brought forth a molten Calfe. The black Calfe with the white spots,
which they saw worshipped in Egypt, has stolen their hearts: And they, which
before would have been at the Egyptian fleshpots, would now be at their
devotions. How many have fallen into a fashion of swearing, scoffing, drinking,
out of the usual practice of others; as those that live in an ill air are
infected with diseases! A man may pass through Aethiopia unchanged: but he
cannot dwell there, and not be discolored.

Their sin was bad enough, let not our uncharitableness make it worse: No man
may think they have so put off humanity, and sense, with their religion, as to
think that Calfe, a God; or that this Idol which they saw yesterday made, did
bring them out of Egypt, three months ago. This were to make them more beasts
then that Calfe, which this image represented: Or if they should have been so
insensate, can we think that Aaron could be thus desperately mad? The image,
and the holy day were both, to one Deity: Tomorrow is the holyday of the Lord
your God. It was the true God they meant to worship in the Calfe: and yet at
best, this Idolatry is shameful. It is no marvel if this foul sin seek
pretenses; yet no excuse can hide the shame of such a face. Gods jealousy is
not stirred only by the riuality of a false God, but of a false worship:
Nothing is more dangerous then to mint Gods services in our own brain.

God sends down Moses to remedy this sin. He could as easily have prevented,
as redressed it. He knew, ere Moses came up, what Israel would do, ere he
came down: like as he knew, the two Tables would be broken, ere he gave them.
God most wisely permits, and ordinates sin to his own ends, without our
excuse: And though he could easily by his own hands remedy evils; yet he will
do it, by means, both ordinary, and subordinate. It is not for us to look for
an immediate redress from GOD, when we have a Moses, by whom it may be
wrought: Since God himself expects this from man, why should man expect it
from God?

Now might Moses have found a time to have been eeuen with Israel, for all
their unthankfulness, and mutinous insurrections. Let me alone: I will consume
them, and make thee a mighty Nation. Moses should not need to solicit God for
revenge; God solicites him, in a sort, for leave to revenge: Who would look for
such a word from god to man, Let me alone? As yet Moses had said nothing;
Before he opens his mouth, God preuents his importunity; as foreseeing that
holy violence, which the requests of Moses would offer to him. Moses stood
trembling before the majesty of his Maker; and yet hears him say, Let me
alones The mercy of our God, has (...) were obliged his power, to the faith of
men: The fervent prayers of the faithful, hold the hands of the Almighty. As
I find it said afterward of Christ, that he could do no miracles there,
because of their unbelief: So now I hear GOD (as if he could not do
execution upon Israel because of Moseses faith) say, Let me alone that I may
consume them.

We all naturally affect propriety; and like our own so much better, as it
is freer from partners. Every one would be glad to say, with that proud one, I
am, and there is none beside me: So much the more sweetly would this message
have sounded to nature, I will consume them, and make of thee a mighty Nation.
How many endeavor that (not without danger of curses and uproar) which was
voluntarily tendered unto Moses! Whence are our depopulations, and enclosures,
but for that men cannot abide either fellows, or neighbors? But how
graciously does Moses strive with GOD against his own preferment? If God had
threatened, I will consume thee, and make of them a mighty Nation, I doubt
whether he could have been more moved. The more a man can leave himself
behind him, and aspire to a care of community, the more spiritual he is.
Nothing makes a man so good a patriot, as religion.

Oh the sweet disposition of Moses; fit for him that should be familiar with
God! he saw they could be content to be merry, and happy without him; he would
not be happy without them. They had professed to have forgotten him: he
slacks not to sue for them. He that will ever hope for good himself, must
return good for evil unto others.

Yet was it not Israel so much that Moses respected, as God in Israel. He was
thrifty and jealous for his Maker; and would not have him lose the glory of his
mighty deliverances; nor would abide a pretense for any Egyptian dog, to
bark against the powerful work of God; Wherefore shall the Egyptians say? If
Israel could have perished without dishonor to God, perhaps his hatred to
their Idolatry would have overcome his natural love, and he had let God alone:
Now so tender is he over the name of God, that he would rather have Israel
escape with a sin, then Gods glory should be blemished in the opinions of men,
by a just judgment. He saw that the eyes and tongues of all the world were
intent upon Israel; a people so miraculously fetched from Egypt, whom the Sea
gave way too; whom heaven fed; whom the rock watered; whom the fire and cloud
guarded, which heard the audible voice of God: He knew vvithall, how ready the
world would be to misconstrue, and how the heathens would be ready to cast
imputations of leuity, or impotence upon GOD, and therefore says, What will
the Egyptians say? Happy is that man, which can make Gods glory the scope of
all his actions, and desires; neither cares for his own welfare, nor fears the
miseries of others, but with respect to God, in both. If God had not given
Moses this care of his glory, he could not have had it: And now his goodness
takes it so kindly, as if himself had received a favor from his creature; and
for a reward of the grace he had wrought, promises not to do that, which
he threatened.

But what needs God to care for the speech of the Egyptians; men, infidels? And
if they had been good, yet their censure should have been unjust. Shall God
care for the tongues of men; the holy God, for the tongues of infidels? The
very Israelites now they were from under the hands of Egypt, cared not for
their words; and shall the GOD of heaven regard that which is not worth the
regard of men? Their tongues could not walk against God, but from himself;
and if it could have been the worse for him, would he have permitted it? But,
O God, how dainty art thou of thine honor! that thou can not endure the
vvorst of men should have any color to taint it. What do we men stand upon
our justice, and innocence, with neglect of all unjust censures; when that
infinite God, whom no censures can reach, will not abide, that the very
Egyptians should falsely tax his power and mercy? Wise men must care not only
to deserve well, but to hear well: and to wipe off, not only crimes, but
censures.

There was never so precious a monument, as the Tables written with Gods own
hand. If we see but the stone which Jacobs head rested on; or, on which the
foot of Christ did once tread; we look upon it with more then ordinary
respect: With what eye should we have beheld this stone, which was hewed, and
written with the very finger of God? Any manuscript scroll written by the hand
of a famous man is laid up amongst our jewels; What place then should we have
given to the handwriting of the Almighty?

That which he has dictated to his servants the Prophets, challenges just
honor from us; how does that deserve veneration, which his own hand wrote
immediately?

Prophecies and Evangelical discourses he has written by others; never did
he write any thing himself, but these Tables of the Law: neither did he ever
speak any thing audibly to whole mankind, but it; The hand, the stone, the Law
were all his. By how much more precious this record was, by so much was the
fault greater, of defacing it. What King holds it less then rebellion to tear
his writing, and blemish his seal?

At the first, he ingraued his image in the Table of man's heart; Adam blurred
the image, but (through Gods mercy) saved the Tablet. Now he writes his will in
the Tables of stone, Moses breaks the Tables, and defaced the writing. If they
had been given him for himself, the author, the matter, had deserved, that as
they were written in stone, for permanency; So they should be kept for ever:
and as they were everlasting in use, so they should be in preservation. Had
they been written in clay, they could but have been broken: But now they were
given for all Israel, for all mankind. He was but the messenger, not the
owner. Howsoever therefore Israel had deserved by breaking this Covenant with
GOD, to have this monument of Gods Covenant with them, broken by the same hand
that wrote it: Yet how durst Moses thus carelessly cast away the treasure of all
the world; and by his hands undo that, which was with such cost and care, done
by his Creator? How durst he fail the trust of that GOD, whose pledge he
received with awe, and reverence? He that expostulated with God, to have
Israel live and prosper, why would he deface the rule of their life, in the
keeping whereof they should prosper? I see that forty days talk with God cannot
bereave a man of passionate infirmity: He that was the meekest upon earth, in
a sudden indignation abandons that, which in cold blood he would have held
faster, then his life: He forgets the Law written, when he saw it broken; His
zeal for GOD has transported him from himself, and his duty to the charge of
God: He more hates the golden Calfe, wherein he saw engraven the Idolatry of
Israel, then he honored the Tables of stone, wherein God had engraven his
commandments: and more longed to deface the Idol, then he cared to preserve
the Tables. Yet that God, which so sharply revenged the breach of one Law, upon
the Israelites, checks not Moses for breaking both the Tables of the Law. The
Law of God is spiritual; the internal breach of one Law is so heinous, that
in comparison of it God scarce counts the breaking of the outward Tables, a
breach of the Law. The goodness of God winks at the errors of honest zeal; and
so loves the strength of good affections, that it passes over their
infirmities: How highly God does esteem a well governed zeal; when his mercy
crowns it with all the faults?

The Tables had not offended: the Calfe had, and Israel in it. Moses takes
revenge on both: He burns and stamps the Calfe to powder, and gives it Israel
to drink; that they might have it in their guts, in stead of their eyes: How
he hastes to destroy the Idol wherein they sinned? that, as an Idol is
nothing, so it might be brought to nothing; and Atoms and dust is nearest to
nothing: that in stead of going before Israel, it might pass through them; so
as the next day they might find their God in their excrements; To the just
shame of Israel, when they should see their new God cannot defend himself,
from being either nothing, or worse.

Who can but wonder to see a multitude of so many hundred thousands (when Moses
came running down the ^ill) to turn their eyes from their god, to him; And on
a sudden, in stead of worshipping their Idol, to batter it in pieces, in the
very height of the nouelty? In stead of building altars, and kindling fires to
it, to kindle an hoter fire, then that, wherewith it was melted, to consume it;
In stead of dancing before it, to abhor and deface it; in stead of singing,
to weep before it? There was never a more stiff-necked people: Yet I do not
hear any one man of them say; He is but one man; We are many; how easily may
we destroy him, rather then he our god? If his brother durst not resist our
motion in making it: Why will we suffer him to dare resist the keeping of it?
It is our act; and we will maintain it. Here was none of this; but an humble
obeisance to the basest and bloodiest revenge that Moses shall impose. God has
set such an impression of Majesty in the face of lawful authority, that
wickedness is confounded in it self to behold it. If from hence visible
powers were not more feared then the invisible God, the world would be
ouerrunne with outrage. Sin has such a guiltiness in it self, that when
it is seasonably checked, it pulls in his head, and seeks rather an hiding
place, then a fort.

The Idol is not capable of a further revenge: It is not enough, unless the
Idolaters smart: The gold was good, if the Israelites had not been evil: So
great a sin cannot be expiated without blood. Behold, that meek spirit,
which in his plea with GOD would rather perish himself, then Israel should
perish, arms the Levites against their brethren, and reioyces to see thousands
of the Israelites bleed, and blesses their executioners.

It was the mercy of Moses that made him cruel: He had been cruel to all,
if some had not found him cruel. They are merciless hands which are not
sometimes embrued in blood: There is no less charity then justice in
punishing sinners with death; GOD delights no less in a killing mercy, then
in a pitiful justice: Some tender hearts would be ready to censure the rigor
of Moses. Might not Israel have repented and lived? Or, if they must die, must
their brethrens hand be upon them? Or if their throats must be cut by their
brethren, shall it be done in the very heat of their sin? But they must
learn a difference betwixt pity, and fondness; mercy, and injustice. Moses,
had an heart as soft as theirs, but more hot; as pitiful, but wiser. He was a
good Physician, and saw that Israel could not live, unless he bled: he
therefore lets out this corrupt blood, to save the whole body. There cannot be
a better sacrifice to God, then the blood of malefactors: and this first
sacrifice so pleased GOD in the hands of the Levites, that he would have none
but them, sacrifice to him for ever. The blood of the Idolatrous Israelites
cleared that tribe from the blood of the innocent Sichemites.

The end of the fist Book.
Contemplations. THE SIXTH BOOK. The veil of Moses. Nadab and Abihu. Aaron and
Miriam. The Searchers of Canaan. Corah's Conspiracy.


At London, printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham: and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS LORD VISCOUNT FENTON, Captain of the Royal
Guard; one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counselors; One of the happy
rescuers of the dear life of our gracious Sovereign LORD; A worthy pattern
of all true Honor: I. H. Dedicates this part of his Meditations, and wishes
all increase of Grace and Happiness. ()

CONTEMPLATIONS. THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Veil of Moses.
IT is a wonder, that neither Moses nor any Israelite gathered up the shiuers
of the former Tables: Every sheard of that stone, and every letter of that
writing had been a relic worth laying up: but he well saw how headlong
the people were to superstition; and how unsafe it were, to feed that
disposition in them.

The same zeal that burnt the Calfe to ashes, concealed the ruins of this
Monument: Holy things besides their use, challenge no further respect. The
breaking of the Tables did as good as blot out all the writing: and the
vvriting defaced, left no virtue in the stone, no reverence to it.

If GOD had not been friends with Israel, he had not renewed his Law. As the
Israelites were wilfully blind if they did not see GODs anger in the Tables
broken: so could they not but hold it a good sign of grace that GOD gave them
his Testimonies. There was nothing wherein Israel out-stripped all the rest of
the world more, then in this privilege; the pledge of his covenant, the Law
written with GODs own hand. Oh what a favor then is it, where GOD bestows
his Gospel upon any Nation? That was but a killing letter: this is the power
of God to salvation.

Never is GOD thoroughly displeased with any people, where that continues.
For, like as those which purposed love, when they fall off, call for their
tokens back again: So when GOD begins once perfectly to mislike, the
first thing he withdrawes, is his Gospel.

Israel recouers this favor, but with an abatement; Heaw thee two Tables. God
made the first Tables: The matter, the form, was his; now, Moses must heaw the
next: As God created the first man after his own image; but that once defaced,
Adam begat Cain after his own: Or as the first Temple razed, a second was
built; yet so far short, that the Israelites wept at the sight of it, The
first works of God, are still the purest: those that he secondarily works
by us, decline in their perfection. It was reason, that though God had forgiven
Israel, they should still find, they had sinned. They might see the footsteps
of displeasure, in the differences of the agent. When GOD had told Moses
before, I will not go before Israel, but my Angel shall lead them; Moses so
noted the difference, that he rested not, till God himself undertook their
conduct: So might the Israelites have noted some remainders of offense, whiles
in stead of that which his own hand did formerly make, he says now, Heaw
thee; And yet these second Tables are kept reverently in the Arc, when the
other lay mouldred in shiuers upon Sinai; Like as the repaired image of God in
our regeneration is preserved, perfited, and laid up at last, safe in heaven;
whereas the first image of our created innocence, is quite defaced: So the
second Temple had the glory of Christ's exhibition, tho meaner in frame. The
merciful respects of God are not tied to glorious outsides; or the inward
worthiness of things, or persons: He has chosen the weak and simple to
confound the wise, and mighty.

Yet God did this work by Moses; Moses heawed, and God wrote: Our true Moses
repayres that Law of GOD which we in our nature had broken; He reuiues it for
us, and it is accepted of GOD no less then if the first characters of his Law
had been still entire. We can give nothing but the Table: it is GOD that must
write in it. Our hearts are but a bare-board, till GOD by his finger ingraue
his Law in them; Yea, Lord, we are a rough quarrie; heaw thou us out, and
square us fit for thee, to write upon.

Well may we marvel, to see Moses, after this oversight, admitted to this
charge again: Who of us would not have said, Your care indeed deserves trust;
you did so carefully keep the first Tables, that it would do well to trust
you with such another burden.

It was good for Moses, that he had to do with GOD, not with men: The GOD of
mercy will not impute the slippes of our infirmity, to the prejudice of our
faithfulness. He that after the misse-answere of the one talent, would not
trust the evil servant with a second, because he saw a wilful neglect; will
trust Moses with his second Law, because he saw fidelity in the worst error
of his zeal. Our charity must learn, as to forgive, so to believe where we
have been deceived: Not that we should wilfully beguile our selves in an
unjust credulity, but that we should search diligently into the disposition
of persons, and grounds of their actions; perhaps none may be so sure, as
they that have once disappointed us. Yea Moses brake the first; therefore he
must heaw the second: If GOD had broken them, he would have repaired them; The
amends must be where the fault was. Both GOD, and his Church look for a
satisfaction, in that wherein we have offended.

It was not long since Moses his former fast of forty days: When he then came
down from the hill, his first question was not for meat: and now going up
again to Sinai, he takes not any repast with him: That GOD which sent the
Quayles to the host of Israel, and Manna from heaven, could have fed him
with dainties: He goes up confidently in a secure trust of GODs provision.
There is no life to that of faith; Man lives not by bread only: The vision of
GOD did not only sat, but feast him. What a blessed satiety shall there be,
when we shall see him as he is; and he shall be all in all to us; since
this very frail mortality of Moses* was sustained, and comforted, but with
representations of his presence.

I see Moses the receiver of the Law, Elias the restorer of the Law, CHRIST
the fulfiller of the old Law, and author of the new, all fasting forty
days: and these three great fasters I find together glorious in Mount Tabor.
Abstinence merits not; For Religion consists not in the belly, either full or
empty: what are meats, or drinks to the kingdom of God, which is like
himself, spiritual? But it prepares best for good duties. Full bellies are
fitter for rest: not the body, so much as the soul, is more active with
emptines; Hence solemn prayer takes ever fasting to attend it, and so much the
rather speeds in heaven, when it is so accompanied. It is good so to diet the
body, that the soul may be fatned.

When Moses came down before, his eyes sparkled with anger; and his face was
beth interchangeably pale, and red with indignation: now it is bright with
glory. Before, there were the flames of fury in it; now the beams of
Majesty. Moses had before spoken with GOD; why did not his face shine before?
I cannot lay the cause upon the inward trouble of his passions, for this
brightness was external. Whither shall we impute it but to his more entireness
with God?

The more familiar acquaintance we have with GOD, the more do we partake of
him. He that passes by the fire, may have some gleames of heat: but he that
stands by it has his color changed. It is not possible a man should have any
long conference with GOD, and be no whit affected. We are strangers from GOD,
it is no wonder if our faces be earthly; but he that settes himself apart
to GOD, shall find a kind of majesty, and awful respect put upon him, in
the minds of others.

How did the heart of Moses shine with illumination when his face was thus
lightsome? And if the flesh of Moses in this base composition, so shined by
conuersing with GOD forty days in Sinai; What shall our glory be, when
clothed with incorruptible bodies we shall converse with him for ever, in the
highest heaven?

Now his face only shone: afterward the three disciples saw all his body
shining. The nature of a glorified body, the clearer vision, the immediate
presence of that fountain of glory, challenge a far greater resplendence to
our faces, then his. O GOD, we are content that our faces be blemished awhile
with contempt, and blubbred with tears; how can we but shine with Moses,
when we shall see thee more then Moses?

The brightness of Moseses face reflected not upon his own eyes: He shone
bright and knew not of it: He saw Gods face glorious, he did not think
others had so seen his. How many have excellent graces, and perceive them
not? Our own sense is an ill judge of GODs favors to us; Those that stand by,
can convince us in that which we deny to our selves. Here below, it is
enough, if we can shine in the eyes of others; above, we shall shine, and
know it. At this instant, Moses sees himself shine: then, he needed not. GOD
meant not that he should more esteem himself, but that he should be more
honored of the Israelites: That other glory shall be for our own happiness,
and therefore requires our knowledge.

They that did but stand still, to see anger in his face; ran away to see
glory in it: Before, they had desired that God would not speak to them any
more but by Moses; and now that GOD does but look upon them in Moses, they are
afraid; and yet there was not more difference betwixt the voices, then the
faces of GOD and Moses. This should have drawn Israel to Moses so much the
more, to have seen this impression of Divinity in his face.

That which should have comforted, affrights them: Yea Aaron himself, that
before went up into the mount to see and speak with God, now is afraid to
see him that had seen GOD: Such a fear there is in guiltiness, such
confidence in innocence. When the soul is once cleared from sin, it shall
run to that glory, with joy, the least glimpse whereof now appalles it, and
sends it away in terror. How could the Israelites now choose but think; How
shall we abide to look GOD in the face, since our eyes are dazeled with the
face of Moses? And well may we still argue, If the image of GOD, which he
has set in the fleshy forehead of authority daunt us; how shall we stand
before the dreadful tribunal of heaven?

Moses maruels to see Israel run away from their guide, as from their enemy;
and looks back to see if he could discern any new cause of fear; and not
conceiving how his mild face could affray them, calls them to stay, and
retire. Oh my people, whom do you flee? It is for your sakes, that I
ascended, stayed, came down: Behold, here are no armed Levites to strike you,
no Amalekites, no Egyptians to pursue you, no fires and thunders to dismay you.
I have not that rod of GOD in my hand, which you have seen to command the
Elements: or if I had; so far am I from purposing any rigor against you,
that I now lately have appeased God toward you; and lo, here the pledges of
his reconciliation. God sends me to you for good; and do you run from your
best friend? Whither will ye go from me; or without me? Stay, and hear the
charge of that God, from whom ye cannot flee.

They perceive his voice the same, though his face were changed, and are
persuaded to stay, and return and hear him, whom they dare not see; and now
after many doubtful pases approaching nearer, dare tell him he was grown too
glorious.

Good Moses, finding that they durst not look upon the sun of his face,
clouds it with a veil: Choosing rather to hide the work of God in him, then
to want opportunity of revealing GODs will, to his people: I do not hear him
stand upon terms of reputation; If there be glory in my face, God put it
there; he would not have placed it so conspicuously, if he had meant it
should be hid: Hide ye your faces rather, which are blemished with your sin;
and look not that I should wrong God and my self, to seem less happy, in
favor of your weakness. But without all selfe-respects, he modestly hides
his glorified face; and cares not their eyes should pierce so far, as to his
skin, on condition, that his words may pierce into their ears. It is good for
a man sometimes to hide his graces; Some talents are best improued by being
laid up: Moses had more glory by his veil, then by his face. Christian modesty
teaches a wise man, not to expose himself to the fairest show, and to live at
the utmost pitch of his strength.

There is many a rich stone laid up in the bowels of earth; many a fair
pearl laid up in the bosom of the Sea, that never was seen, nor never shall
be. There is many a goodly star, which because of height comes not within our
account: How did out true Moses with the veil of his flesh, hide the glory of
his Deity, and put on vileness, besides the laying aside of Majesty; and shut
up his great and Divine Miracles, with, See you tell no man. How far are
those spirits from this, which care only to be seen; and wish only to dazzle
others eyes with admiration, not caring for unknown riches? But those yet
more, which desire to seem above themselves, whether in parts, or graces;
whose veil is fayrer then their skin. Modest faces shall shine through
their vayles, when the vainglorious shall bewray their shame, through their
covering.

That GOD, which gave his Law in smoke, delivered it again, through the veil
of Moses. Israel could not look to the end of that, which should be
abolished; for the same cause had GOD a veil upon his own face, which hid
his presence in the holy of holies. Now as the veil of GOD did rend, when he
said, It is finished; so the veil of Moses was then pulled off: We clearly
see Christ, the end of the Law; Our Joshua that succeeded Moses, speaks to us
barefaced: what a shame is it there should be a veil upon our hearts, when
there is none on his face?

When Moses went to speak with GOD, he pulled off his veil; It was good
reason he should present to GOD, that face which he had made: There had been
more need of his veil, to hide the glorious face of GOD from him, then to
hide his from GOD: but his faith and thankfulness, serve for both these uses.
Hypocrites are contrary to Moses; he showed his worst to men, his best to GOD;
they show their best to men, their worst to GOD: but GOD sees both their veil,
and their face; and I know not, whether he more hates their veil of
dissimulation, or their face of wickedness.

Nadab and Abihu.
THat GOD, which showed himself to men in fire, when he delivered his Law;
would have men present their sacrifices to him in fire; And this fire he would
have his own: that there might be a just circulation in this creature; as the
water sends up those vapors, which it receives, down again in rain.
Hereupon it was, that fire came down from God, unto the altar: That as the
charge of the sacrifice was delivered in fire and smoke; so God might signify
the acceptance of it, in the like fashion wherein it was commanded. The
Baalites might lay ready their bullock upon the wood, and water in their
trench: but they might sooner fetch the blood out of their bodies, and destroy
themselves, then one flash out of heaven to consume the sacrifice. That devil,
which can fetch down fire from heaven, either maliciously, or to no purpose;
(although he abound with fire; and did as fervently desire this fire in emulation
to God, as ever he desired mitigation of his own) yet now, he could no more
kindle a fire for the Idolatrous sacrifice, then quench the flames of his own
torment. Herein God approoues himself only worthy to be sacrificed unto,
that he creates the fire for his own service; whereas the impotent Idols of
the heathen, must fetch fire from their neighbors kitchen; and themselves are
fit matter for their borrowed fire.

The Israelits (that were led too much with sense) if they had seen the bullock
consumed with a fire fetched from a common hearth, could never have acknowledged
what relation the sacrifice had to GOD; had never perceived that God took
notice of the sacrifice: but now they see the fire coming out, from the
presence of God, they are convinced both of the power and acceptance of the
Almighty; They are at once amazed, and satisfied to see the same God answer by
fire, which before had spoken by fire: God does no less approve our
Euangelical sacrifices, then theirs under the law; But as our sacrifices are
spiritual, so are the signs of his acceptance; Faith is our guide, as sense
was theirs. Yea even still, does God testify his approbation by sensible
evidences: when by a lively faith, and fervent zeal, our hearts are consecrated
to GOD, then does his heavenly fire come down upon our sacrifices; Then are
they holy, living, acceptable. This flame, that GOD kindled, was not as some
momentany bonfire, for a sudden, and short Triumph, nor as a domestical
fire, to go out with the day; but is given for a perpetuity, and neither must
die, nor be quenched. God, as he is himself, eternal; so he loves permanency,
and constancy of grace in us: If we be but a flash and away, God regards us
not; all promises are to perseverance. Sure, it is but an elementary fire, that
goes out; that which is celestial, continues: it was but some presumptuous
heat in us, that decays upon every occasion.

But he that miraculously sent down this fire, at first, will not renew the
miracle every day, by a like supply; it began immediately from God, it must be
nourished by means. Fuel must maintain that fire, which came from heaven;
God will not work miracles every day: if he have kindled his spirit in us, we
may not expect he shall every day begin again; we have the fuel of the word
and sacraments, prayers, and meditations, which must keep it in for ever. It is
from God that these helps can nourish his graces in us; like as every flame of
our material fire, has a concourse of providence; but we may not expect new
infusions: rather know, that God expects of us an improuement of those
habitual graces we have received.

Whiles the people with fear and joy see God lighting his own fire, fire from
heaven, the two sons of Aaron, in a careless presumption, will be serving him
with a common flame; As if he might not have leave to choose the forms of his
own worship. If this had bin done some ages after, when the memory of the
original of this heavenly fire had bin worn out, it might have bin excused
with ignorance: but now, when God had newly sent his fire from above, newly
commanded the continuance of it; either to let it go out, or whiles it still
flamed, to fetch profane coals to Gods altar, could savor of no less then
presumption, and sacrilege: when we bring zeal without knowledge,
misconceits of faith, carnal affections, the devises of our will worship,
superstitious devotions into Gods service; we bring common fire to his altar;
these flames were never of his kindling; He hates both altar, fire, priest and
sacrifice. And now behold; the same fire which consumed the sacrifice before,
consumes the sacrificers. It was the sign of his acceptance in consuming the
beast; but whiles it destroyed men, the fearful sign of his displeasure. By
the same means can GOD bewray both love, and hatred. We would have pleaded for
Nadab and Abthu; They are but young men, the sons of Aaron, not yet warm in
their function; let both age, and blood, and inexperience excuse them, as yet.
No pretenses, no privileges can bear off a sin with God: Men think either to
patronize, or mitigate evils, by their fained reasons. That no man may hope the
plea either of birth, or of youth, or of the first commission of evil, may
challenge pardon. I see here young men, sons of the Ruler of Israel, for the
first offense struck dead.

Yea, this made God the more to stomach, and the rather to revenge this
impiety, because the sons of Aaron did it. God had both pardoned and graced
their father, he had honored the^; of the thousands of Israel, culling them out
for his altar: and now, as their father set up a false God, so they bring false
fire unto the true God. If the sons of Infidels live godlesly, they do their
kind; their punishment shall be (though just) yet less: but if the children
of religious parents, after all Christian nourture, shall shame their
Education, GOD takes it more haynously, and reuenges it more sharply. The more
bonds of duty, the more plagues of neglect.

If from the agents, we look to the act it self; set aside the original
descent, and what difference was there betwixt these fyres? Both looked alike,
heated alike, ascended alike, consumed alike: Both were fed with the same
material wood, both vanished into smoke; There was no difference, but in the
commandment of God. If God had enjoined ordinary fire, they had sinned to look
for celestial; now he commanded only the fire which he sent: they sinned in
sending up incense, in that fire, which he commanded not. It is a dangerous
thing in the service of God to decline from his own institutions; we have to
do with a power which is wise to prescribe his own worship, just to require
what he has prescribed, powerful to revenge that which he has not required.

If God had struck them with some leprosy in their forehead, as he did their
Aunt Miriam, soon after, or with some palsy, or lingering consumption, the
punishment had been grievous: but he, whose judgments are ever just, sometimes
secret, saw fire the fittest revenge, for a sin of fire; his own fire, fittest
to punish strange fire; A sudden judgment, fit for a present, and
exemplary sin; He saw, that if he had winkt at this, his service had been
exposed to profanation. It is wisdom in Governors to take sin at the first
bound; and so to revenge it, that their punishments may be preuentions. Speed
of death, is not always a judgment; suddennes, as it is ever justly
suspicable, so then certainly argues anger, when it finds us in an act of
sin. Leisure of repentance is an argument of favor: when God gives a man law,
it implies that he would not have judgment surprise him.

Doubtless Aaron looked somewhat heavily on this sad spectacle; It could not
but appall him, to see his two sons dead before him, dead in displeasure,
dead suddenly, dead by the immediate hand of God. And now he could repent him
of his new honor, to see it succeed so ill, with the sons of his loins;
neither could he choose, but see himself stricken in them. But his brother Moses,
that had learned not to know either nephews, or brother, when they stood in
his way to God, wisely turned his eyes from the dead carcasses of his sons,
to his respect of the living GOD; My Brother, this event is fearful, but
just; These were thy sons, but they sinned; it was not for GOD, it is not
for thee, to look so much who they were, as what they did. It was their honor
and thine, that they were chosen to minister before the Lord: He that called
them, justly required their sanctification, and obedience. If they have
profaned God, and themselves; can thy natural affection so miscary thee, that
thou could wish their impunity, with the blemish of thy Maker? Our sons are
not ours, if they disobey our Father: to pity their misery, is to partake of
their sin; If thou grudge at their judgment, take heed least the same fire
of GOD come forth upon this strange fire of nature. Show now whether thou more
love GOD, or thy sons; Show whether thou be a better father, or a son.

Aaron, weighing these things, holds his peace, not out of an amazement, or
fullennesse, but out of patient and humble submission; and seeing Gods
pleasure, and their desert, is content to forget, that he had sons. He might
have had a silent tongue, and a clamorous heart; There is no voice louder in the
ears of GOD, then a a speechless repining of the soul. Heat is more intended
with keeping in; but Aarons silence was no less inward: He knew how little
he should get by brauling with GOD. If he breathed out coffeehouse, he
saw GOD could speak fire to him again; And therefore he quietly submits to
the will of God; and held his peace, because the Lord had done it. There is no
greater proof of grace, then to smart patiently; and humbly and contentedly to
rest the heart in the justice, and wisdom of Gods proceeding; and to be so far
from chiding, that we dispute not. Nature is froward; and tho she well knows
we meddle not with our match, when we strive with our Maker, yet she pricks
us forward to this idle quarrel; and bids us with Jobs wife, Curse and die. If
God either chide, or smite, (as servants are charged to their Masters) we may
not answer again; when Gods hand is on our back, our hand must be on our
mouth: else, as mothers do their children, God shall whippe us so much the more
for crying.

It is hard for a stander by, in this case to distinguish betwixt
hardhartednes, and piety. There Aaron sees his sons ly; he may neither put
his hand to them, to bury them, nor shed a tear for their death. Never parent
can have iuster cause of mourning, then to see his sons dead in their sin; if
prepared, and penitent, yet who can but sorrow for their end: but to part with
children, to the danger of a second death, is worthy of more then tears. Yet
Aaron must learn so far to deny nature, that he must more magnify the
justice of GOD, then lament the judgment. Those whom GOD has called to his
immediate service, must know that he will not allow them the common passions,
and cares of others. Nothing is more natural then sorrow for the death of our
own: if ever grief be seasonable, it becoms a funeral. And if Nadab and
Abihu had died in their beds, this favor had been allowed them, the sorrow of
their father and brethren: for when GOD forbids solemn mourning to his
Priests, over the dead, he excepts the cases of this neerenesse of blood. Now
all Israel may mourn for these two; only the father and brethren may not. God
is jealous, least their sorrow should seem to countenance the sin, which he
had punished: even the fearfullest acts of GOD must be applauded by the
heauiest hearts of the faithful.

That which the father and brother may not do, the cozens are commanded: Dead
carcasses are not for the presence of GOD; His justice was shown sufficiently
in killing them: They are now fit for the grave, not the sanctuary: Neither
are they carried out naked, but in their coats. It was an unusual sight for
Israel to see a linen Ephod upon the beer; The judgment was so much more
remarkable, because they had the badge of their calling upon their backs.
Nothing is either more pleasing unto God, or more commodious to men, then that
when he has executed judgment, it should be seen and wondered at; for
therefore he strikes some, that he may warn all.

Aaron and Miriam.
THe Israelites are stayed seven days in the station of Hazzeroth, for the
punishment of Miriam. The sins of the Governors are a just stop to the
people; all of them smart in one; all must stay the leisure of Miriams
recovery. Whosoever seeks the Land of Promise, shall find many lets; Amalek,
Og, Sehon, and the Kings of Canaan meet with Israel: these resisted, but
hindered not their passage; their sins only stay them from remoouing.
Afflictions are not crosses to us, in the way to heaven, in comparison to our
sins.

What is this I see? Is not this Aaron, that was brother in nature, and by
office ioynt-commissioner with Moses? Is not this Aaron, that made his brother
an intercessor for him, to God, in the case of his Idolatry? Is not this Aaron,
that climbd up the hill of Sinai, with Moses? Is not this Aaron, whom the mouth
and hand of Moses consecrated an high Priest unto GOD? Is not this Miriam, the
elder sister of Moses? Is not this Miriam, that led the triumph of the
women, and sung gloriously to the Lord? Is not this Miriam, which laid her
brother Moses in the Reeds, and fetched her Mother to be his Nurse? Both,
Prophets of GOD; both, the flesh and blood of Moses: And does this Aaron
repine at the honor of him, which gave himself that honor, and saved his
life? Does this Miriam repine at the prosperity of him whose life she
saved? Who would not have thought, this should have been their glory, to
have seen the glory of their own Brother? What could have bin a greater
comfort to Miriam, then to think; How happily* does he now sit at the steine
of Israel, whom I saved from perishing in aboat of bulrushes! It is to me,
that Israel owes this commander; But now envy has so blinded their eyes, that
they can neither see this privilege of nature, nor the honor of Gods choice.
Miriam and Aaron, are in mutiny against Moses. Who is so holy that sins not?
what sin is so unnatural, that the best can avoid without God? But what
weakness soever may plead for Miriam, who can but grieve to see Aaron at the
end of so many sins? Of late, I saw him caruing the molten Image, and
consecrating an altar to a false GOD: now I see him seconding an unkind
mutiny against his brother: Both sins find him accessarie, neither
principal. It was not in the power of the legal priesthood to perform, or
promise innocence to her ministers: It was necessary we should have another
high Priest, which could not be tainted. That King of righteousness, was of
another order; He being without sin, has fully satisfied for the sins of
men. Whom can it now offend, to see the blemishes of the Euangelical
priesthood, when Gods first high priest is thus miscarried?

Who can look for love and prosperity at once, when holy, and meek Moses
finds enmity in his own flesh and blood? Rather then we shall want, A man's
enemies shall be those of his own house. Authority cannot fail of opposition,
if it be never so mildly swayed: that common makebate will rather raise it out
of our own bosom; To do well, and hear ill, is princely.

The Midianitish wife of Moses, cost him dear. Before, she hazarded his life;
now, the favor of his people: Unequal matches are sildom prosperous. Although
now, this scandal was only taken: Envy was not wife enough to choose a ground
of the quarrel. Whether some secret and emulatorie brawles passed between
Zipporah and Miriam, (as many times these sparks of private brawles, grow into
a perilous and common flame) or whether now that Iethro and his family was
joined with Israel, there were surmises of transporting the government to
strangers; or whether this unfit choice of Moses, is now raised up to disparage
Gods gifts in him; Even in sight, the exceptions were frivolous: Emulation is
curious; and out of the best person, or act, will raise something to cauil at.

Seditions do not ever look the same way they move; Wise men can easily
distinguish betwixt the visor of actions, and the face. The wife of Moses is
mentioned, his superiority is shot at. Pride is lightly the ground of all
sedition. Which of their faces shined like Moses? Yea, let him but have drawn
his veil, which of them durst look on his face? Which of them had fasted twice
40. days? Which of them ascended up to the roppe of Sinai, and was hid with
smoke, and fire? Which of them received the Law twice in two several tables,
from Gods own hand? And yet they dare say, Has God spoken only by Moses? They
do not deny Moses his honor, but they challenge a part with him: and as they
were the elder in nature, so they would be equal in dignity, equal in
administration. According to her name, Miriam would be exalted. And yet how
unfit were they? One, a woman, whom her sex debarred from rule; the other a
Priest, whom his office sequestered from earthly government. Self-love makes
men unreasonable, and teaches them to turn the glass, to see themselves
bigger, others less then they are. It is an hard thing for a man, willingly
and gladly to see his equals lifted over his head, in worth and opinion.
Nothing will more try a man's grace, then questions of emulation. That man has
true light, which can be content to be a candle before the sun of others.

As no wrong can escape God; so least of all those which are offered to Princes:
He that made the ear, needs no intelligence of our tongues. We have to do
with a GOD, that is light of hearing; we cannot whisper any evil so secretly,
that he should not cry out of noise; and what need we any further evidence,
when our Judge is our witness?

Without any delation of Moses, GOD hears, and challenges them. Because he was
meek, therefore he complained not: Because he was meek, and complained not,
therefore the Lord struck in for him, the more. The less a man strives for
himself, the more is GOD his Champion. It is the honor of great persons, to
undertake the patronage of their clients: How much more will GOD revenge his
Elect, which cry to him, day and night? He that said, I seek not mine own
glory, adds, But there is one that seeks it, and judges. GOD takes his part
ever, that fights not for himself.

No man could have given more proofs of his courage, then Moses. He slew the
Egyptian; He confronted Pharaoh in his own Court; He beat the Midianite
Shepherds; He feared not the troops of Egypt; He durst look GOD in the
face, amiddst all the terrors of Sinai: and yet that Spirit, which made, and
knevv his heart* says, He was the mildest man upon earth. Mildness and
Fortitude may well lodge together in one breast; to correct the misconceits of
those men, that think none valiant, but those that are fierce, and cruel.

No sooner is the word out of Miriams mouth, then the word of Gods reproof
meets it; How he bestirres him, and will be at once seen and heard, when the
name of Moses is in question! Moses was zealously careful for Gods glory, and
now God is zealous for his. The remuneratio^s of the almighty, are infinitely
gracious; He cannot want honor, and patronage, that seeks the honor of his
Maker. The ready way to true glory, is goodness.

GOD might have spoken so loud, that heaven and earth should have heard it; so
as they should not have needed to come forth for audience: but now, he calls
them out to the bar, that they may be seen to hear. It did not content him,
to chide them within doors; the shame of their fault had been less in a
private rebuke: but the scandal of their repining was public. Where the
sin is not afraid of the light, God loves not the reproof should be smothered.

They had depressed Moses, GOD aduaunces him; They had equalled themselves to
Moses, God preferres him to them. Their plea was, that God had spoken by them,
as well as Moses: Gods reply is, That he has in a more entire fashion spoken
to Moses, then them. GOD spoke to the best of them, but either in their dream,
sleeping; or in vision, waking. But to Moses, he spoke with more inward
illumination; with more lively representation: To others, as a stranger; to
Moses, as a friend. GOD had never so much magnified Moses to them, but for
their envy. We cannot devise to pleasure Gods servants, so much as by
despighting them.

God was angry when he chode them, but more angry when he departed. The
withdrawing of his presence, is the presence of his wrath. Whiles he stays to
reprove, there is favor in his displeasure; but when he leaves either man, or
Church, there is no hope, but of vengeance. The final absence of GOD, is hell
it self. When he forsakes us (tho for a time) it is an introduction to his
utmost judgment. It was time to look for a judgment, when God departed: so
soon as he is gone from the eyes of Miriam, the leprosy appears in her face:
her foul tongue is punished with a foul face. Since she would acknowledge no
difference betwixt her self, and her brother Moses, every Israelite now sees
his face glorious, hers leprous. Deformity is a fit cure of Pride. Because the
venom of her tongue, would have eaten into the reputation of her brother,
therefore a poisonous infection eats into her flesh. Now both Moses, and
Miriam, need to wear a veil: the one to hide his glory; the other, her
deformity. That Midianite, Zipporah, whom she scorned, was beautiful in
respect of her.

Miriam was stricken, Aaron escaped: both sinned; his priesthood could not
rescue him; the greatness of his dignity, did but add to the haynousnes of
his sin: his repentance freed him; Alas, my Lord, I beseech thee, lay not
this sin upon us, which we have foolishly committed. I wonder not to see Aaron
free, while I see him penitent; This very confession saved him before, from
bleeding for Idolatry, which now preserues him from leprosy, for his envious
repining. The universal antidote for all the judgments of God, is our humble
repentance.

Yea, his sad deprecation prevailed, both to to clear himself and recover
Miriam; The brother sues for himself and his sister, to that brother, whom
they both emulated, for pardon from himself, and that God which was offended
in him. Where now is that equality which was pretended? Behold he that so
lately made his brother his fellow, now makes him, his God: Lay not this sin
upon us; Let her not be as one dead: As if Moses had imposed this plague, and
could remove it. Never any opposed the servants of GOD, but one time or other
they have been constrained to confess a superiority.

Miriam would have wounded Moses with her tongue; Moses would heal her, with
his O Lord heal her now: The wrong is the greater, because his sister did it.
He does not say, I sought not her shame, she sought mine; if God have revenged
it, I have no reason to look on her, as a sister, who looked at me, as an
adversary: But, as if her leprosy were his; He cries out for her cure. O
admirable meekness of Moses! His people the Jews rebelled against him; GOD
profers revenge; He would rather die, then they should perish: His Sister
rebels against him; GOD works his revenge: He will not give GOD peace, till
she be recured. Behold a worthy and noble pattern for us to follow. How
far are they from this disposition, who are not only content GOD should
revenge; but are ready to prevent GODs revenge with their own?

GODs Love to Moses suffers him not to obtain presently his suit for Miriam;
His good nature to his Sister, made him pray against himself. If the judgment
had been at once inflicted, and removed, there had been no example of terror
for others: God either denies or differs the grant of our requests, for our
good; It were wide for us, if our suites should be ever heard. It was fit for
all parts, Miriam should continue some-while leprous. There is no policy in a
sudden remouall of just punishment: unless the rain so fall that it lie, and
soke into the earth, it profits nothing. If the judgments of God should be
only as passengers, and not soiourners at least, they would be no whit
regarded.

The Searchers of Canaan.
I Can but wonder at the counsel of God; If the Israelites had gone on to
Canaan, without inquiry, their confidence had possessed it: now they send to
espy the Land, six hundred thousand of them never lived to see it: And yet I
see GOD inioyning them to send; but inioyning it, upon their instance. Some
things GOD allows, in judgment; Their importunity, and distrust extorted
from God this occasion of their overthrow. That which the Lord mooues unto,
prospers; but that which we move him to, first, seldom succeeds. What
needed they doubt of the goodness of that Land, which God told them did flow
with milk and honey? What needed they to doubt of obtaining that, which God
promised to give? When we will send forth our senses to be our scouts in the
matters of faith, and rather dare trust men, then God, we are worthy to be
deceived.

The basest sort of men are commonly held fit enough for intelligencers; but
Moses, to make sure work, chooses forth the best of Israel, such as were like
to be most judicious in their inquiry; and most credible in their report.
Those that ruled Israel at home, could best descry for the^ abroad; What should
direct the body but the head? Men can judge but by appearance; It is for him
only that sees the event, ere he appoint the means, not to be deceived. It
had been better for Israel to have sent the offal of the multitude: By how
less the credit of their persons is, by so much less is the danger of
seducement. The error of the mighty is armed with authority, and in a sort
commands assent; whether in good or evil, greatness has ever a train to
follow it at the heels.

Forty days they spent in this search; and this cowardly unbelief in the
search, shall cost them forty years delay of the fruition. Who can abide to
see the rulers of Israel so basely timorous? They commend the Land, the fruit
commends it self, and yet they plead difficulty: We be not able to go up.
Their shoulders are laden with the grapes; and yet their hearts are ouerlaid
with unbelief: It is an unworthy thing to plead hardness of atchieuing, where
the benefit will more then requite the endeavor. Our Land of Promise is above;
we know the fruit thereof is sweet and glorious; the passage difficult. The
giantly sons of Anak (the powers of darkness) stand in our way: If we sit
down and complain, we shall once know, that without shall be the fearful.

See the idle pleas of distrust; We are not able: They are stronger. Could not
God enable them? was he not stronger then their giants? Had he not promised to
displace the Canaanites, to settle them in their stead? How much more easy is
it for us to spy their weakness, then for them to espy the strength of their
adversaries: When we measure our spiritual success by our own power, we are
vanquished, before we fight: He that would overcome, must neither look upon
his own arm, nor the arm of his enemy, but the mouth, and hand of him, that
has promised, and can perform. Who are we flesh and blood, with our breath in
our nostrills, that we should fight with Principalities, powers, spiritual
wickednesses in heavenly places? The match is too unequal; we are not like
grasshoppers, to these giants; when we compare our selves with them, how can we
but despair? when we compare them with God, how can we be discouraged? He
that has brought us into this field, has promised us victory. GOD knew their
strength, ere he offered to commit us.

Well might they have thought, Were not the Amalekites stronger then we? were
not they armed, we naked? Did not the only hand of Moses, by lifting up, beat
them down? were not the Egyptians no less our masters? Did not Death come
running after us in their chariots? Did we not leave these buried in the sea,
the other unburied in the Wilderness? Whence had the Anakims their strength,
but from him, that bids us go up against them? Why have the bodies of our
forefathers taken possession of their Hebron, but for us? But now, their fear
has not left them so much reason as to compare their adversaries with others,
but only with themselves: Doubtless these giants were mighty, but their fear
has stretched them out some cubits, beyond their stature. Distrust makes our
dangers greater, and our helps less then they are, and forecasts ever worse,
then shall be; and if evils be possible, it makes them certain.

Amongst those twelve messengers, whom our second Moses sent through the Land
of Promise, there was but one Judas; But amongst those twelve, which the former
Moses addressed through the same Land, there is but one Caleb: and yet those
were chosen out of the meanest; these, out of the heads of Israel. As there is
no society free from some corruption: so it is hard, if in a community of men,
there be not some faithfulness.

We shall wrong GOD, if we fear least good causes shall be quite forsaken; He
knows how to serve himself of the best, if the fewest; And could as easily be
attended with a multitude, if he did not seek his own glory, in vnlikelihoods.

Joshua was silent, and wisely spared his tongue for a further advantage; Only
Caleb spoke: I do not hear him say, Who am I to strive with a multitude? What
can Joshua and I do against ten rulers? It is better to sit still, then to rise
and fall: But he resolves to swim against this stream, and will either draw
friends to the truth, or enemies upon himself.

True Christian fortitude teaches us not to regard the number, or quality of
the opponents, but the equity of the cause; and cares not to stand alone, and
challenge all comers: and if it could be opposed by as many worlds, as men, it
may be ouerborne, but it cannot be daunted: Whereas popularitie carries weak
minds, and teaches them the safety of erring with a multitude.

Caleb saw the giantly Anakims, and the walled cities, as well as the rest;
and yet he says, Let us go up and possess it: As if it were no more, but to
go, and see, and conquer. Faith is courageous, and makes nothing of those
dangers, wherewith others are quayled.

It is very material with what eyes we look upon all objects. Fear does not
more multiply evils, then faith diminishes them; which is therefore bold,
because either it sees not, or contemnes that terror, which fear represents
to the weak. There is none so valiant, as the believer.

It had been happy for Israel, if Calebs counsel had been as effectual, as
good: But how easily have these rulers discouraged a faint-hearted people? In
stead of lifting up their ensigns, and marching toward Canaan; They sit them
down, and lift up their voice, and cry; The rods of their Egyptian
task-maisters had never been so fit for them, as now, for crying. They had
cause indeed to weep for the sin of their infidelity: but now they weep
forfeare of those enemies they saw not. I fear if there had been ten Calebs
to persuade, and but two faint spies to discourage them; those two cowards
would have prevailed against those ten solicitors: How much more, now ten
oppose, and but two encourage? An easy Rhetoric draws us to the worse part;
yea it is hard not to run down the hill. The faction of evil is so much
stronger in our nature, then that of Good, that every least motion preuailes
for the one; scarce any suite for the other.

Now is Moses in danger of losing all the cost; and care, that ever he bestowed
upon Israel: His people are already gone back to Egypt, in their hearts; and
their bodies are returning. Oh ye rebellious Hebrews, where shall GOD have
you at last? Did ever Moses promise to bring you to a fruitful Land, without
inhabitants? To give you a rich country, without resistance? Are not the graves
of Canaan as good, as those of Egypt? What can ye but die at the hands of the
Anakims? Can ye hope for less from the Egyptians? What madness is this, to
wish to die for fear of death: Is there less hope from your enemies, that
shall be, when ye go under strong, and expert leaders, then from the enemies
that were, when ye shall return maisterlesse? Can those cruel Egyptians so
soon have forgotten the blood of their fathers, children, brothers, husbands,
which perished in pursuing you? Had ye rather trust the mercy of known
enemies, then the promise of a faithful GOD? Which way will ye return? Who
shall divide the Sea for you? Who shall fetch you water out of the Rock? Or
can ye hope that the Manna of of GOD will follow you, while ye run from him?
Feeble minds, when they meet with crosses they looked not for, repent of
their good beginnings, and wish any difficulty rather then that they find: How
many have pulld back their foot from the narrow way, for the troubles of a
good profession?

It had been time for the Israelites to have fallen down on their faces,
before Moses and Aaron, and to have said; Ye led us through the Sea; make
way for us into Canaan; Those giants are strong, but not so strong, as the
Rock of Rephidim; ye stroke that, and it yielded; If they be tall, the
pillar of GOD is hyer then they: when we look on our selves, we see cause of
fear; but when we consider the miraculous power of you our leaders, we
cannot but contemn those men of measures. Leave us not therefore, but go
before us in your directions, go to GOD for us in your prayers. But now
contrarily, Moses and Aaron fall on their faces to them; And sue to them, that
they would be content to be conducted. Had they been suffered to depart,
they had perished; Moses and his few had been victorious: And yet, as if he
could not be happy without them, he falls on his face to them, that they
would stay. We have never so much need to be importuned, as in those things,
whose benefit should make us most importunate. The sweetness of GODs Law, and
our promised glory is such, as should draw all hearts after it; And yet if we
did not sue to men (as for life) that they would be reconciled to GOD, and be
saved, I doubt whether they would obtain; yea, it were well, if our suite
were sufficient to prevail.

Though Moses and Aaron entreat upon their faces, and Joshua and Caleb
persuade, and rend their garments, yet they move nothing: The obstinate
multitude, grown more violent with opposing, is ready to return them stones,
for their prayers. Such has been ever the thanks of fidelity, and truth;
Crossed wickedness proves desperate; and in stead of yielding, seeks for
revenge. Nothing is so hateful to a resolute sinner, as good counsel: We are
become enemies to the world, because we tell them truth.

That GOD which was inuisibly present, whiles they sinned; when they have
sinned, shows himself glorious. They might have seen him before, that they
should not sin; Now they cannot choose but see him, in the height of their
sin. They saw before, the pillar of his ordinary presence: now they see him
vnusually terrible; that they may with shame and horror, confess him able to
defend, able to revenge. The help of GOD* uses to show it self in extremity.
He that can prevent evils, conceales his aid, till danger be ripe; And then,
he is as fearful as before he seemed conniuent.

Corah's Conspiracy.
THe tears of Israel were scarce dry, since the smart of their last mutiny,
and now they begin another. The multitude is like a raging Sea; full of
unquiet billows of coffeehouse; whereof one rises, in the fall of another.
They saw God did but threaten, and therefore are they bold to sin: It was
now hie time, they should know what it is, for God to be angry. There was
never such a revenge taken of Israel; never any, better deserved. When lesser
warnings will not serve, God looks into his quiver for deadly arrows. In the
mean time what a weary life did Moses lead, in these continual successions of
conspiracies? What did he gain by this troublesome government, but danger and
despite? Who but he would not have wished himself rather with the sheep of
Iethro, then with these wolves of Israel? But, as he durst not quit his hook,
without the calling of God, so now he dare not his scepter; except he be
dismissed by him that called him, no troubles, no oppositions can drive him
from his place: We are too weak, if we suffer men to chase us from that
station, where God has set us.

I see the Levites, not long since, drawing their swords for GOD and Moses,
against the rest of Israel; and that fact winnes them, both praise and
blessing: Now, they are the forwardest in the rebellion against Moses and
Aaron, men of their own Tribe. There is no assurance of a man, for one act:
whom one Sin cannot fasten upon, another may. Yea the same sin may find a
repulse one while, from the same hand, which another time gives it
entertainment: and that yeeldance loses the thank of all the former resistance.
It is no praise to have done once well, unless we continue.

Outward privileges of blood can avail nothing, against a particular calling
of GOD: These Reubenites had the right of the natural primogeniture; yet do
they vainly challenge preeminence, where GOD has subjected them. If all
civil honor flow from the King, how much more from the GOD of Kings? His
hand exalts the poor, and casts down the mighty from their throne. The man
that will be lifting up himself, in the pride of his heart, from under the
foot of God, is justly trodden in the dust.

Moses is the Prince of Israel; Aaron the Priest: Moses was mild; Aaron
popular, yet both are conspired against: Their places are no less brothers,
then their persons. Both are opposed at once; He that is a traitor to the
Church, is a traitor to the King. Any superiority is a mark of Envy. Had
Moses, and Aaron been but fellows with the Israelites, none had been better
beloved; their dispositions were such, as must needs have forced favor, from
the indifferent: now they were advanced, their malice is not inferior to their
honor. High towers must look for lightnings; we offer not to undermine but
those walls, which we cannot scale. Nature in every man is both envious, and
disdainful; and never loves to honor another, but where it may be an honor to
it self.

There cannot be conceived an honor less worth emulation, then this
principality of Israel; A people that could give nothing; a people that had
nothing, but in hope; a people whom their leader was feign to feed with bread,
and water; which paid him no tribute, but of ill words; whose command was
nothing but a burden: and yet this dignity was an eyesore to these Levites and
these Rubenites; Ye take too much upon you, ye Sons of Leui.

And this challenge (though thus unseasonable) has drawn in, two hundred and
fifty Captains of Israel. What wonder is it, that the ten rulers prevailed
so much with the multitude to dissuade them from Canaan; when three traitors
prevailed thus with 250. rulers, famous in the Congregation* and men of
renown? One man may kindle such a fire, as all the world cannot quench: One
plague sore may infect a whole kingdom: The infection of evil is much worse
then the act.

It is not like, these leaders of Israel could err without followers: He is a
mean man that draws not some Clients, after him. It has bin ever a dangerous
policy of Satan, To assault the best: he knows that the multitude (as we say
of Bees) will follow their master.

Nothing can be more pleasing to the vulgar sort, then to hear their
governors taxed, and themselves flattered. All the Congregation is holy; Every
one of them; Wherefore lift ye up your selves? Every word is a falsehood. For
Moses dejected himself ( Who am I?) GOD lifted him up, over Israel: And so was
Israel holy, as Moses was ambitious. What holiness was there in so much
infidelity, fear, Idolatry, mutiny, disobedience? What could make them
unclean, if this were holiness? They had scarce wiped their mouths, or washed
their hands, since their last obstinacy: and yet these pick-thanks, say, All
Israel is holy.

I would never desire a better proof of a false teacher, then flattery: True
meaning need not uphold it self by soothing. There is nothing easier, then to
persuade men well of themselves; when a man's self-loue meets with another
flattery, it is an hy praise that will not be believed. It was more out of
opposition, then belief, that these men plead the holiness of Israel. Violent
adversaries, to uphold a side, will mainetaine those things, they believe not.

Moses argues not for himself, but appeals to GOD; neither speaks for his
own right, but his brother Aarons: He knew, that Gods immediate service was
worthy to be more precious, then his government: That, his Princedome served
but to the glory of his Master. Good Magistrates are more tender, over Gods
honor, then their own; and are more sensible of the wrongs offered to
religion, then to themselves.

It is safest to trust God with his own causes. If Aaron had been chosen, by
Israel, Moses would have sheltred him under their authority: Now that GOD did
immediately appoint him, his patronage is sought, whose the election was. We may
easily fault in the menaging of divine affairs; and so our want of success,
cannot want sin; He knows how to use, how to bless his own means.

As there was a difference betwixt the people, and Levites, so betwixt the
Levites, and Priests. The GOD of order, loves to have our degrees kept. Whiles
the Levites would be looking up to the Priests, Moses sends down their eyes,
to the people. The way not to repine at those above us, is to look at those
below us. There is no better remedy for ambition, then to cast up our former
receyts, and to compare them with our deseruings, and to confer our own
estate with inferiors: So shall we find cause to be thankful, that we are
above any, rather then of envy, that any is above us.

Moses has chid the sons of Leui, for mutining against Aaron; and so much
the more, because they were of his own Tribe: now, he sends for the
Reubenites, which rose against himself. They come not, and their message is
worse, then their absence. Moses is accused of injustice, cruelty, falsehood,
treachery, usurpation; and Egypt it self must be commended, rather then
Moses shall want reproach. Innocence is no shelter from ill tongues; Malice
never regards how true any accusation is, but how spightfull.

Now it was time for Moses to be angry. They durst not have been thus bold, if
they had not seen his mildness. Lenity is ill bestowed upon stubburne natures:
It is an injurious senselessness, not to feel the wounds of our reputation. It
well appears he is angry, when he prays against them. He was displeased
before; but when he was most bitter against them, he still prayed for them:
but now, he bends his very prayers against them. Look not to their offering.
There can be no greater revenge, then the imprecation of the righteous; There
can be no greater judgment, then Gods reiection of our services. With us men,
what more argues dislike of the person, then the turning back of his present?
What will GOD accept from us, if not prayers?

The innocence of Moses calls for revenge on his Adversaries. If he had
wronged them in his government, in vain should he have looked to Gods hand,
for right. Our sins exclude us from Gods protection; whereas uprightness
challenges, and finds his patronage. An ass taken, had made him incapable of
favor. Corrupt Governors, lose the comfort of their own breast, and the
tuition of God.

The same tongue that prayed against the Conspirators, prays for the people.
As lewd men think to carry it with number; Corah had so far prevailed, that
he had drawn the multitude to his side. GOD, the auenger of treasons, would
have consumed them all, at once: Moses and Aaron, pray for their rebels.
Although they were worthy of death, and nothing but death could stop their
mouths; yet their merciful Leaders will not buy their own peace, with the
loss of such enemies. Oh rare and imitable mercy! The people rise up against
their Governors; Their Governors fall on their faces to God, for the people:
So far are they from plotting revenge, that they will not endure God should
revenge for them.

Moses knew well enough, that all those Israelites must perish in the
Wilderness; GOD had vowed it, for their former insurrection: yet how earnestly
does he sue to GOD, not to consume them at once! The very respite of evils,
is a favor next to the remoueall.

Corah kindled the fire; the two hundred and fifty Captains brought sticks to
it; All Israel warmed themselves by it; only the incendiaries perish. Now do
the Israelites owe their life to them, whose death they intended. God, and
Moses know to distinguish betwixt the heads of a faction, and the train:
though neither be faultless, yet the one is plagued, the other forgiven. Gods
vengeance when it is at the hotest, makes differences of men. Get you away from
about the Tabernacles of Corah. Ever before common judgments, there is a
separation. In the universal judgment of all the earth, the Judge himself
will separate: in these particular executions, we must separate our selves.
The society of wicked men, especially in their sins, is mortally dangerous:
whiles we will not be parted, how can we complain if we be enwrapped in their
condemnation? Our very company sins with them; why should we not smart with
them also?

Moses had well hoped, that when these rebels should see all the Israelites
run from them, as from monsters, and looking affrightedly upon their Tents,
and should hear that fearful proclaclamation of vengeance, against them,
(howsoever they did before, set a face on their conspiracy; yet now) their
hearts would have misgiuen. But lo, these bold Traitors stand impudently
staring in the door of their tents, as if they would outface the revenge of
GOD; As if Moses had never wrought miracle before them; As if no one Israelite
had ever bledde for rebelling. Those that shall perish, are blinded. Pride and
infidelity obdures the heart, and makes even cowards fearelesse.

So soon as the innocent are severed, the guilty perish: the earth cleaues,
and swallows up the rebels. This element was not used to such morsels: It
deuoures the carcasses of men; but bodies informed with living souls, never
before. To have seen them struck dead upon the earth, had been fearful: but
to see the earth at once their executioner, and grave, was more horrible.
Neither the Sea, nor the Earth, are fit to give passage; The sea is moist and
flowing, and will not be divided, for the continuitie of it; The earth is dry
and massy, and will neither yield naturally, nor meet again, when it has
yielded; yet the waters did cleave to give way unto Israel, for their
preservation; the earth did cleave, to give way to the Conspirators, in
judgment: Both Sea, and Earth, did shut their jaws again upon the
adversaries of GOD.

There was more vvonder in this latter. It was a marvel that the waters
opened: it was no wonder that they shut again; for, the retyring and
flowing, was natural. It was no less marvel, that the earth opened; but more
marvel that it did shut again, because it had no natural disposition to
meet, when it was divided. Now might Israel see, they had to do with a GOD,
that could revenge with ease.

There were two sorts of Traitors: the earth swallowed up the one the fire, the
other. All the elements agree to serve the vengeance of their Maker. Nadab and
Abihu, brought fit persons, but unfit fire to GOD; These Levites bring the
right fire, but unwarranted persons, before him: Fire from GOD consumes both.
It is a dangerous thing to usurp sacred functions. The ministry will not
grace the man; The man may disgrace the ministry.

The common people were not so fast gathered to Corahs flattering persuasion
before, as now they ran from the sight, and fear of his judgment. I marvel
not, if they could not trust that earth, whereon they stood, whiles they knew
their hearts had bin false. It is a madness to run away from punishment, and
not from sin.

The end of the sixth Book.
Contemplations. THE SEVENTH BOOK. Aarons Censer, and Rod. The Brazen Serpent.
Balaa^ Phinehas. The death of Moses.


At London, printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham: and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1614.

TO MY RIGHT HONORABLE, RELIGIOUS AND BOVNTIFVL PATRON, EDWARD, Lord DENNY,
BARON of WALTHAM, The chief comfort of my labors, I. H. wishes all true
happiness, and Dedicates this part of his Meditations.

CONTEMPLATIONS. THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Aarons Censer and Rod.
WHen shall we see an end of these murmurings, and these judgments? Because
these men rose up against Moses and Aaron, therefore GOD consumed them; and
because God consumed them, therefore the people rise up against Moses and Aaron:
and now because the people thus murmur, God has again begun to consume them.
What a circle is here of sins, and judgments? Wrath is gone out from God:
Moses is quick-sighted, and spies it at the setting out. By how much more
faithful, and familiar we are with God, so much earlier do we discern his
judgments; As those which are well acquainted with men, know by their looks
and gestures that, which strangers understand but by their actions; As finer
tempers are more sensible of the changes of weather. Hence the Seers of God
have ever from their watchtower descryed the judgments of God afar off. If
another man had seen from Carmel a cloud of a hand breadth he could not have
told Ahab, he should be wet. It is enough for Gods messengers, out of their
acquaintance with their masters proceedings, to foresee punishment: No marvel
if those see it not, which are wilfully sinful: we men reveal not our secret
purposes either to enemies or strangers; all their favor is to feel the
plague ere they can epsy it.

Moses though he were great with God, yet he takes not upon him this
reconciliation; he may advise Aaron what to do, himself undertakes not to act
it: It is the work of the Priesthood, to make an atonement for the people:
Aaron was first his brothers tongue to Pharaoh; now he is the peoples tongue to
God: He only must offer up the incense of the public prayers to God. Who
would not think it a small thing to hold a Censer in his hand? yet if any
other had done it, he had fallen with the dead, and not stood betwixt the
living and dead; in stead of the smoke ascending, the fire had descended upon
him: And shall there be less use, or less regard of the Evangelical
ministry, then the Legal? When the world has powered out all his contempt, we
are they, that must reconcile men to God; and without us, they perish.

I know not whether more to marvel at the courage, or mercy of Aaron: His
mercy, that he would yet save so rebellious a people; his courage, that he
would save them, with so great a danger of himself. For, as one that would
part a fray, he thrusts himself under the strokes of God; and puts it to the
choice of the revenger, whether he will smite him, or forbear the rest; He
stands boldly betwixt the living and the dead, as one that will either die with
them, or have them live with him; the sight of fourteen hundred carcasses
dismayed him not; he that before feared the threats of the people, now fears
not the strokes of GOD: It is not for Gods ministers, to stand upon their own
perils, in the common causes of the Church: Their prayers must oppose the
judgments of the Almighty; When the fire of Gods anger is kindled, their
Censers must smoke with fire from the altar. Every Christian must pray for the
remouall of vengeance: how much more they, whom God has appointed to mediate
for his people. Every man's mouth is his own: but they are the mouths of all.

Had Aaron thrust in himself with empty hands, I doubt whether he had
prevailed; now his Censer was his protection; When we come with supplications
in our hands, we need not fear the strokes of GOD. We have leave to resist
the divine judgments by our prayers, with favor and success: So soon as the
incense of Aaron ascended up unto God, he smelt a savor of rest; he will
rather spare the offenders, then strike their intercessor. How hardly can any
people miscarry, that have faithful ministers to sue for their safety?
Nothing but the smoke of hearty prayers can cleanse the air from the plagues
of God.

If Aarons sacrifice were thus accepted; how much more shall the hy-priest of
the new Testament, by interposing himself to the wrath of his father, deliver
the offenders from death? The plague was entered upon all the sons of men: O
Savior, thou stood'st betwixt the living, and the dead, that all which believe
in thee, should not perish. Aaron offered and was not stricken; but thou, O
Redeemer, would offer and be struck, that by thy stripes we might be
healed: So stood'st thou betwixt the dead and living, that thou were both alive
and dead; and all this, that we, when we were dead, might live for ever.

Nothing more troubled Israel, then a fear least the two brethren should
cunningly ingrosse the government to themselves. If they had done so, what
wise men would have envied them an office so little worth, so dearly
purchased? But because this conceit was ever apt to stir them to rebellion,
and to hinder the benefit of this holy soueraintie; therefore God has
indeuor'd nothing more, then to let them see that these officers, whom they so
much envied, were of his own proper institution: They had scarce shut their
eyes since they saw the confusion of those two hundred and fifty usurping
sacrificers; and Aarons effectual intercession for staying the plague of
Israel. In the one, the execution of GODs vengeance upon the competitors of
Aaron, for his sake. In the other, the forbearance of vengeance upon the people
for Aarons mediation, might have challenged their voluntary acknowledgement of
his just calling from God; If there had been in them either awe, or
thankfulness, they could not have doubted of his lawful supremacy. How could
they choose but argue thus. Why would God so fearfully have destroyed the
riualls that durst contest with Aaron, if he would have allowed him any
equal? Wherefore serve those plates of the Altar, which we see made of those
usurped Censers, but to warn all posterity of such presumption? Why should
God cease striking, whiles Aaron interposed betwixt the living and the dead, if
he were but as one of us? Which of us if we had stood in the plague, had not
added to the heap? Incredulous minds will not be persuaded with any evidence.
These two brothers had lived asunder forty years; GOD makes them both meet in
one office of delivering Israel. One half of the miracles were wrought by
Aaron; he stroke with the rod, whiles it brought those plagues on Egypt. The
Israelites heard GOD call him up by name, to mount Sinai; They saw him
anointed from GOD: and (least they should think this a set match betwixt the
brethren) they saw the earth opening, the fire issuing from GOD upon their
emulous opposites: they saw his smoke a sufficient antidote for the plague of
GOD; and yet still Aarons calling is questioned. Nothing is more natural to
every man, then unbelief; but the earth never yielded a people so strongly
incredulous, as these; and after so many thousand generations their children
do inherit their obstinacy; still do they oppose the true high priest, the
anointed of GOD: sixteen hundred years desolation has not drawn from them to
confess him whom God has chosen.

How desirous was GOD to give satisfaction even to the obstinate! There is
nothing more material, then that men should be assured their spiritual guides
have their commission and calling from GOD: The want whereof is a prejudice to
our success. It should not be so: but the corruption of men will not not
receive good, but from due messengers.

Before, GOD wrought miracles in the rod of Moses; now, in the rod of Aaron.
As Pharaoh might see himself in Moseses rod; who of a rod of defense and
protection was turned into a venomous serpent: So Israel might see themselves,
in the rod of Aaron. Every Tribe and every Israelite was, of himself, as a
sere stick, without life, without sap; and if any one of them had power to
live, and flourish, he must acknowledge it from the immediate power, and gift
of God.

Before Gods calling all men are alike: Every name is alike written in their
rod; there is no difference in the letters, in the wood; neither the characters
of Aaron are fayrer, nor the staff more precious; It is the choice of God that
makes the distinction: So it is in our calling of Christianity; All are equally
deuoid of the possibility of grace, all equally liuelesse; by nature we all are
sons of wrath: If we be now better then others, who separated us? We are all
crab-stocks in this orchard of God, he may graffe what fruit he pleases, upon
us; only the grace and effectual calling of God makes the difference.

These twelve heads of Israel, would never have written their names in their
rods, but in hope they might be chosen to this dignity. What an honor was
this Priesthood, whereof all the Princes of Israel are ambitious? If they had
not thought it an high preferment, they had never so much enuyed the office of
Aaron. What shall we think of this change? Is the Evangelical ministration
of less worth then the Leuiticall? Whiles the Testament is better, is the
service worse? How is it that the great think themselves too good for this
employment? How is it, that under the Gospel, men are disparaged with that,
which honored them under the Law; that their ambition, and our scorn, meet
in one subject.

These twelve rods are not laid up in the several cabinets of their owners,
but are brought forth, and laid before the Lord. It is fit God should make
choice of his own attendants. Even we men hold it injurious, to have servants
obtruded upon us, by others: never shall that man have comfort in his
ministry, whom God has not chosen. The great Commander of the world, has set
every man in his station; To one he has said, Stand thou in this tower and
watch; To another* Make thou good these Trenches; To a third, Dig thou in
this Mine. He that gives, and knows our abilities, can best set us on work.

This rod was the pastoral staff of Aaron, the great Shepherd of Israel. God
testifies his approbation of his charge, by the fruit. That a rod cut off from
the tree, should blossom, it was strange; but that in one night, it should
bear buds, blossoms, fruit, and that both ripe and hard, it was highly
miraculous. The same power that reuiues the dead plants of winter, in the
Spring, does it here without earth, without time, without sun; that Israel
might see and grant, it was no reason, his choice should be limited, whose
power is unlimited.

Fruitfulness is the best argument of the calling of GOD: Not only all the
plants of his setting, but the very boughs cut off from the body of them, will
flourish. And that there may not want a succession of increase, here are
fruit, blossoms, buds; both proof and hope, inseparably mixed.

It could not but be a great comfort unto Aaron, to see his rod thus
miraculously flourishing, to see this wonderful Testimony of Gods favor, and
Election: Sure he could not but think; Who am I, O GOD, that thou should
thus choose me out of all the Tribes of Israel? My weakness has been more
worthy of thy rod of correction, then my rod has been worthy of these
blossoms. How have thou magnified me, in the sight of all thy people? How able
art thou to uphold my imbecillitie with the rod of thy support? how able to
defend me with the rod of thy power, who have thus brought fruit out of the
saplesse rod of my profession? That servant of GOD is worthy to faint, that
holds it not a sufficient encouragement, to see the evident proofs of his
Masters favor.

Commonly, those fruits which are soon ripe, soon wither; but these almonds
of Aarons rod, are not more early, then lasting: the same hand which brought
them out before their time, preserved them, beyond their time; and for
perpetual memory, both rod and fruit must be kept in the Ark of God. The
tables of Moses, the rod of Aaron, the Manna of God, are momuments fit for so
holy a shrine. The doctrine, sacraments, and government of Gods people, are
precious to him, and must be so to me^. All times shall see and wonder, how his
ancient Church was fed, taught, ruled. Moses his rod did great miracles, yet I
find it not in the Ark. The rod of Aaron has this privilege, because it
carried the miracle still in it self; whereas the wonders of that other rod were
passed. Those monuments would God have continued in his church, which carry in them
the most manifest evidences of that which they import.

The same God, which by many transient demonstrations had approved the calling
of Aaron to Israel, will now have a permanent memorial of their conviction;
that whenever they should see this relic, they should be ashamed of their
presumption, and infidelity. The name of Aaron was not more plainly written in
that rod, then the sin of Israel was in the fruit of it; and how much Israel
finds their rebellion beaten with this rod, appears in their present
relenting, and complaint; Behold, we are dead, we perish. God knows how to
pull down the biggest stomach, and can extort glory to his own Name, from the
most obstinate gainsayers.

The Brazen Serpent.
Seven times already has Israel mutin'd against Moses, and seven times has
either been threatened, or punished; yet now they fall to it afresh. As a teastie
man finds occasion to chafe at every trifle: so this discontented people,
either find or make all things troublesome. One while they have no water; then
bitter; One while no God; then one too many; One while no bread; then bread
enough, but too light; One while, they will not abide their Governors; then
they cannot abide their loss. Aaron and Miriam were never so grudged alive, as
they are bewailed dead. Before, they wanted onions, garlike, fleshpots; now
they want figs, vines, pomgranats, corn. And as rabid children, that cry
for every thing they can think of, are whipped by their wise mother: So God
justly serves these fond Israelites.

It was first their way that makes them repine; They were feign to go round
about Idumea; The journey was long and troublesome. They had sent entreaties to
Edom for license of passage the next way, reasonably, submislie: It was
churlishly denied them. Esau lives still in his posterity; Jacob in Israel:
The combat which they began in Rebeccaes belly, is not yet ended. Amalek,
which was one limme of Esau, follows them at the heels; The Edomite, which
was another, meets them in the face; So long as there is a World, there will
be opposition to the chosen of God. They may come at their peril; The way had
been nearer, but bloody; they dare not go it, and yet complain of length.

If they were afraid to purchase their resting place with war, how much
less would they their passage? What should GOD do with impatient men? They
will not go the nearest way, and yet complain to go about. He that will
pass to the promised Land, must neither stand upon length of way, nor
difficulty. Every way has his inconveniences: the nearest has more danger,
the farthest has more pain; Either, or both must be overcome, if ever we
will enter the rest of God.

Aaron and Miriam, were now past the danger of their mu^inyes; for want of
another match, they join GOD with Moses, in their murmurings: Tho they had
not mentioned him, they could not sever him in their insurrection; For, in the
causes of his own servants, he challenges, even when he is not challenged. What
will become of thee, O Israel, when thou make thy Maker thine enemy?
Impatience is the cozen to Frenzy: this causes men not to care upon whom they
run, so they may breathe out some revenge. How often have we heard men that
have bin displeased by others, tear the Name of their Maker in pieces? He
that will judge, and can confound, is fetched into the quarrel without cause.
But if to strive with a mighty man be unwise, and unsafe, what shall it be to
strive with the mighty GOD?

As an angry child casts away that which is given him, because he has not
that he would: so do these foolish Israelites; their bread is light, and their
water vnsatisfying, because their way displeased them. Was ever people fed with
such bread, or water? Twice has the very Rock yielded them water, and every
day the heaven affords them bread. Did any one soul amongst them miscary,
either for hunger, or thirst? But no bread will down with them, save that
which the earth yields; no water but from the natural Wells, or Rivers.
Unless nature may be allowed to be her own caruer, she is never contented.

Manna had no fault, but that it was too good, and too frequent: the pulse of
Egypt had been fitter for these course mouths: This heavenly bread was
unspeakably delicious; it tasted like wafers of honey, and yet even this Angels
food is contemned. He that is full, despises an Honeycomb. How sweet, and
delicate is the Gospel! Not only the Fathers of the old Testament, but the
Angels desired to look into the glorious mysteries of it, and yet we are
cloyed. This supernatural food is too light: the bread-corne of our humane
reason, and profound discourse, would better content us.

Moses will not revenge this wrong; God will: yet will he not deal with them
himself, but he sends the fiery serpents to answer for him; How fitly? They
had carried themselves like serpents to their governors: how often had they stung
Moses, and Aaron, near to death? If the serpent bite when he is not charmed,
no better is a slaunderer. Now these venomous Adders revenge it; which are
therefore called fiery, because their poison scalded to death; God has an hand
in the annoyance, and hurt of the basest creature; how much less can the sting
of an ill tongue, or the malice of an ill spirit, strike us without him? Whiles
they were in Goshen, the frogs, lice, caterpillars spared the^, and plagued the
Egyptians; now they are rebellious in the desert, the serpents find the^ out,
and sting the^ to death. He that brought the quails thither to feed the^,
fetches these Serpents thither to punish them. While we are at wars with God,
we can look for no peace with his creatures: Every thing reioyces to execute
the vengeance of his Maker. The stones of the field will not be in league with
us, while we are not in league with GOD.

These men, when the spies had told them news of the giants of Canaan, a
little before had wished, Would GOD we were dead in this Wilderness: Now GOD
has heard their prayers; what with the plague, what with the serpents, many
thousands of them dyed. The ill wishes of our impatience are many times heard;
As those good things are not granted us, which we pray for, without care; so
those evils which we pray for, and would not have, are often granted. The ears
of God are not only open to the prayers of faith, but to the imprecations of
infidelity. It is dangerous wishing evil to our selves, or ours; It is just
with GOD to take us at our word, and to effect that, which our lips speak
against our heart.

Before, God has ever consulted with Moses; and threatened, ere he punished: now
he strikes, and says nothing. The anger is so much more, by how much less
notifyed. When God is not heard before he is felt, (as in hewing of wood, the
blow is not heard, till the axe be seen to have struck) it is a fearful
sign of displeasure: It is with God, as with us men, that still reuenges are
ever most dangerous. Till now, all was well enough with Israel, and yet they
grudged; Those that will complain without a cause, shall have cause to
complain for something. Discontented humors seldom escape unpunished; but
receive that most justly whereat they repined unjustly.

Now the people are glad to seek to Moses unbidden. Ever heretofore, they
have been wont to be sued too, and entreated for without their own entreaty;
Now, their misery makes them importunate: There need no solicitor, where
there is sense of smart. It were pity, men should want affliction; since it
sends them to their prayers, and confessions. All the perswasio^s of Moses
could not do that which the serpents have done for him. O GOD; thou see how
necessary it is we should be stung sometimes: else we should run vvilde, and
never come to a sound humiliation; we should never seek thee, if thy hand
did not find us out.

They had spoken against God, and Moses; And now they humbly speak to Moses,
that he would pray to GOD for them. He that so often prayed for them unbidden,
cannot but much more do it requested; and now obtaines the means of their
cure. It was equally in the power of God, to remove the serpents; and to heal
their stinging; To have cured the Israelites by his word, and by his sign: But
he finds it best for his people (to exercise their faith) that the serpents
may bite, and their bitings may inuenome, and that this venom may endanger the
Israelites; and that they, thus affected, may seek to him for remedy; and
seeking may find it, from such means, as should have no power, but in
signification; That while their bodies were cured by the sign, their souls
might be confirmed, by the matter signified. A serpent of brass could no more
heal, then sting them. What remedy could their eyes give to their legs? Or
what could a serpent of cold brass prevail against a living and fiery
serpent? In this troublesome desert, we are all stung by that fiery and old
Serpent; O Savior, it is to thee, we must look, and be cured; It is thou that
were their paschall Lamb, their Manna, their Rock, their Serpent. To all
purposes do thou vary thy self to thy Church, that we may find thee
euery-where: Thou art for our nourishment, refreshing, cure; as hereafter, so
even now, all in all.

This serpent which was appointed for cure to Israel, at last stings them to
death, by idolatrous abuse: What poison there is in Idolatry, that makes even
Antitidotes deadly! As Moses therefore raised this serpent, so Ezekias pulld it
down: God commanded the raising of it, God approved the demolishing of it.
Superstitious use can mar the very institutions of God: how much more the
most wise and wel-grounded devises of men?

Balaam.
MOab and Midian had bin all this while standers by, and lookers on; If they
had not seen the pattern of their own ruin, in these neighbors; it had
never troubled them, to see the Kings of the Amorites, and Bashan to fall
before Israel. Had not the Israelites camped in the Plains of Moab, their
victories had been no eyesore to Balac. Wicked men never care to observe Gods
judgments, till themselves be touched; The fire of a neighbors house would
not so affect us, if it were not with the danger of our own; Secure minds
never startle, till God come home to their very senses.

Balac and his Moabites had wit enough to fear, not wit enough to prevent
judgment: They see an enemy in their borders, and yet take no right course for
their safety. Who would not have looked, that they should have come to Israel,
with conditions of peace? Or, Why did they not think; Either Isreal's GOD is
stronger, then ours, or he is not. If he be not, why are we afraid of him?
If he be, Why do we not serve him? The same hand which gives them victory,
can give us protection. Carnal men, that are secure of the vengeance of God,
ere it do come, are mastered with it, when it does come; and not knowing
which way to turn them, run forth at the wrong door.

The Midianites join with the Moabites, in consultation, in action against
Israel. One would have thought, they should have looked for favor from Moses,
for Iethroes sake; which was both a Prince of their Country, and father in law
to Moses; and either now, or not long before, was with Israel in the
Wilderness. Neither is it like, but that Moses having found forty years
harbor amongst them, would have been (what he might) inclinable to
favorable treaties, with them: but now, they are so fast linked to Moab, that
they will either sink, or swim together; Entireness with wicked consorts
is one of the strongest chains of Hell, and binds us to a participation both
of sin, and punishment: An easy occasion will knit wicked hearts together, in
conspiracy against the Church of God.

Their errand is devilish ( Come, curse Israel:) That which Satan could not do
by the swords of Og, and Sehon, he will now try to effect, by the tongue of
Balaam. If either strength, or policy would prevail against Gods Church, it
could not stand. And why should not we be as industrious to promote the glory
of God, and bend both our hands and heads to the causes of the Almighty? When
all helps fail Moab, the Magician is sought too. It is a sign of a desperate
cause, to make Satan either our counselor, or our refuge.

Why did they not send to Balaam to bless themselves rather, then to curse
Israel? It had been more easy to be defended from the hurt of their enemies,
then to have their enemies laid open to be hurt by them. Pride and malice did
not care so much for safety, as for conquest: It would not content them to
escape Israel, if Israel may escape them; It was not thank-worthy, to save
their own blood, if they did not spill the blood of others; As if their own
prosperity had been nothing, if Israel also prospered. If there be one
project worse then another, a wicked heart will find it out. Nothing but
destruction will content the malicious.

I know not whether Balaam were more famous, or Balac more confident. If the
King had not been persuaded of the strength of his charm, he had not sent so
far, and paid so dear, for it; now he trusts more to his inchauntment, then
to the forces of Moab, and Midian: and (as if heaven, and earth were in the
power of a charmers tongue) he says, He that thou blessest, is blessed; and
he whom thou cursest, is cursed: Magic, through the permission of God, is
powerful; for, whatsoever the Devil can do, the Magician may do: but, it is
madness to think either of them omnipotent. If either the curses of men, or the
endeavors of the powers of darkness, should be effectual, all would be Hell.
No, Balac: So short is the power of thy Balaam, that neither thou, nor thy
Prophet himself, can avoid that curse, which thou would have brought upon
Israel. Had Balaam been a true Prophet of God, this bold assurance had been but
just; Both those ancient Seers, and the Prophets of the Gospel have the
ratification of God in heaven, to their sentences on earth. Why have we less
care of the blessings, and less fear of the curses and censures of Gods
ministers? Who would not rather have Elishaes guard, then both the Kings of
Israel, and Assyria? He himself as he had the Angelical chariots and
horsemen about him, so was he the chariots and horsemen of Israel: Why should
our faith be less strong, then superstition? Or why should GODs agents have
less virtue then Satan's?

I should wonder to hear God speak with a false Prophet, if I did not know
it has been no rare thing with him (as with men) to bestow words, even
where he will not bestow favor. Pharaoh, Abimelech, Nebuchadnezzar, receive
visions from GOD: neither can I think this strange, when I hear GOD speaking
to Satan, in a question no less familiar, then this of Balaam; Whence comst
thou Satan. Not the sound of the voice of GOD, but the matter which he
speaks, argues love: He may speak to an enemy; he speaks peace to none, but
his own. It is a vain brag, GOD has spoken to me? So may he do to
reprobates, or Devils: but what said he? Did he say to my soul, I am thy
salvation; Has he indented with me that he will be my God, and I shall be his?
I cannot hear this voice and not live.

God heard all the consultation, and message of these Moabites; These
messengers could not have moved their foot, or their tongue, but in him: and
yet he which asked Adam, where he was, asks Balaam, What men are these? I have
ever seen, that God loves to take occasion of proceeding with us, from our
selves, rather then from his own immediate prescience. Hence it is, that we
lay open our wants, and confess our sins, to him, that knows both, better
then our own hearts, Because he will deal with us from our own mouths.

The prevention of GOD, forbids both his journey, and his curse. And what if he
had been suffered to go and curse? What corn had this wind shaken when God
meant to bless them? How many Bulls have bellowed out execrations against this
Church of God? What are we the worse? Yea, I doubt if we had been so much
blessed, had not those Balaamitish curses been spent upon us. He that knows
what waste wind the causeless curses of wicked men are, yet will not have
Balaam curse Israel; because he will not allow Balac so much encouragement, in
his opposition, as the conceit of this help. Or perhaps, if Balac thought this
Sorcerer a true Prophet, God would not have his name, so much, as in the
opinion of the heathen, scandalized, in usurping it to a purpose, which he
meant not should succeed.

The hand of God is in the restraint of many evils, which we never knew to be
toward us. The Israelites sat still in their Tents, they little thought what
mischief was brewing against them: without ever making them of counsel, God
crosses the designs of their enemies. He that keeps Israel, is both a sure,
and a secret friend. The reward of the divination, had easily commanded the
journey, and curse of the covetous Prophet, if GOD had not stayed him. How often
are wicked men curbed by a divine hand, even in those sins, which their heart
stands to? It is no thank to lewd men that their wickedness is not
prosperous. Whence is it that the world is not overrun with evil, but
from this; that men cannot be so ill as they would?

The first entertainment of this message, would make a stranger think Balaam
wise, and honest: He will not give a sudden answer, but craves leisure to
consult with GOD; and promises to return the answer he shall receive. Who
would not say, This man is free from rashness, from partiality? Dissimulation
is crafty, and able to deceive thousands: The words are good: when he comes to
action, the fraud bewrayes it self: For, both he insinuates his own
forwardnes, and casts the blame of the prohibition, upon God, and (which is
worse) delivers but half his answer: he says indeed, GOD refuses to give me
leave to go: He says not, as it was, He charges me not to curse them, for
they are blessed. So did Balaam deny, as one that wished to be sent for again.
Perhaps a peremptory refusal had hindered his further solicitation.
Concealment of some truths, is sometimes as faulty, as a denial. True
fidelity is not niggardly in her relations.

Where wickedness meets with power, it thinks to command all the world, and
takes great scorn of any repulse. So little is. Balac discouraged with one
refusal, that he sends so much the stronger message; Mo Princes, and more
honorable. Oh that we could be so importunate for our good, as wicked men are
for the compassing of their own designs! A denial does but whet the desires
of vehement suitors. Why are we faint in spiritual things, when we are not
denied, but delayed?

Those which are themselves transported with vanity, and ambition, think that
no heart has power to resist these offers. Balacs Princes thought they had
struck it dead, when they had once mentioned promotion to great honor.
Self-love makes them think they cannot be slaves, whiles others may be free;
and that all the world would be glad to run on madding after their bait.
Nature thinks it impossible to contemn honor and wealth; and because too
many souls are thus taken, cannot believe that any would escape. But let
carnal hearts know there are those, that can spitte the world in the face, and
say, Thy gold and silver perish with thee: and that in comparison of a good
conscience, can tread under foot his best profers, like shadows, as they are;
and that can do, as Balaam said.

How near, truth, and falsehood can lodge together? Here was piety in the
lips, and covetousness in the heart. Who can any more regard good words, that
hears Balaam speak so like a Saint? An house-full of gold and silver may not
pervert his tongue; his heart is won with less: for if he had not already
swallowed the reward, and found it sweet, why did he again solicit GOD, in
that which was peremptorily denied him? If his mind had not been bribed
already, why did he stay the messengers? why did he expect a change in
GOD? Why was he vvilling to feed them with hope of success, which had fed
him with hope of recompense? One prohibition is enough for a good man.

Whiles the delay of GOD does but hold us in suspense, importunity is holy and
seasonable: but when once he gives a resolute denial, it is profane sauciness
to solicit him. When we ask what we are bidden, our suites are not more
vehement, then welcome: but when we beg prohibited savors, our presumption is
troublesome, and abominable: No good heart will endure to be twice forbidden.

Yet this importunity has obtained a permission; but, a permission, worse
then a denial. I heard GOD say before, Go not, nor curse them; Now he says,
Go, but curse not. Anon, he is angry that he did go. Why did he permit that,
which he forbad, if he be angry for doing that which he permitted? Some
things God permits with an indignation; not for that he gives leave to the act,
but that he gives a man over to his sin in the act: this sufferance implies not
favor, but judgment: so did GOD bid Balaam to go, as Solomon bids the young
man follow the ways of his own heart. It is one thing to like, another thing
to suffer; Moses never approou'd those legal divorces, yet he tolerated them:
GOD never liked Balaams journey, yet he displeasedly gives way to it: as if he
said; Well, since thou art so hot, set on this journey, be gone. And thus
Balaam took it: else, when GOD after professed his displeasure for the
journey, it had been a ready answer, Thou commaundedst me: but heerin his
confession argues his guilt. Balaams suit, and Isreal's Quayles, had both one
fashion of grant, in anger. How much better is it, to have gracious denyals,
then angry yieldings?

A small persuasion hartens the willing: It booted not to bid the covetous
Prophet hasten to his way. Now he makes himself sure of success: His corrupt
heart tells him, that as God had relented in his license to go, so he might
perhaps, in his license to curse; and he saw how this curse might bless him
with abundance of wealth: he rose up early therefore and sadled his ass. The
night seemed long to his forwardness. Covetous men need neither clock nor
bell to awaken them: their desires make them restless. Oh that we could, with
as much eagerness seek the true riches, which only can make us happy!

We that see only the outside of Balaam, may marvel, why he that permitted
him to go; afterward opposes his going: but GOD that savv his heart, perceived
what corrupt affections carried him: he saw, that his covetous desires, and
wicked hopes, grew the stronger, the nearer he came to his end: An Angel is
therefore sent to withhold the hasty Sorcerer. Our inward disposition, is the
life of our actions; according to that, does the God of spirits judge us,
whiles men censure according to our external motions. To go at all, when GOD
had commanded to stay, was presumptuous: but to go with desire to curse, made
the act doubly sinful, and fetched an Angel to resist it. It is one of the
worthy employments of good Angels, to make secret opposition to evil designs:
Many a wicked act have they hindered, without the knowledge of the agent. It is
all one with the Almighty, to work by spirits, and men; It is therefore our
glory to be thus set on work: to stop the course of evil, either by
disswasion, or violence, is an Angelical service.

In what danger are wicked men, that have Gods Angels their opposites? The
devil moved him to go; a good Angel resists him. If an heavenly Spirit stand
in the way of a Sorcerers sin, how much more ready are all those spiritual
powers, to stop the miscariages of Gods dear children? How often had we fallen
yet more, if these gardians had not vpheld us, whether by removing occasions,
or by casting in good instincts? As our good endeavors are often hindered by Satan;
so are our evil, by good Angels: else, were not our protection equal to our
danger; and we could neither stand, nor rise.

It had been as easy for the Angel to strike Balaam, as to stand in his way;
and to have followed him in his starting aside, as to stop him in a narrow
path: But even the good Angels have their stints, in their executions. GOD had
somewhat more to do with the tongue of Balaam, and therefore he will not
have him slain, but withstood: and so withstood, that he shall pass. It is
not so much glory to GOD to take away wicked men, as to use their evil to his
own holy purposes. How soon could the Commander of heaven, and earth, rid
the world of badde members? But so should he lose the praise of working good by
evil instruments. It suffices that the Angels of GOD resist their actions,
while their persons continue.

That no man may marvel to see Balaam have visions from God, and utter
prophecies from him; his very ass has his eyes opened, to see the Angel,
which his Master could not; and his mouth opened to speak more reasonably
the^ his Master. There is no beast deserves so much wonder, as this of Balaam,
whose common sense is advanced above the reason of his rider; so as for the
time, the Prophet is brutish, and the beast prophetical. Who can but stand
amazed at the eye, at the tongue of this silly creature? For so dull a sight it
was much to see a bodily object, that were not too apparent; but to see that
spirit, which his rider discerned not, was far beyond nature. To hear a
voice come from that mouth, which was used only to brag, it was strange, and
uncouth: but to hear a beast, whose nature is noted for incapacity, to
out-reason his Master, a professed Prophet, is in the very height of miracles:
Yet, can no heart stick at these, that considers the dispensation of the
Almighty, in both. Our eye could no more see a beast, then a beast can see an
Angel, if he had not given this power to it. How easy is it for him that made
the eye of man and beast, to dim, or inlighten it at his pleasure? And if his
power can make the very stones to speak, how much more a creature of sense?
That evil spirit spoke in the serpent to our first Parents; Why is it more
that a spirit should speak in the mouth of a beast? How ordinarily did the
heathen receive their Oracles out of stones, and trees? Do not we our selves
teach birds to speak those sentences they understand not? We may wonder, we
cannot distrust, when we compare the act with the author; which can as easily
create a voice* without a body, as a body without a voice. Who now can
hereafter plead his simplicity, and dulnes of apprehending spiritual things,
when he sees how God exalts the eyes of a beast, to see a spirit? Who can be
proud of seeing visions, since an Angel appeared to a beast; neither was his
skin better after it, then others of his kind? Who can complain of his own
rudeness, and inability to reply in a good cause, when the very beast is
enabled by God, to convince his master? There is no mouth, into which GOD
cannot put words: and how often does he choose the weak, and unwise, to
confound the learned, and mighty?

What had it been better for the ass to see the Angel; if he had rushed
still upon his sword? Evils were as good not seen, as not avoided; But now
he declines the way, and saues his burden. It were happy for perverse sinners,
if they could learn of this beast, to run away from foreseen judgments. The
revenging Angel stands before us; and though we know we shall as sure die, as
sin: yet we have not the wit, or grace to give back; though it be with
the hurt of a foot, to save the body; with the pain of the body, to save the
soul.

I see, what fury and stripes the impotent Prophet bestows upon this poor
beast, because he will not go on; yet, if he had gone on, himself had
perished. How often do we wish those things, the not obtaining whereof is mercy?
We grudge to be staid in the way to death, and fly upon those which oppose our
perdition.

I do not (as who would not expect) see Balaams hair stand upright, nor
himself alighting, and appalled at this monster of miracles: But, as if no new
thing had happened, he returns words to the beast, full of anger, void of
admiration; Whether his trade of sorcering had so inured him to receive voices
from his familiars, in shape of beasts, that this event seemed not strange to
him; Or, whether his rage, and covetousness had so transported him, that he had
no leisure to observe the unnatural vnusualnes of the event. Some men make
nothing of those things, which overcome others with horror, and astonishment.

I hear the Angel of GOD taking notice of the cruelty of Balaam to his beast:
His first words to the unmerciful Prophet, are in expostulating of this
wrong. We little think it; but God shall call us to an account, for the
unkind and cruel vsages of his poor mute creatures: He has made us Lords,
not tyrants; owners, not tormentors: he that has given us leave to kill them,
for our use, has not given us leave to abuse them, at our pleasure; they are
so our drudges, that they are our fellows by creation. It was a sign the
Magician would easily wish to strike Israel with a curse, when he wished a
sword to strike his harmless beast. It is ill falling into those hands,
whom beasts find unmerciful.

Notwithstanding these rubs, Balaam goes on, and is not afraid to ride on that
beast, whose voice he has heard: And now, posts are sped to Balac, with the
news of so welcome a guest: He that sent Princes, to fetch him, comes
himself on the way, to meet him; Although he can say ( Am not I able to
promote thee) yet he gives this high respect to him as his better, from whom
he expected the promotion of himself, and his people. Oh the honor that has
been formerlie done by heathens, to them that have borne but the face of
Prophets: I shame, and grieve to compare the times and men: Only, O GOD, be
thou merciful to the contempt of thy servants.

As if nothing needed but the presence of Balaam, the superstitious King (out
of the joy of his hope) feasts his gods, his Prophet, his Princes; and on the
morrow, carries him up to the high places of his Idol. Who can doubt whether
Balaam were a false Prophet, that sees him sacrificing in the mount of Baal?
Had he bin from the true God, he would rather have said, Pull me down these
altars of Baal, then, Build me here seven others: The very place conuinces
him of falsehood, and Idolatry: And why seven altars? What needs all this pomp?
When the true God never required but one at once, as himself is one; why does
the false Prophet call for no less then seven? As if GOD stood upon numbers?
As if the Almighty would have his power either divided, or limited? Here is
nothing but a glorious, and magnificent pretense of devotion. It has been
ever seen, that the false worshippers of GOD have made more pompous shows,
and fairer flourishes of their piety, and religion, then the true.

Now when Balaam sees his seven bulloks, and seven rams smoking upon his seven
altars, he goes up higher into the mount (as some counterfair Moses) to receive
the answer of God: But will GOD meet with a sorcerer? will he make a Prophet of
a Magician? O man, who shall prescribe God what instruments to use? he knows
how to employ, not only Saints, and Angels, but wicked men, beasts, Devils, to
his own glory: He that put words into the mouth of the Ass, puts words into
the mouth of Balaam: The words do but pass from him; They are not polluted,
because they are not his; as the Trunk, through which a man speaks, is not the
more eloquent for the speech, that is vttred through it. What a notable
proclamation had the Infidels wanted of Gods favor, to his people, if Balaams
tongue had not been used. How many shall once say, Lord we have prophesied in
thy name, that shall hear Verily I know you not?

What madness is this in Balaam? He that found himself constant in soliciting,
thinks to find GOD not constant in denying; and, as if that infinite Deity
were not the same every where, hopes to change success, with places. Neither
is that bold forehead ashamed, to importune God again in that, wherein his
own mouth had testified an assurance of denial. The reward was in one of his
eyes; the revenging Angel in the other: I know not whether (for the time) he
more loved the bribe, or feared the Angel. And whiles he is in this
distraction, his tongue blesses against his heart, and his heart curses against
his tongue. It angers him that he dare not speak what he would; and now at
last rather then lose his hopes, he resolves to speak worse then curses. The
fear of GODs judgment in a worldly heart, is at length over come with the
love of gain.

PHINEAS.
BAlaam pretended an have homeward: but he lingered so long, that he left his
bones in Midiam. How justly did he perish with the sword of Israel, whose
tongue had insensibly slain so many thousands of them? As it is usually said of
the Devil, that he goes away in a stench; so may it truly be said of this
Prophet of his: According to the fashion of all hypocrites, his words were
good, his actions abominable: He would not curse, but he would advise; and
his counsel is worse, then a curse: For his curse had hurt none but himself;
his counsel cost the blood of 24000. Israelites. He that has heard God
speak by Balaam, would not look for the Devil, in the same mouth. And, if
GOD himself had not witnessed against him, who could believe that the same
tongue which uttered so divine prophecies, should utter so villainous and cursed
advise? Hypocrisy gains this of men, that it may do evil, unsuspected: But
now, he that heard what he spoke in Balacs ear, has bewrayd, and condemned
his counsel, and himself.

This policy was fetched from the bottom of hell; It is not for lack of
desire, that I curse not Israel; thou do not more wish their destruction,
then I do thy wealth, and honor: But so long as they hold firm with GOD,
there is no sorcery against Jacob; withdraw GOD from them, and they shall fall
alone, and curse themselves; Draw them into sin, and thou shall withdraw
GOD from them. There is no sin more plausible, then wantonness; One
fornication shall draw in another, and both shall fetch the anger of God after
them; send your fairest women into their tents, their sight shall draw them to
lust; their lust to folly; their folly to Idolatry; and now God shall curse them
for thee, unasked. Where Balaam did speak well, there was never any Prophet
spoke more divinely; where he spoke ill, there was never any devil spoke more
desperately: Ill counsel seldom succeeds not; Good seed falls often out of
the way, and roots not; but the tares never light amiss: This project of the
wicked Magician, was too prosperous. The daughters of Moab come into the tents
of Israel; and have captiued those, who^ the Amorites and Amalekites could not
resist. Our first mother Eve bequeathed this dowry to her daughters, that they
should be our helpers to sin; the weaker sex is the stronger, in this conquest:
Had the Moabites sent their subtilest Counselors, to persuade the Israelites,
to their Idol-sacrifices: they had been repelled with scorn; but now the
beauty of their women is ouer-eloquent, and succesfull. That which in the first
World betrayed the sons of GOD; has now ensnared Gods people; It had been
happy for Israel if Balaam had used any charms, but these. As it is the use of
God to fetch glory to himself out of the worst actions of Satan; so it is the
guise of that evil one (through the just permission of the Almighty) to raise
advantage to himself, from the fairest pieces of the work-manship of God: No
one means has so much enriched hell, as beautiful faces.

All Idols are abominable: but this of Baal-Peor, was, besides the superstition
of it, beastly; Neither did Baal ever put on a form, of so much shame, as
this; yet very Israelites are drawn to adore it. When lust has blinded the
eyes, it carries a man whither it lists; even beyond all differences of sin.
A man besotted with filthy desires, is fit for any villainy.

Sin is no less crafty, then satan himself; give him but room in the eye,
and he will soon be possessed of body and soul. These Israelites, first saw
the faces of these Moabites, and Midianites: then they grew to like their
presence; from thence, to take pleasure in their feasts: From their bords, they
are drawn to their beds; from their beds, to their Idols; and now they are
joined to Baal-Peor, and separated from GOD. Bodily fornication is the way to
spiritual: If we have made Idols of flesh, it is just to be given up to Idols
of wood, and stones. If we have not grace to resist the beginnings of sin,
where shall we stay? If our foot slip into the mouth of hell, it is a
miracle to stop ere we come to the bottom.

Well might God be angry, to see his people go a whoring in this double
fornication; neither does he smother his wrath, but himself strikes with his
plague, and biddes Moses strike with the sword. He strikes the body, and bids
Moses strike the head. It had been as easy for him to plague the Rulers, as
the vulgar: and one would think, these should be more properly reserved, for
his immediate hand; but these, he leaves to the sword of humane authority,
that he might win awe to his own ordinances. As the sins of great men are
exemplary, so are their punishments. Nothing procures so much credit to
government, as strict and impartial executions of great and noble offenders.
Those whom their sins have embased, deserve no favor in the punishment: As God
knows no honor, no royalty in matter of sin, no more may his deputyes.
Contrarily, conniuence at the outrages of the mighty, cuts the sinews of any
State; neither does any thing make good laws more contemptible, then the
making difference of offenders; that small sacriledges should be punished,
when great ones ride in triumph. If good ordinations turn once to Spyders
webs, which are broken through, by the bigger Flies, no hand will fear to
sweep them down.

GOD was angry; Moses and all good Israelites grieved; the heads hanged up;
the people plagued: yet behold, one of the Princes of Israel fears not to
brave God, and his Ministers, in that sin, which he sees so grievously
revenged in others. I can never wonder enough at the impudence of this
Israelite. Here is fornication, an odious crime, and that, of an Israelite,
whose name challenges holiness; yea, of a Prince of Israel, whose practice is
a rule to inferiors; and that, with a woman of Midian, with whom, even a chaste
contract had been unlawful; and that, with contempt of all government; and
that, in the face of Moses, and all Israel; and that in a time of mourning, and
judgment, for that same offense. Those that have once passed the bounds of
modesty, soon grow shameless in their sins. Whiles sin hides it self in
corners, there is yet hope; for, where there is shame, there is a possibility
of grace: but when once it dare look upon the sun, and send challenges to
authority, the case is desperate, and ripe for judgment.

This great Simeonite, thought he might sin by privilege; He goes, as if he
said, Who dares control me? His nobility has raised him above the reach of
correction. Commonly, the sins of the mighty are not without presumption: and
therefore their vengeance is no less, then their security; and their
punishment is so much greater, as their conceit of impunity is greater. All
Israel saw this bold lewdness of Zimri: but their hearts, and eyes were so full
of grief, that they had not room enough for indignation.

Phineas looked on with the rest, but with other affections. When he saw this
defiance bidden to God; and this insultation upon the sorrow of his people,
that whiles they were wringing their hands, a proud miscreant durst outface
their humiliation, with his wicked dalliance; his heart boyles with a desire of
an holy revenge: and now that hand, which was used to acenser, and sacrificing
knife, takes up his Iaueline, and with one stroke ioynes these two bodies in
their death, which were joined in their sin; and in the very flagrance of
their lust, makes a new way for their souls, to their own place. O noble and
heroical courage of Phineas! which as it was rewarded of GOD, so is worthy to
be admired of men. He does not stand casting of scruples: Who am I to do
this? The son of the high Priest; My place is all for peace, and mercy; It
is for me to sacrifice, and pray for the sin of the people, not to sacrifice
any of the people, for their sin. My duty calls me to appease the anger of
GOD, what I may, not to revenge the sins of men; to pray for their conversion,
not to work the confusion of any sinner: and who are these? Is not the one a
great Prince in Israel, the other a Princess of Midian? Can the death of two
so famous persons go unrevenged? Or if it be safe, and fit, why does my Uncle
Moses rather shed his own tears, then their blood? I will mourn with the
rest, let them revenge whom it concerns. But the zeal of God has barred out
all weak deliberations; and he holds it now both his duty, and his glory, to
be an executioner of so shameless a pair of offenders.

God loves this heat of zeal, in all the carriages of his servants: And if it
transport us too far, he pardons the errors of our feruencie, rather then
the indifferencies of luke warmness. As these two were more beasts, then any
that ever he sacrificed; so the shedding of their blood, was the acceptablest
sacrifice, that ever he offied unto GOD: for both all Israel is freed from the
plague, and all his posterity have the priesthood, entayled to them, so long as
the Jews were a people. Next to our prayers, there is no better sacrifice,
then the blood of malefactors; not as it is theirs, but as it is shed by
authority. Governors are faulty of those sins they punish not. There can be
no better sight in any State, then to see a malefactor at the gallows. It is
not enough for us, to stand gazing upon the wickedness of the times, (yea
although with tears) unless we endeavor to redress it: especially public
persons carry not their Iauelin in their hand for naught.

Every one is ready to ask Phineas for his commission: and those that are
willing to salve up the act, plead extraordinary instinct from God; who (no
doubt) would not have accepted, that which himself wrought not. But what need
I run so far for this warrant, when I hear GOD say to Moses, Hang up all
the Heads of Israel; and Moses say to the vnder-Rulers, Every one slay his men,
that are joined to Baal-Peor. Every Israelite is now made a Magistrate, for
this execution; and why not Phineas, amongst the rest? Does his Priesthood
exempt him from the blood of sinners? How then does Samuel heaw Agag in pieces?
Even those may make a carcass, which may not touch it. And if Leui got the
Priesthood, by shedding the blood of Idolaters; why may it not stand with that
Priesthood, to spill the blood of a fornicator, and Idolater? Ordinary justice
will bear out Phineas in this act; It is not for every man to challenge this
office, which this double proclamation allowed to Phineas. All that private
persons can do, is either to lift up their hands to heaven, for redress of
sin; or to lift up their hands against the sin, not against the person. Who
made thee a Judge, is a lawful question, if it meet with a person unwarranted.

Now the sin is punished, the plague cease. The revenge of God, sets out
ever after the sin; but if the revenge of men (which commonly comes later)
can overtake it, GOD gives over the chase. How often has the infliction of a
less punishment, avoided a greater. There are none so good friends to the
State, as courageous and impartial ministers of justice. These are the
reconcilers of God, and the people, more, then the prayers of them that sit
still, and do nothing.

The death of Moses.
AFter many painful, and perilous enterprises, now is Moses drawing to his
rest. He has brought his Israelites from Egypt, through the Sea, and
wilderness, within the sight of their promised Land; and now himself must
take possession of that Land, whereof Canaan was but a type. When we have done
that we came for, it is time for us to be gone; This earth is only made for
action, not for fruition; The services of Gods children should be ill rewarded,
if they must stay here always. Let no man think much, that those are fetched
away which are faithful to GOD; They should not change, if it were not to
their preferment. It is our folly that we would have good men live for ever,
and account it an hard measure that they were. He that lends them to the
world, owes them a better turn, then this earth can pay them. It were
injurious to wish, that goodness should hinder any man from glory. So is the
death of Gods Saints precious, that it is certain.

Moses must go up to mount Nebo, and die. The time, the place, and every
circumstance of his dissolution, is determined. That one dies in the field,
another in his bed, another in the water; one in a foreign nation, another in
his own, is fore-decreed in heaven. And, tho we hear it not vocally, yet God
has called every man, by his name, and says; Die thou there. One man seems
to die casually; another, by an inexpected violence: both fall by a destiny;
and all is set down to us by an eternal decree. He that brought us into the
world, will carry us out, according to his own purposes.

Moses must ascend up to the hill, to die. He received his charge for Israel,
upon the hill of Sinai; And now he delivers up his charge, on the hill of
Nebo: His brother Aaron dyed on one hill; he, on another. As Christ was
transfigur'd on an hill: so, was this excellent type of his; Neither doubt I,
but that these hills were types to them, of that heaven, whither they were
aspiring. It is the goodness of our God, that he will not have his children die
any where, but where they may see the Land of Promise before them; neither can
they depart without much comfort, to have seen it: Contrarily, a wicked man
that looks down, and sees hell before him, how can he choose but find more
horror in the end of death, then in the way?

How familiarly does Moses hear of his end! It is no more betwixt God, and
Moses, but Go up, and die; If he had invited him to a meal, it could not
have been in a more sociable compellation: No otherwise then he said to his
other Prophet, Up and eat: It is neither harsh, nor news to Gods children, to
hear, or think of their departure; To them death has lost his horror, through
acquaintance: Those faces which at first sight seemed ill favored, by often
viewing, grow out of dislike: They have so often thought, and resolved of the
necessity, and of the issue of their dissolution, that they cannot hold it
either strange, or unwelcome: He that has had such entire conversation
with GOD, cannot fear to go to him. Those that know him not, or know that
he will not know them, no marvel if they tremble.

This is no small favor; that God warnes Moses of his end: He that had so
often made Moses of counsel, what he meant to do with Israel, would not now
do ought with himself, without his knowledge. Expectation of any maine event
is a great advantage to a wise heart; If the fiery chariot had fetched away
Elias, unlooked for, we should have doubted of the favor of his transportation:
It is a toke^ of judgment, to come as a thief in the night. God forewarns one
by sickness, another by age, another by his secret instincts, to prepare for
their end: If our hearts be not now in a readiness, we are worthy to be
surprised.

But what is this I hear? Displeasure mixed with love? and that to so
faithful a servant as Moses? He must but see the Land of Promise, he shall not
tread upon it; because he once, long ago, sinned in distrusting. Death, tho it
were to him an entrance into glory, yet shall be also a chastisement of his
infidelity: How many noble proofs had Moses given of his courage and strength
of faith? How many gracious services had he done to his Master? Yet for one
act of distrust, he must be gathered to his Fathers. All our obediences cannot
bear out one sin against God; How vainly shall we hope to make amends to God
for our former trespasses, by our better behauior, when Moses has this one sin
laid in his dish after so many and worthy testimonies of his fidelity? When we
have forgotten our sins, yet GOD remembers them, and (although not in anger,
yet) he calls for our arerages. Alas, what shall become of them, with whom God
has ten thousand greater quarrels; That amongst many millions of sins,
have scattered some few acts of formal services? If Moses must die ^he first
death, for one fault; how shall they escape the second for ^inning always?
Even where God loves, he will not wink at sin; and if he do not punish, yet
he will chastise: How much less can it stand with that eternal justice to let
wilful sinners escape judgment?

It might have been just with God, to have reserved the cause to himself;
and in a generality, to have told Moses, that his sin must shorten his
journey: but it is more of mercy, then justice, that his children shall know
why they smart; That GOD may at once both justify himself, and humble them,
for their particular offenses: Those to whom he means vengeance, have not the
sight of their sins, till they be past repentance. Complain not that God
vpbraides thee with thy old sins, whosoever thou art: but know, it is an
argument of love; whereas concealment is a fearful sign of a secret dislike
from God.

But what was that noted sin which deserves this late exprobration, and
shall carry so sharp a chastisement? Israel murmured for water; God bids Moses
take the rod in his hand, and speak to the rock to give water; Moses in stead
of speaking, and striking the rock with his voice, strikes it with the rod;
Here was his sin; An ouer-reaching of his commission; A fearefulnes and
distrust of the effect; The rod, he knew, was approved for miracles; he knew
not how powerful his voice might be; therefore he did not speak, but strike, and
he stroke twice for failing; And now, after these many years, he is stricken
for it, of God; It is a dangerous thing in divine matters, to go beyond our
warrant: Those sins which seem triuiall to men, are heinous in the account
of God; Any thing that sauors of infidelity displeases him more, then some
other crimes of morality. Yet the moving of the rod was but a diverse thing
from the moving of the tongue, it was not contrary; He did not forbid the one,
but he commanded the other: This was but acrosse the stream, not against it;
where shall they appear whose whole courses are quite contrary to the
commandments of God?

Upon the act done, God passed the sentence of restrayning Moses with the rest,
from the promised Land; now he performs it: Since that time, Moses had many
favors from God: All which could not reuerse this decreed castigation; That
everlasting rule is grounded upon the very essence of God; I am Jehovah, I
change not. Our purposes are as our selves, fickle, and incertaine; His are
certain, and immutable: some things which he reueales, he alters; nothing that
he has decreed. Besides the soul of Moses (to the glory whereof God
principally intended this change) I find him careful of two things: His
Successor, and his Body: Moses moves for the one; the other God does, unasked:
He was so tender over the welfare of Israel, in his life; would not slaken his
care, in death: He takes no thought for himself (for he knew how gainful an
exchange he must make.) All his care is for his charge. Some envious natures
desire to be missed, when they must go; and wish that the weakness, or want of
a successor, may be the foil of their memory, and honor: Moses is in a
contrary disposition, It suffices him not to find contentment in his own
happiness, unless he may have an assurance, that Israel shall prosper after
him. Carnal minds are all for themselves, and make use of government, only
for their own advantages; But good hearts look ever to the future good of the
Church above their own, against their own.

Moses did well to show his good affection to his people; but in his silence
God would have provided for his own: He that called him from the sheep of
Iethro, will not want a governor for his chosen, to succeed him; God has
fitted him, whom he will choose. Who can be more meet, then he whose name,
whose experience, whose graces might supply, yea revive Moses to the people? He
that searched the Land before, was fittest to guide Israel into it; He that
was endued with the spirit of GOD, was the fittest deputy for GOD: He that
abode still in the Tabernacle of Ohel-moed, as Gods attendant, was fittest to
be sent forth from him, as his lieutenant: But, oh the unsearchable counsel of
the Almighty! Aged Caleb, and all the Princes of Israel are past over; and
Joshua the servant of Moses, is chosen to succeed his master; The eye of God
is not blinded either with gifts, or with blood, or with beauty, or with
strength: but as in his eternal elections, so in his temporary, he will have
mercy, on whom he will.

And well does Joshua succeed Moses; The very acts of God of old were
allegories: where the Law ends, there the Savior begins; we may see the Land
of P^omise in the Law; Only Jesus the mediator of the new Testament can bring
us into it. So was he a servant of the Law, that he supplies all the defects
of the Law, to us: He has taken possession of the promised Land for us; he
shall carry us from this Wilderness, to our rest.

It is no small happiness to any State, when their governors are chosen by
worthiness; and such elections are ever from GOD; whereas the intrusions of
bribery, and unjust favor, or violence, as they make the commonwealth
miserable, so they come from him, which is the author of confusion: Woe be to
that State that suffers it; woe be to that person that works it; for both of
them have sold themselves; the one to servitude, the other to sin.

I do not hear Moses repine at Gods choice; and grudge that this scepter of
his is not hereditary; but he willingly lays hands upon his servant, to
consecrate him for his successor. Joshua was a good man, yet he had some
sparks of Envy; for when Eldad and Medad prophesied, he stomacht it; ( My Lord
Moses forbid them.) He that would not abide two of the Elders of Israel to
prophecy; how would he have allowed his servant to sit in his throne? What an
example of meekness (besides all the rest) does he here see in this last act
of his master, who without all murmuring resignes his chair of state to his
Page? It is all one to a gracious heart, whom GOD will please to advance:
Emulation, and coffeehouse are the affections of carnal minds. Humility
goes ever with regeneration; which teaches a man to think (what ever honor
be put upon others) I have more then I am worthy of.

The same GOD that by the hands of his Angels carried up the soul of Moses, to
his glory; does also by the hand of his Angels, carry his body down into the
valley of Moab, to his sepulture; Those hands which had taken the Law from him,
those eyes that had seen his presence, those lips that had conferred so often
with him, that face that did so shine with the beams of his glory, may not be
neglected, when the soul is gone: He that took charge of his birth, and
preservation in the reeds; takes charge of his carriage out of the world: The
care of GOD cease not over his own, either in death or after it. How justly
do we take care of the comely burials of our friends; when God himself gives
us this example?

If the ministry of man had been used in this grave of Moses; the place
might have bin known to the Israelites; but GOD purposely co^ceales this
treasure both from Men, and Devils; that so he might both cross their
curiosity, and prevent their superstition. If God had loved the adoration of
his servants relics; He could never have had a fitter opportunity, for this
devotion, then in the body of Moses. It is folly to place religion in those
things, which God hides on purpose, from us; It is not the property of the
Almighty to restrain us from good.

Yet, that divine hand which locked up this treasure, and kept the key of it,
brought it forth afterward, glorious. In the transfiguration, this body which
was hid in the valley of Moab, appeared in the hill of Tabor; that we may
know, these bodies of ours, are not lost, but laid up; and shall as sure be
raised in glory, as they are laid down in corruption. We know, that when he
shall appear, we shall also appear with him in glory.

The end of the seventh Book.
Contemplations. THE EIGHT BOOK. Rahab. Jordan divided. The siege of Jericho.
Achan. The Gibeonites.


At London, printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham: and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1614.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, AND WORTHILY HONOred Gentleman, Master Robert Hay, one of
the attendants of his Majesty's Bedchamber, a sincere friend of virtue, and
lover of learning; I.H. with apprecation of all happiness, dedicates this part
of his Meditations. ()

CONTEMPLATIONS. THE EIGHT BOOK.
RAHAB.
Joshua was one of those twelve searchers which were sent to view the Land of
Canaan; yet now he addresses two Spies, for a more particular survey: Those
twelve were only to inquire of the general condition of the people, and Land;
these two, to find out the best entrance into the next part of the Country,
and into their greatest City. Joshua himself was full of Gods spirit, and had
the Oracle of GOD ready for his direction: yet now he goes not to the
propitiatory for consultation, but to the spies. Except where ordinary means
fail us, it is no appealing the immediate help of GOD; we may not seek to the
posterne, but where the common gate is shut. It was promised Joshua, that he
should lead Israel into the promised Land; yet he knew it was unsafe to
presume. The condition of his provident care was included in that assurance of
success. Heaven is promised to us; but not to our carelessness, infidelity,
disobedience. He that has set this blessed inheritance before us, presupposes
our wisdom, faith, holiness.

Either force, or policy, are fit to be used unto Canaanites. He that would be
happy in this spiritual warfare, must know where the strength of his enemy
lies; and must frame his guard, according to the others assault. It is a great
advantage to a Christian, to know the fashion of Satan's onsets, that he may the
more easily compose himself to resist. Many a soul has miscarried, through
the ignorance of his enemy, which had not perished, if it had well known that
the weakness of Satan stands in our faith.

The Spies can find no other lodging, but Rahabs house. She was a victualer
by profession, and (as those persons and trades, by reason of the commonnesse
of entertainment were amongst the Jews, infamous, by name, and note) she was
Rahab the harlot; I will not think she professed filthiness: only her
public trade (through the corruption of those times) has cast upon her this
name of reproach; yea, rather will I admire her faith, then make excuses for
her calling. How many women in Israel (now Miriam was dead) have given such
proofs of their knowledge, and faith? How noble is that confession, which she
makes of the power and truth of GOD? Yea, I see here, not only a disciple of
GOD, but a Prophetess. Or, if she had once been public, as her house was;
now she is a chaste and worthy convert; and so approved her self for honest,
and wise behauior, that she is thought worthy to be the great grand mother of
David's Father: and the holy line of the Messiah, is not ashamed to admit her
into that happy pede-gree. The mercy of our GOD does not measure us, by what
we were; It would be wide with the best of us, if the eye of God should look
backward to our former estate; there he should see Abraham an Idolater; Paul a
persecutor; Manasses a necromancer; Mary Magdalen a curtizan; and the best,
vile enough to be ashamed of himself. Who can despair of mercy, that sees
even Rahab fetched into the blood of Israel, and line of Christ?

If Rahab had received these Spies, but as unknown passengers, with respect to
their money, and not to their errand, it had been no praise: for in such cases,
the thank is rather to the guest, then to the host: but now, she knew their
purpose; she knew that the harbor of them, was the danger of her own life:
and yet, she hazards this entertainment. Either faith or friendship, are
never tried, but in extremities. To show countenance to the messengers of God,
whiles the public face of the State smiles upon them, is but a courtesy of
course; but to hide our own lives, in theirs, when they are persecuted, is an
act, that looks for a reward. These times need not our favor; we know not
what may come: Alas! how likely is it they would shelter them in danger, which
respect them not in prosperity?

All intelligences of State come first to the Court; It most concerns Princes
to harken after the affairs of each other. If this poor In-holder knew of the
Sea dried up before Israel, and of the discomfiture of Og and Sebon. Surely
this rumor was stale with the King of Jericho; he had heard it, and feared: And
yet, in stead of sending Ambassadors for peace* he sends Pursuiuants, for the
spies* The spirit of Rahab melted with that same report, wherewith the King of
Jericho was hardened* All make not one use of the messages, of the proceedings
of GOD.

The King sends to tell her, what she knew; she had not hid them, if she
had not known their errand. I know not whether first to wonder at the gracious
provision of God, for the spies; or at the strong faith, which he has wrought in
the heart of a weak woman: two strangers, Israelites, Spies; and noted for all
these, in a foreign, ^n an hostile Land, have a safe har^our provided the^,
even amongst their enemies; In Jericho, at the very Court-gate, against the
proclamation of a King, against the ^ndeuours of the people. Where cannot the
GOD of heaven either find, or raise up friends to his own causes, and
servants?

Who could have hoped for such faith in Rahab? which contemned her life for the
present, that she might save it for the future; neglected her own King and
Country for strangers, which she never saw; and more feared the destruction
of that City, before it knevv that it had an adversary, then the displeasure
of her King, in the mortal revenge of that, which he would have accounted
treachery. She brings them up to the roof of her house, and hides them with
stalks of Flax: That plant which was made to hide the body, from nakedness
and shame, now, is used to hide the spies from death. Never could these stalks
have been improued so well with all her huswifry, after they were bruised, as
now before they were fitted to her wheel: Of these she has wouen an
everlasting web, both of life and propagation. And now her tongue hides them no
less, then her hand: her charity was good, her excuse was not good. Evil may
not be done, that good may come of it; we may do any thing but sin, for
promoting a good cause: And if not in so main occasions; how shall God take it,
that we are not dainty of falsehoods in tryfles?

No man will look that these Spies could take any sound sleep, in these beds
of stalks; It is enough for them that they live, though they rest not. And now,
when they hear Rahab coming up the stayres, doubtless they looked for an
executioner: but behold, she comes up with a message better then their sleep;
adding to their protection, advise for their future safety; whereto she makes
way by a faithful report of Gods former wonders, and the present disposition of
her people; and by wise capitulations for the life, and security of her
family. The news of Gods miraculous proceedings for Israel, have made her
resolve of their success, and the ruins of Jericho. Then only do we make a
right use of the works of God, when by his judgments upon others, we are
warned to avoid our own. He intends his acts for precedents of justice.

The parents, and brethren of Rahab take their rest; They are not troubled with
the fear and care of the succese of Israel; but securely go with the current
of the present condition: She watches for them all, and breaks her midnight
sleep, to prevent their last. One wise and faithful person does well in an
house; where all are careless, there is no comfort, but in perishing together.
It had bin an ill nature in Rahab, if she had been content to be saved alone:
that her love might be a match to her faith, she covenants for all her family;
and so returns life to those, of whom she received it. Both the bond of
nature, and of grace, will dravv all ours, to the participation of the same
good, with our selves.

It had bin never the better for the Spies, if after this nights lodging, they
had been turned out of doors to the hazard of the way: For so the pursuers
had light upon the^, and prevented their return with their death. Rahabs
counsel therefore was better then her harbor; which sent them (no doubt, with
victuals in their hands) to seek safety in the mountains, till the heat of
that search were past. He that has given us charge of our lives, will not
suffer us to cast them upon wilful adventures: Had not these Spies hid
themselves in those desert hills, Israel had wanted directors for their
enterprises. There is nothing more expedient for the Church, then that some of
Gods faithful messengers should withdraw themselves, and give way to
persecutions. Courage in those that must die, is not a greater advantage to the
Gospel, then a prudent retyring of those, which may survive, to maintain and
propagate it.

It was a just and reasonable transaction betwixt them; that her life should be
saved by them, which had saved theirs; They owe no less to her, to whom they
were not so much guests, as prisoners: And now they pass, not their promise
only, but their oath. They were strangers to Rahab, and for ought she knew,
might have been godless: yet she dares trust her life, upon their oath. So
sacred and inviolable has this bond ever been, that an heathen woman thought
her self secure, upon the oath of an Israelite.

Neither is she more confident of their oath taken, then they are careful
both of taking, and performing it. So far are they from desiring to salve up
any breach of promise, by equivocation, that they explain all conditions; and
would prevent all possibilities of violation. All Rahabs family, must be
gathered into her house; and that read cord, which was an instrument of their
delivery, must be a sign of hers. Behold, this is the saving color: The
destroying Angel sees the door cheeks of the Israelites sprinkled with read,
and passes them over. The Warriors of Israel see the window of Rahab dyed with
read, and save her family, from the common destruction. If our souls have
this tincture of the precious blood of our Savior, upon our doors, or
windows, we are safe.

But if any one of the brethren of Rahab, shall fly from this read flagge,
and roue about the City, and not contain himself under that roof, which hid
the Spies, it is in vain for him to tell the auengers, that he is Rahabs
brother: That title will not save him, in the street; within doors it will. If
we will wander out of the limits, that GOD has set us, we cast our selves
out of his protection; we cannot challenge the benefit of his gracious
preservation, and our most precious redemption, when we fly out, into the
by-waies of our own hearts; Not for innocence, but for safety and harbor, the
Church is that house of Rahab, which is saved, when all Jericho shall perish.
Whiles we keep us in the lists-thereof, we cannot miscary, through
mis-opinion: but when once we run out of it, let us look for judgment from
GOD, and error in our own judgment.

Jordan divided.
THe two Spies returned, with news of the victory that should be. I do not
hear them say, The Land is unpeopled; or the people are unfurnished with
arms; unskillful of the discipline of war; but, ( They faint because of us,
therefore their Land is ours.) Either success, or discomfiture, begins ever at
the heart. A man's inward disposition does more then presage the event. As a man
rayses up his own heart, before his fall; and depresses it, before his glory:
so God rayses it up, before his exaltation; and casts it down, before his
ruin. It is no otherwise, in our spiritual conflicts: If Satan see us once
faint, he gives himself the day. There is no way to safety, but that our hearts
be the last that shall yield. That which the heathens attributed to Fortune,
we may justly to the hand of GOD; That he speedeth those that are forward. All
the ground that we lose, is given to our adversaries.

This news is brought but over night; Joshua is on his way by morning, and
preuents the sun for have. Delays, whether in the business of God, or our
own, are hateful and prejudicial. Many a one loses the Land of Promise, by
lingering: if we neglect Gods time, it is just with him, to cross us in ours.

Joshua hastens till he have brought Israel to the verge of the promised Land:
Nothing parts the^ now, but the river of Jordan. There he stays a time; that
the Israelites might feed themselves a while, with the sight of that, which
they should afterward enjoy. That which they had bin forty years in seeking,
may not be seized upon, too suddenly: God loves to give us cooles, and heats in
our desires; and will so allay our joys, that their fruition hurt us not. He
knows, that as it is in meats, the long forbearance whereof causes a surfeit,
when we come to fullfeed: so it fares in the contemners of the mind; therefore
he feeds us, not with the dish, but with the spoone; and will have us, neither
cloyed, nor famished. If the mercy of GOD have brought us within sight of
heaven, let us be content to pause awhile, and and upon the banks of Jordan,
fit our selves for our entrance.

Now that Israel is brought to the brimme of Canaan, the clowd is vanished,
which led them all the way: And as soon as they have but crossed lordan, the
Manna cease, which nourisht them all the way. The clowd and Manna were for
their passage, not for their rest; for the Wilderness, not for Canaan. It were
as easy for GOD to work miracles always; but he knows, that custom were
the way to make them no miracles. He goes by-waies, but till he have brought us
into the rode; and then, he referres us to his ordinary proceedings. That
Israelite should have been very foolish, that would still have said; I will not
stir, till I see the clowd; I will not eat, unless I may have that food of
Angels. Wherefore serves the Ark, but for their direction? Wherefore serves the
Wheat of Canaan, but for bread? So fond is that Christian, that will still
depend upon expectation of miracles, after the fullness of Gods kingdom. If
God bear us in his arms, when we are children, yet when we are well grown, he
looks we should go on our own feet. it is enough, that he vpholds us, tho he
carry us not.

He that hitherto had gone before them in the clowd, does now go before them,
in the Ark; the same guide, in two diverse signs of his presence. The clowd
was for Moses, the Arc for Ioshuas time: the clowd was fit for Moses; the Law
offered us Christ, but enwrapped in many obscurities. If he were seen in the
clowd, he was heard from the cover of the Arc. Why was it the Ark of the
Testimony, but because it witnessed both his presence, and love? And within
it, were his Word, the Law; and his Sacrament, the Manna. Who can wish a better
guide, then the God of heaven, in his word, and Sacraments? Who can know the
way into the Land of Promise, so well, as he that owes it? And what means can
better direct us thither, then those of his institution?

That Arc which before was as the heart, is now as the head: It was in the
midst of Israel, whiles they camped in the desert; now when the clowd is
removed, it is in the front of the Army; That as before they depended upon it
for life, so now, they should for direction. It must go before them, on the
shoulders of the sons of Leui; they must follow it, but within sight, not
within breathing. The Levites may not touch the Ark, but only the bars: The
Israelites may not approach nearer then a thousand pases to it. What awful
respects does GOD require to be given unto the testimonies of his presence?
Vzzah paid dear for touching it; the men of Bethshemesh, for looking into it.
It is a dangerous thing to be too bold with the ordinances of GOD. Tho the
Israelites were sanctified, yet they might not come near either the mount of
Sinai, when the law was delivered; or the Ark of the covenant, wherein the law
was written. How fearful shall their estate be, that come with unhallowed
hearts and hands to the word of the Gospel, and the true Manna of the
Evangelical Sacrament? As we use to say of the Court and of fire; so may we of
these divine institutions, we freeze if we be far off from them; and if we
be more near then befits us, we burn. Under the Law, we might look at
Christ aloof; now under the Gospel, we may come near him: He calls us to him;
yea he enters into us.

Neither was it only for reverence, that the Arc must be not stumbled at, but
waited on, a far; but also for conuenience, both of sight, and passage: Those
things that are near us, tho they be less, fill our eye; Neither could so
many thousand eyes see the same object, upon a level, but by distance: It
would not content God, that one Israelite should tell another, Now the Arc
goes, now it turns, now it stands; but he would have every one his own
witness. What can be so comfortable to a good heart, as to see the pledges of
GODs presence, and favor? To hear of the loving kindnesses of God, is
pleasant; but to behold, and feel the evidences of his mercy, is unspeakably
delectable: Hence the Saints of GOD, not contenting themselves with faith, have
still prayed for sight, and fruition, and mourned when they have wanted it. What
an happy prospect has GOD set before us of Christ Jesus crucified before us,
and offered unto us?

Ere God will work a miracle before Israel, they have charge to be sanctified.
There is an holiness required, to make us either patients, or beholders of the
great works of God: how much more when we should be actors in his sacred
services? There is more use of sanctification, when we must present something
to God, then when he must do ought to us.

The same power that divided the red Sea before Moses, diuides Jordan before
Joshua; that they might see the Arc no less effectual, then the cloud; and
the hand of GOD, as present with Joshua, to bring them into Canaan, as it was
with Moses, to bring them out of Egypt: The bearers of the Arc had need be
faithful; they must first set their foot into the streams of Jorden, and
believe that it will give way; The same faith that led Peter upon the
water, must carry them into it. There can be no Christian without belief in
GOD; but those that are near to GOD, in his immediate services, must go
before others no less in believing, then they do in example.

The waters know their maker: That Jordan, which flowed with full streams,
when Christ went into it, to be baptized; now gives way, when the same GOD
must pass through it in state: Then there was use of his water, now of his
sand. I hear of no news of any rod to strike the waters; the presence of
the Ark of the Lord GOD, the Lord of all the World, is sign enough to these
waves; which now, as, if a sinew were broken, runs back to both issues, and
dare not so much, as wet the feet of the Priests, that bore it; What ayleth
thee O Sea, that thou fledst, and thou Jordan that thou were driven back? ye
mountains that ye leaped like rams, and ye little hills like lambs? The earth
trembled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. How
obseruant are all the creatures to the God that made them? How glorious a GOD
do we serve; whom all the powers of the heavens and Elements are willingly
subject unto; and gladly take that nature which he pleases to give them? He
could have made Jordan like some solid pauement of crystal, for the
Israelites feet to have trod upon; but this work had not been so
magnificent. Every strong frost congeales the water, in a natural course: but
for the river to stand still, and run on heaps, and to be made a liquid wall
for the passage of Gods people, is, for nature to run out of it self, to do
homage to her Creator: Now must the Israelites needs think; How can the
Canaanites stand out against us, when the Seas and rivers give us way? With
what joy did they now trample upon the dry channel of Jordan, whiles they
might see the dry deserts overcome, the promised Land before them, the very
waters so glad of them, that they ran back to welcome them into Canaan? The
passages into our promised Land are troublesome and perilous; and, even at
last, offer themselves to us the maine hindrances of our salvation; which,
after all our hopes, threaten to defeat us: for what will it avail us to have
passed a Wilderness, if the waves of Jordan should swallow us up; But the
same hand that has made the way hard, has made it sure: He that made the
Wilderness comfortable, will make Jordan dry; he will master all
difficulties for us: and those things, which we most feared, will he make
most sovereign, and beneficial to us. O GOD, as we have trusted thee with the
beginning, so will we with the finishing of our glory. Faithful art thou
that have promised, which wilt also do it.

He that led them about, in forty years journey, through the Wilderness,
yet now leads them the nearest cut to Jericho; He will not so much, as seek
for a ford for their passage; but diuides the waters. What a sight was this to
their heathen adversaries, to see the waters make both a lane, and a wall for
Israel? Their hearts could not choose, but be broken, to see the streams
broken off for a way to their enemies. I do not see Joshua hasting through
this channel, as if he feared, least the tide of Jordan should return; but
as knowing that watery wall stronger, then the walls of Jericho, he pases
slowly: And least this miracle should pass away with themselves, he
commands twelve stones to be taken out of the channel of Jordan, by twelve
selected men, from every Tribe; which shall be pitched in Gilgal; and twelve
other stones, to be set in the midst of Jordan, where the feet of the Priests
had stood, with the Arc; That so both land and water might testify the
miraculous way of Israel, whiles it should be said of the one; These stones
were fetched out of the pauement of Jordan; of the other, There did the Arc
rest whiles we walked dry-shod, through the deepes of Jordan: Of the one,
Jordan was once as dry as this Gilgal; Of the other, Those waves which drown
these stones, had so drowned us, if the power of the Almighty had not
restrained them. Many a great work had God done for Israel, which was now
forgotten: Joshua therefore will have Monuments of GODs mercy, that future Ages
might be both witnesses, and applauders of the great works of their GOD.

The Siege of Jericho.
Joshua begins his wars with the Circumcision and Passover; He knew that the
way to keep the blood of his people from shedding; was to let out that paganish
blood of their vncircumcisio^. The person must be in favor, ere the work can
hope to prosper: His predecessor Moses had like to have been slain for
neglect of this Sacrament, when he went to call the people out of Egypt: he
justly fears his own safety, if now he omit it, when they are brought into
Canaan: we have no right of inheritance in the spiritual Canaan, the Church
of God, till we have received the Sacrament of our matriculation: So soon as
our covenants are renewed with our Creator, we may well look for the vision of
God, for the assurance of victory.

What sure work did the King of Jericho think he had made! he blocked up the
passages, barred up the gates, defended the walls, and did enough to keep
out a common enemy: If we could do but this to our spiritual adversaries, it
were as impossible for us to be surprised, as for Jericho to be safe. Me
thinks I see how they called their council of war; debated of all means of
defense; gathered their forces, trained their soldiers, set strong gards to
the gates, and walls; and now would persuade one another, that unless Israel
could fly into their city, the siege was vain. Vain worldlings think their
rampires and Barricadoes can keep out the vengeance of God; Their blindness
suffers them to look no further then the means: The supreme hand of the
Almighty comes not within the compass of their fears. Every carnal heart is
a Jericho shut up; GOD sets down before it, and displayes mercy and judgment,
in sight of the walls thereof; It hardens it self in a wilful security; and
says, Tush, I shall never be moved.

Yet their courage and fear fight together within their walls, within their
bosoms: Their courage tells them of their own strength; their fear suggests
the miraculous success of this (as they could not but think) enchanted
generation; and now whiles they have shut out their enemy, they have shut in
their own terror. The most secure heart in the world has some flashes of
fear; for it cannot but sometimes look out of it self, and see what it
would not. Rahab had notified that their hearts fainted: and yet now, their
faces bewray nothing but resolution. I know not whether the heart, or the
face of an hypocrite be more false; and as each of them seeks to beguile the
other, so both of them agree to deceive the beholders: In the midst of
laughter, their heart is heavy; who would not think him merry that laughs? Yet
their rejoicing is but in the face: who would not think a blasphemer, or
profane man resolutely careless? If thou had a vvindowe into his heart, thou
should see him tormented with horrors of conscience.

Now the Israelites see those walled cities, and towers whose height was
reported to reach to heaven; the same whereof had so affrighted them, ere they
saw them, and were ready doubtless to say, in their distrust, which way shall
we scale these invincible fortifications? what ladders, what engines shall we
use to so great a work? GOD preuents their infidelity; Behold I have given
Jericho into thine hand. If their walls had their foundations laid in the
center of the earth; If the battlements had been so high built, that an Egle
could not soar over them; this is enough, I have given it thee: For, on whose
earth have they raised these castles? Out of whose treasure did they dig
those piles of stone? Whence had they their strength, and time to build? Can
not he that gave, recall his own? O ye fools of Jericho; what if your walls
be strong, your men valiant, your leaders skillful, your King wise; when God
has said, I have given thee the City: What can swords or spears do against
the Lord of hosts? Without him means can do nothing: how much less against
him? How vain and idle is that reckoning, wherein God is left out? Had the
captain of the Lords host drawn his sword for Jericho, the gates might have
been opened; Israel could no more have entered, then they can now be kept from
entering, when the walls were fallen. What courses soever we take for our
safety, it is good making GOD of our side: Neither men, nor devils can hurt us
against him; neither men nor Angels can secure us from him.

There was never so strange a siege as this of Jericho: Here was no mount
raised, no sword drawn, no engine planted, no pioners undermining; Here were
trumpets sounded, but no enemy seen; Here were armed men, but no stroke
given: They must walk and not fight; seven several days must they pase about
the walls, which they may not once look over, to see what was within.
Doubtless these inhabitants of Jericho made themselves merry with this sight:
When they had stood six days upon their walls, and beheld none but a
walking enemy; what (say they) could Israel find no walk to breath them with,
but about our walls? Have they not traueled enough in their forty years
pilgrimage, but they must stretch their limbs in this circle? surely if their
eyes were engines, our walls could not stand: we see they are good footmen;
but when shall we try their hands? What, do these vain men think Jericho
will be won with looking at? Or, do they only come to count how many pases
it is about our City? If this be their manner of siege, we shall have no
great cause to fear the sword of Israel. Wicked men think GOD in jest, when
he is preparing for their judgment. The Almighty has ways and counsels of
his own; utterly unlike to ours: which because our reason cannot reach, we
are ready to condemn of foolishness and impossibility. With us, there is no
way to victory but fighting; and the strongest carries the spoil: GOD can
give victory to the feet, as well as to the hands; and, when he will, makes
weakness no disadvantage. What should we do but follow GOD through bywayes,
and know, that he will in spite of nature lead us to our end?

All the men of war must compass the City; yet it was not the presence of the
great warriors of Israel that threw down the walls of Jericho. Those
foundations were not so slightly laid; as that they could not endure either a
look, or a march, or a battery: It was the Ark of God whose presence
demolished the walls of that wicked City. The same power that drove back the
waters of Jordan before, and afterward laid Dagon on the floor, cast down
all those forts. The Priests bear on their shoulders that mighty engine of
God, before which those walls, if they had been of molten brass, could not
stand. Those spiritual wickednesses, yea those gates of hell, which to nature
are utterly invincible, by the power of the word of GOD (which he has
committed to the carriage of his weak servants) are overthrown, and triumphed
over. Thy Arc, O GOD, has been long amongst us; how is it that the walls
of our corruptions stand still vnruined. It has gone before us; his Priests
have carried it, we have not followed it, our hearts have not attended upon
it; and therefore, how mighty soever it is in it self; yet to us, it has not
been so powerful, as it would.

Seven days together they walked this round; They made this therefore their
Sabaoth-daies iourny; and who knows whether the last, and longest walk, which
brought victory to Israel, were not on this day? Not long before an Israelit is
stoned to death, for but gathering a few sticks, that day: Now all the host
of Israel must walk about the walls of a large and populous City, and yet do
not violate the day. Gods precept is the rule of the justice, and holiness of
all our actions: Or was it, for that revenge upon Gods enemies is an holy
work, and such, as God vouchsafes to privilege with his own day? Or, because
when we have undertaken the exploits of God, he will abide no intermission,
till we have fulfilled them; He allows us to breathe, not to break off,
till we have finished.

It had been as easy for God, to have given this success to their first
days walk, yea to their first pase, or their first sight of Jericho; yet he
will not give it, until the end of their seven days toil: It is the pleasure
of God to hold us both in work, and in exeectation; And though he require
our continual endeavors for the subduing of our corruptions, during the six
days of our life, yet we shall never find it perfectly effected, till the
very evening of our last day: In the mean time, it must content us, that we
are in our walk, and that these walls cannot stand, when we come to the
measure, and number of our perfection. A good heart groans under the sense of
his infirmities, feign would be rid of them, and strives and prays; but when
he has all done; until the end of the seventh day, it cannot be: If a stone
or two moulder off from these walls, in the mean time, that is all; but the
foundations will not be removed, till then.

When we hear of so great a design as the miraculous winning of a mighty
City, who would not look for some glorious means to work it? when we
hear that the Ark of GOD must besiege Jericho, who would not look for some
royal equipage? But behold here, seven Priests must go before it, with
seven trumpets of rams horns. The Israelites had trumpets of silver, which
GOD had appointed for the use of assembling, and dissoluing the Congregation,
for war, and for peace. Now I do not hear them called for; but in stead
thereof, Trumpets of rams horns; base for the matter, and not loud for sound;
the shortness and equal measure of those instruments could not afford, either
shrilnes of noise, or variety. How mean and homely are those means which GOD
commonly uses in the most glorious works? No doubt, the Citizens of Jericho,
answered this dull alarm of theirs, from their walls, with other instruments
of louder report, and more martial ostentation; and the vulgar Israelites
thought; we have as clear, and as costly trumpets as theirs; yet no man dares
offer to sound the better, when the worse are commanded: If we find the
ordinances of GOD poor and weak; let it content us that they are of his own
choosing, and such as whereby he will so much more honor himself, as they in
themselves are more inglorious: not the outside, but the efficacy is it, that
God cares for.

No ram of iron could have been so forceable for battery, as these
rams-hornes: For when they sounded long, and were seconded with the shout of
the Israelites, all the walls of Jericho fell down at once: They made the
heaven ring with their shout: but the ruin of those walls drowned their
voice, and gave a pleasant kind of horror to the Israelites: The earth shook
under them, with the fall; but the hearts of the inhabitants shook yet more:
many of them doubtless were slain with those walls, wherein they had
trusted: A man might see death in the faces of all the rest, that remained; who
now being half dead with astonishment, expected the other half from the
sword of their enemies; They had now, neither means, nor will to resist; for
if only one breach had been made (as it uses in other sieges) for the
entrance of the enemy; perhaps new supplies of defendants might have made it
up with their carcasses: but now, that at once, Jericho is turned to a plain
field, every Israelite without resistance might run to the next booty;
and the throats of their enemies seemed to inuit their swords, to a dispatch.

If but one Israelite had knocked at the gates of Jericho, it might have been
thought their hand had helped to the victory: Now, that GOD may have all the
glory, without the show of any rival, yea of any means, they do but walk
and shout, and the walls give way. He cannot abide to part with any honor,
from himself: As he does all things, so he would be acknowledged.

They shout all at once. It is the presence of God's Ark and our conjoined
prayers, that are effectual to the beating down of wickedness. They may not
shout till they be bidden. If we will be unseasonable in our good actions, we
may hurt, and not benefit our selves.

Every living thing in Jericho, man, woman, child, cattle, must die: Our
folly would think this merciless; but there can be no mercy in injustice;
and nothing but injustice, in not fulfilling the charge of GOD: The death of
malefactors, the condemnation of wicked men, seem harsh to us; but we must
learn of GOD, that there is a punishing mercy. Cursed be that mercy, that
opposes the GOD of mercy.

Yet was not Joshua so intent upon the slaughter, as not to be mindful of Gods
part, and Rahabs: First, he gives charge (under a curse) of reserving all the
treasure for God; Then of preserving the family of Rahab. Those two Spies, that
received life from her, now return it to her, and hers: They call at the
window with the red cord; and send up news of life to her, the same way which
they received theirs. Her house is no part of Jericho; neither may fire be
set to any building of that City, till Rahab and her family be set safe
without the host. The actions of our faith and charity will be sure to pay us,
if late, yet surely. Now Rahab finds what it is to believe GOD; whiles out of
an impure idolatrous City, she is transplanted into the Church of God, and
made a mother of a royal, and holy posterity.

Achan.
WHen the walls of Jericho were fallen, Joshua charged the Israelites but with
two precepts; Of sparing. Rahabs house; and of abstaining from that treasure,
which was anathematized to GOD; and one of them is broken: As in the entrance
to Paradise, but one tree was forbidden, and that was eaten of. GOD has
provided for our weakness in the paucitie of commands: but our innocencie^
stands not so much in having few^ precepts, as in keeping those we have. So
much more guilty are we in the breach of one, as we are more favored in the
number.

They needed no command to spare no living thing in Jericho: but to spare the
treasure, no command was enough. Impartialitie of execution is easier to
perform, then contempt of these worldly things; because we are more prone to
covet for our selves, then to pity others. Had Joshua bidden to save the men,
and divide the treasure, his charge had been more plausible, then now to kill
the men, and save the treasure: or, if they must kill, earthly minds would
more gladly shed their enemies blood, for a booty, then out of obedience, for
the glory of their Maker. But now, it is good reason, since God threw down
those walls, and not they; that both the blood of that wicked City should be
spilt to him, not to their own revenge; and that the treasure should be
reserved for his use, not for theirs. Who but a miscreant can grudge, that GOD
should serve himself of his own? I cannot blame the rest of Israel, if they
were well pleased with these conditions; only one Achan, troubles the peace,
and his sin is imputed to Israel: the innocence of so many thousand
Israelites, is not so forceable to excuse his one sin, as his one sin is to
taint all Israel.

A lewd man is a pernicious creature: That he damnes his own soul, is the
least part of his mischief; he commonly draws vengeance upon a thousand,
either by the desert of his sin, or by the infection. Who would not have
hoped, that the same GOD, which for ten righteous men would have spared five
wicked Cities, should not have been content to drown one sin, in the
obedience of so many righteous? But so venomous is sin, (especially, when
it lights among GODs people) that one ^ramme of it is able to infect the ^hole
mass of Israel.

Oh righteous people of Israel, that had but one Achan! How had their late
circumcision cut away the unclean foreskin of their disobedience? How had the
blood of their Paschall Lamb scoured their souls from covetous desires? The
world was well mended with them, since their stubburne murmurings, in the
desert. Since the death of Moses, and the government of Joshua, I do not find
them in any disorder. After that the Law has brought us under the conduct of
the true Jesus* our sins are more rare, and our lives more conscionable.
Whiles we are under the Law, we do no^ so keep it, as when we are delivered
from it: our Christian freedom, is more holy then our servitude. Then have the
Sacraments of God their due effect, when their receipt purges us from our old
sins, and makes our conversation clean, and spiritual.

Little did Joshua know that there was any sacrilege committed by Israel: that
sin is not half cunning enough, that has not learned secrecy. Joshua was a
vigilant Leader, yet some sins will escape him: Only that eye which is every
where, finds us out in our close wickedness. It is no blame to authority,
that some sins are secretly committed: The holiest congregation, or family,
may be blemished with some malefactors: It is just blame, that open sins are
not punished; we shall wrong government, if we shall expect the reach of it
should be infinite. He therefore, which if he had known the offense, would
have sent up prayers, and tears to GOD, now sends Spies for a further
discovery of Ai; They return, with news of the weakness of their
adversaries: and (as contemning their paucitie) persuade Joshua, that a vving
of Israel is enough to ouershadow this City of Ai. The Israelites were so
fleshed with their former victory, that now they think no walls, or men can
stand before them. Good success lifts up the heart with too much
confidence; and vvhiles it disswades men from doing their best, oft-times
disappoynts them. With God, the means can never be too weak; without him,
never strong enough.

It is not good to contemn an impotent enemy. In this second battle the
Israelites are beaten: It was not the fewness of their assaylants that
overthrew them, but the sin that lay lurking at home. If all the host of
Israel, had set upon this poor village of Ai, ^hey had been all equally
discomfited: the wedge of Achan did more fight against them, then ^ll the
swords of the Canaanites. The victories of GOD go not by strength, but by
innocence.

Doubtless these men of Ai, insulted in this foil of Israel, and said; Lo
these are the men, from whose presence the waters of Jordan ran back, now they
run as fast away from ours: These are they, before whom the walls of Jericho
fell down; now they are fallen as fast before us; and all their neighbors
took heart from this victory. Wherein I doubt not, but besides the punishment
of Isreal's sin, God intended the further obduration of the Canaanites: Like as
some skillful player loses on purpose, at the beginning of the game, to draw on
the more abetments. The news of their overthrow spread as far as the fame of
their speed; and every City of Canaan could say, Why not we, as well as Ai?

But good Joshua, that succeeded Moses, no less in the care of Gods glory,
then in his government, is much dejected with this event. He rends his
clothes, falls on his face, casts dust upon his head, and (as if he had learned
of his Master, how to expostulate with GOD) says, What will thou do to thy
mighty Name?

That Joshua might see, GOD took no pleasure to let the Israelites lie dead
upon the earth, before their enemies; himself is taxed, for but lying all day,
upon his face, before the Arc. All his expostulations are answered in one
word, Get thee up, Israel has sinned. I do not hear God say, Ly still, and
moure for the sin of Israel. It is to no purpose to pray against punishment,
while the sin continues. And though GOD loves to be sued to; yet he holds our
requests unseasonable, till there be care had of satisfaction. When we have
risen, and redressed sin, then may we fall down for pardon.

Victory is in the free hand of God, to dispose where he will; and no man can
marvel that the dice of War run ever with hazard, on both sides: so as GOD
needed not to have given any other reason of this discomfiture of Israel, but
his own pleasure: yet Joshua must now know, that Israel, which before
prevailed for their faith, is beaten for their sin. When we are crossed in
just, and holy quarrels, we may well think there is some secret evil
unrepented of, which GOD would punish in us; which, tho we see not, yet he so
hates, that he will rather be wanting to his own cause, then not revenge it.
When we go about any enterprise of God, it is good to see that our hearts be
clear from any pollution of sin; and when we are thwarted in our hopes, it
is our best course to ransack our selves, and to search for some sin hid from
us in our bosom, but open to the view of GOD.

The oracle of God, which told him a great offense was committed, yet reueales
not the person: It had been as easy for him, to have named the man, as the
crime. Neither does Joshua request it; but referres that discovery to such a
means; as whereby the offender (finding himself singled out by the lot) might
be most convinced. Achan thought he might have lain as close in all that
throng of Israel, as the wedge of Gold lay in his Tent. The same hope of
secrecy which moved him to sin, moved him to confidence in his sin: but
now, when he saw the lot fall upon his Tribe, he began to start a little; when
upon his family, he began to change countenance; when upon his household, to
tremble and fear; when upon his person, to be utterly confounded in himself.
Foolish men think to run away with their privy sins; and say, Tush, no eye
shall see me: but when they think themselves safest, God pulls them out with
shame. The man that has escaped justice, and now is lying down in death,
would think; My shame shall never be disclosed: but, before men and Angels
shall he be brought on the scaffold, and find confusion, as sure, as late.

What needed any other evidence, when GOD had accused Achan? Yet Joshua will
have the sin out of his mouth, in whose heart it was hatched; My son, I
beseech thee, give glory to GOD. Whom God had convinced as a malefactor, Joshua
beseeches as a son. Some hot spirit would have said; Thou wretched traitor,
how have thou pilfred from thy GOD, and shed the blood of so many Israelites,
and caused the host of Israel to show their backs, with dishonor, to the
heathens: now shall we fetch this sin out: of thee with tortures; and plague
thee with a condign death. But like the disciple of him* whose servant he was,
he meekly intreates that, which he might have extorted by violence, ( My son,
I beseech thee). Sweetness of compellation, is a great help toward the good
entertainment of an admonition: roughnes and rigor, many times hardens those
hearts, which meekness would have melted to repentance: whether we sue, o^
convince, or reprove, little good is gotten by bitterness. Detestation of the
sin, may well stand with favor to the person: And these two, not
distinguished, cause great wrong, either in our charity, or justice; for,
either we uncharitably hate the creature of GOD, or unjustly affect the evil
of men. Subjects are, as they are called, sons to the Magistrate: All Israel
was not only of the family, but, as of the loins of Joshua; such must be the
corrections, such the provisions of Governors, as for their children; as
again, the obedience and love of subjects must be filial.

GOD had glorified himself sufficiently, in finding out the wickedness of
Achan; neither need he honor from men, much less from sinners; They can
dishonor him by their iniquities: but what recompense can they give him, for
their wrongs? yet Joshua says, My son, give glory to God; Israel should now
see, that the tongue of Achan did justify God in his lot. The confession of
our sins does no less honor God, then his glory is blemished by their
commission. Who would not be glad to redeem the honor of his Redeemer, with his
own shame?

The lot of God, and the mild words of Joshua, won Achan to accuse himself,
ingenuously, impartially: a storm perhaps would not have done that, which a
sunshine has done. If Achan had come in uncalled, and before any question
made, out of an honest remorse, had brought in this sacrilegious booty, and
cast himself and it, at the foot of Joshua; doubtless, Israel had prospered,
and his sin had carried away pardon: now, he has gotten thus much thank, that
he is not a desperate sinner. GOD will once wring from the conscience of wicked
men their own inditements; They have not more carefully hid their sin, then
they shall one day freely proclaim their own shame.

Achans confession, tho it were ^ate, yet was it free, and full: For he does
not only acknowledge the act, but the ground (...) his sin; I saw, and
coueted, and too^^ The eye betrayed the heart; an^ that, the hand; and now all
conspire in the offense. If we list n^^ to flatter our selves, this has b^ the
order of our crimes: Evil (...) uniform; and beginning at the senses, takes
the inmost fort (...) the soul, and then arms o^ own outward forces, against
v^ This shall once be the lasciuio^ man's song, I saw, and coueted, took: This
the thieues; this the idolaters; this the gluttons an^ drunkards: All these
receive the death by their eye. But, oh fo^^lish Achan! with what eyes did thou
look upon that spoil, whi^^ thy fellows saw, and contemned Why could thou
not before, well as now, see shame hid under that gay Babylonish garment? and
^n heap of stones covered with those shekels of silver? The ouer^rizing, and
ouer-desiring of these ^arthly things, caries us into all mischief; and hides
us from the ^^ght of Gods judgments: whosoever admires the glory of me^alls,
or of gay clothes, or honor, cannot be innocent.

Well might Joshua have pro^eeded to the execution of him, whom GOD, and his
own mouth ^ccused: but, as one that thought ^o evidence could be too strong
(...) a case, that was capital; he ^ends to see, whether there was ^s much
truth in the confession, as ^ere was falsehood in the stealth.

Magistrates and Judges, must pase slowly, and sure, in the punishment of
offenders. Presumptions are not ground enough for the sentence of death; no,
not in some cases, the confessions of the guilty: It is no warrant for the Law
to wrong a man, that he has before wronged himself. There is less ill in
sparing an offender, then in punishing the innocent.

Who would not have expected, since the confession of Achan was ingenuous, and
his pillage still found entyre, that his life should have been pardoned? But
here was, Confess, and dye: He had been too long sick of this disease, to be
recovered. Had his confession been speedy, and free, it had saved him. How
dangerous it is, to suffer sin to lie fretting into the soul! which if it
were washed off betimes with our repentance, could not kill us. In mortal
offenses, the course of humane justice is not stayed by our penitence: It is well
for our souls that we have repented; but the laws of men take not notice of
our sorrow. I know not whether the death, or the tears of a malefactor, be a
better sight: The censures of the Church are wiped off with weeping, not the
penalties of laws.

Neither is Achan alone called forth to death, but all his family, all his
substance. The actor alone does not smart with sacrilege; all that concerns
him is enwrapped, in the judgment. Those that defile their hands with holy
goods, are enemies to their own flesh, and blood. Gods first reuenges are so
much the more fearful, because they must be exemplary.

The Gibeonites.
THe news of Isreal's victory had flowne over all the mountains, and vallyes of
Canaan; and yet those heathenish Kings, and people, are mustered together
against them. They might have seen themselves in Jericho, and Ai; and have well
perceived, it was not an arm of flesh, that they must resist; yet they gather
their forces, and say, Tush, we shall speed better. It is madness in a man,
not to be warned; but to run upon the point of those judgments, wherewith
he sees others miscary; and not to believe, till he cannot recover. Our assent
is purchased too late, when we have ouer-stayd prevention; and trust to that
experience, which we cannot live to redeem.

Only the Hiuites are wiser then their fellows, and will rather yield and
live. Their intelligence was not diverse from the rest; all had equally heard
of the miraculous conduct, and success of Israel: But their resolution was
diverse. As Rahab saved her family, in the midst of Jericho: so these four
Cities preserved themselves, in the midst of Canaan; and both of them, by
believing what GOD would do. The efficacy of GODs maruailous works, is not
in the acts themselves, but in our apprehension; some are overcome with those
motives, which others have contemned for weak.

Had these Gibeonites joined with the forces of all their neighbors, they had
perished in their common slaughter; If they had not gone a way by themselves,
death had met them; It may have more pleasure, it cannot have so much safety,
to follow the multitude. If examples may lead us, the greatest part shuts out
God, upon earth, and is excluded from GOD elsewhere. Some fevv poor Hiuites
yield to the Church of GOD, and escape the condemnation of the world. It is
very like, their neighbors flouted at this base submission of the Gibeonites;
and out of their terms of honor, scorned to beg life of an enemy, whiles they
were out of the compass of mercy: but when the bodies of these proud Iebusites
and Perizzites lay strawed upon the earth, and the Gibeonites suruiued, whether
was more worthy of scorn, and insultation?

If the Gibeonites had stayed till Israel had besieged their Cities, their
yieldance had been fruitless; now they make an early peace, and are
preserved. There is no wisdom in staying till a judgment come home to us;
the only way to avoid it, is to meet it half way. There is the same remedy of
war, and of danger: To provoke an enemy in his own borders, is the best stay
of invasion; and to solicit God betimes in a manifest danger, is the best
antidote for death.

I commend their wisdom in seeking peace; I do not commend their falsehood, in
the manner of seeking it: who can look for any better of Pagans? But as the
faith of Rahab is so rewarded, that her lie is not punished: so the fraud of
these Gibeonites, is not an equal match to their belief; since the name of
the Lord GOD of Israel, brought them to this suit of peace.

Nothing is found fitter to deceive Gods people, then a counterfeit copy of
age. Here are old sacks, old bottles, old shoes, old garments, old bread. The
Israelites that had worn one suit forty years, seemed new-clad in comparison
of them. It is no new policy, that satan would beguile us with a vain color
of antiquity, clothing falsehood in rags. Errors are never the elder, for
their patching: Corruption can do the same that time would do; we may make
age, as well as suffer it. These Gibeonites did tear their bottles, and
shoes, and clothes, and made them naught, that they might seem old: so do
the false patrons of new errors. If we be caught with this Gibeonitish
stratagem, it is a sign we have not consulted with GOD.

The sentence of death was gone out against all the inhabitants of Canaan.
These Hiuites acknowledge the truth, and judgments of GOD, and yet seek to
escape by a league with Israel. The general denunciations of the vengeance of
God, enwrappe all sinners; Yet may we not despair of mercy. If the secret
counsel of the Almighty had not designed these men to life, Joshua could not
have been deceived, with their league. In the generality there is no hope:
Let us come in the old rags of our vileness, to the true Joshua, and make
our truce with him; we may live, yea, we shall live. Some of the Israelites
suspect the fraud; and notwithstanding all their old garments, and provisions,
can say, It may be thou dwell among us. If Joshua had continued this doubt,
the Gibeonites had torn their bottles in vain. In cases and persons unknown,
it is safe not to be too credulous: Charity it self will allow suspicion,
where we have seen no cause to trust.

If these Hiuites had not put on new faces, with their old clothes, they had
surely changed countenance, when they heard this argument of the Israelites, (
It may ^e thou dwell amongst us; how ^^en can I make a league with thee?)
They had perhaps hoped, their ^^bmission would not have been ^^fused,
where-soeuer they had ^^welt: but, lest their neighbour^ood might be a
prejudice, they ^ome disguised; and now hear, ^^at their nearness of abode
was (...) unremovable bar of peace. (...) was quarrel enough, that they
^^re Canaanites; God had for^^dden both the league, and the (...) of the native
inhabitants. He ^^at calls himself the GOD of ^^ace, proclaims himself the
^^d of hosts: and not to fight ^here he has commanded, is to ^^ak the peace
with God, whiles (...) nourish it with men. Contention with brethren, is not
mo^^ hateful to him, then leagues wi^^ idolaters. The condition that h^ has
set to our peace, is our possi^bilitie, and our power. That fall not within the
possibility of ou^ power, which we cannot do^^ lawfully.

What a smooth tale did the^ Gibeonites tell for themselves? (...) the
remoteness of their Country the motives of their journey; (...) consultation of
their Elders; the ageing of their provisions in the way: that it might seem not
on^^lie safe, but deserved on the parts, that they should be a^^mitted to a
peace, so far sough^ and purchased with so much toy^^ and importunity. Their
cloth^ and their tongues agreed together; and both disagree from the truth:
Deceit is ever lightly wrapped up in plausibilitie of words; as fair faces
often times hide much unchastity. But this guile spedde the better, because it
was cladde with much plainness: For who would have suspected, that clouted
shoes, and ragged coats could have covered so much subtlety? The case seemed
so clear, that the Israelites thought it needless to consult with the mouth
of the Lord. Their own eyes and ears were called only to counsel; and
now their credulity has drawn them into inconvenience.

There is no way to convince these Gibeonitish pretenses of antiquity, but to
have recourse to the oracle of GOD. Had this been advised with, none of these
false rags had shamed the Church of God: whether in our practice, or
judgment, this direction cannot fail us; whereas, what we take up on the
words of men, proves ever either light, or false wares.

The facility of Israel had led them into a league, to an oath, for the
safety of the Gibeonites: and now within three days they find both their
neighborhood and deceit. Those old shoes of theirs, would easily hold to carry
them back to their home. The march of a great Army, is easy: yet within three
days the Israelites were before their Cities. Joshua might now have taken
advantage of their own words, to dissolve his league; and have said; Ye are
come from a far Country, these Cities are near; These are not therefore the
people, to whom we are engaged by our promise, and oath: And if these Cities
be yours, yet ye are not your selves. Ere-while, ye were strangers; now ye
are Hiuites, borne and dwelling in the midst of Canaan: we will therefore
destroy these Cities near hand, and do you save your people a far off. It
would seem very questionable, Whether Joshua needed to hold himself bound to
this oath; for fraudulent conuentions oblige not; and Israel had put in a
direct caveat of their vicinity: yet dare not Joshua, and the Princes trust to
shifts, for the eluding their oath; but must faithfully perform, what they
have rashly promised.

Ioshuas heart was clear from any intention of a league with a Canaanite, when
he gave his oath to these disguised strangers: yet he durst neither repeal
it himself, neither do I hear him sue to Eleazar the high Priest, to dispense
with it; but takes himself tied, to the very strict words of his oath; not to
his own purposes. His tongue had bound his heart and hands: so as neither might
stir; lest while he was curious of fulfilling the will of GOD, he should
violate the oath of GOD. And if these Gibeonites had not known these holy
bonds indissoluble, they neither had been so importunate to obtain their vow,
nor durst have trusted it being obtained. If either dispensation with oaths,
or equivocation in oaths, had been known in the world, or at least approved,
these Gibeonites had not lived, and Israel had slain them without sin: Either
Israel wanted skill; or our reseruers, honesty.

The multitude of Israel, when they came to the walls of these four exempted
Cities, itched to be at the spoil: Not out of a desire to fulfill Gods
commandment, but to enrich themselves, would they have fallen upon these
Hiuites; They thought all lost that fell besides their fingers. The wealthy
City of Jericho, was first altogether interdicted them; the walls and houses
either fell, or must be burnt; the men and cattle killed; the goods and
treasure confiscate to GOD. Achans booty shows that City was both rich, and
proud: yet Israel might be no whit the better for them, carrying away nothing
but empty victory; and now four other Cities must be exempted from their
pillage. Many an envious look did Israel therefore cast upon these walls; and
many bitter words did they cast out against their Princes, the enemies of their
gain; whether for swearing, or for that they would not forswear: But
how-soeuer, the Princes might have said in a return to their fraud; We swore
indeed to you, but not the people: yet, if any Israelite had but pulled down
one stone from their walls, or shed one droope of Gibeonitish blood; he had no
less plagued all Israel for perjury, then Achan had before plagued them, for
sacrilege. The sequel shows how GOD would have taken it: For, when three
hundred years after, Saul (perhaps forgetting the vow of his forefathers)
slew some of these Gibeonites, although out of a wel-meant zeal; all Israel
smarted for the fact, with a three years famine, and that in David's reign:
who received this oracle from God, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house,
because he slew the Gibeonites. Neither could this wrong be expiated, but by
the blood of Saul's seven sons, hanged up at the very Court-gates of their
father.

Joshua and the Princes had promised them life; they promised them not
liberty: no covenant was past against their servitude. It was just therefore
with the Rulers of Israel, to make slavery the price both of their lives, and
their deceit. The Israelites had themselves been drudges, if the Gibeonites had
not beguiled them, and lived. The old rags therefore wherewith they came
disguised, must now be their best suites, and their life must be toylesomlie
spent in heawing of wood, and drawing of water, for all Israel. How dear is
life to our nature, that men can be content to purchase it with servitude? It
is the wisdom of Gods children to make good use of their ouer-sights. The rash
oath of Israel, proves their advantage: Even wicked men gain by the outside
of good actions: Good men make a benefit of their sins.

FINIS.
Faults of the Press thus to be corrected.
Read Yea for yet. page 55. line 5. Adoring for adorning. pa. 78. l. vlt.
Contentments for contemners. p. 396. l. 3.



