THE True Peacemaker: Laid forth in a Sermon before his Majesty at Theobalds.
September 19, 1624.

By IOS. HALL Deane of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by J. Haviland for Nath. Butter. 1624.

THE TRVE PEACEMAKER.
ESAIAS 32. 17. Opus Iustitiae pax.

The work of Justice (or righteousness) shall be peace.


MY Text (you hear) is of Justice and peace, two royal graces; and such as
flow from sovereign Majesty: There is a double Justice, Divine and humane;
there is a double peace, outward in the state, inward in the soul:
Accordingly, there is a double sense of my Text; a spiritual, a civil sense:
The spiritual concerning Theological Justice, and inward peace; The civil
concerning humane Justice and outward peace. The spiritual thus; The Messiah
shall cause the fruit of his perfect justice to be our inward peace with God,
and our selves. The civil thus; The Magistrate shall cause the work of civil
Justice in his administration, to be our outward peace with one another: In
both, or either (as Musculus well) there is an allusion in the Hebrew word to a
field; the soil is the heart or the State, the seed is Justice, the fruit
peace: That which was waste ground is now a Carmell, a fruitful field; and the
fruit of this field of Justice is peace.

As there is good reason, we will begin with the spiritual Justice and Peace.

The great King of Heaven will disforest that piece of the world, which he
calls his Church, and put it to tillage; it shall be sown with
righteousness, and shall yield a sweet crop of peace: in this only, not in the
barren heaths of the profane world shall true peace grow.

At first, God and man were good friends: How should there be other than good
terms betwixt Heaven and Paradise? God made man just; and just man (whiles he
was so) could not choose but love the just God that made him; sin set them at
odds; in one act and instant did man leese both his justice and peace; now the
world is changed; now the style of God is Fortis vltor, God the auenger. The
sons of wrath.
God the auenger, Ier. 51. 56. and the style of men* Filij irae, sons of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. There is no possible peace to be made betwixt God and man,
but by the perfect Justice of him that was both God and man: I would there were
a peace in the Church about this Justice; It is pity and shame there is not;
but there must be heresies: As there are two parts of Divinity, the Law and the
Gospel; so each of these have their Justice; there is a justice of the Law,
and an Evangelical Justice* The Justice of the Law when a mere moral man is
justified (out of his own powers) by the works of the Law; very Papists will
give so much way to S. Paul, so much affront to Pelagius, as to renounce this;
freely anathematizing that man who by the strength of humane nature, or the
doctrine of the Law, shall challenge justification; Unless perhaps some
Andradius have privilege to teach, that this Ethica Iustitia, Moral
righteousness.
was enough to justify and save the old Philosophers.

The Evangelical Justice is not without the interuention of a Savior* To
which claim is laid in two kinds, either as imputative, or as inherent; The
inherent wrought in us: the imputed wrought for us. How easy were it to lead
you through a thick of distinctions into a large field of controversy,
concerning the nature, means, manner of our Justification? No head in all
Divinity yields either more, or more important Problems* In so much as
Cardinal De Monte, Vice President for the time of the Council of Trent, in an
Oration made by him in the eleventh session, professes, that when they meant to
dispatch their Decree concerning Justification in fifteen days, it cost them
seven months to finish, without one days intermission; and when all is done,
they have left the world, which was before (as Pighius ingenuously) intricated
by the thorny questions of Schoolmen, rather more unsatisfied and perplexed
than they found it. It is the maine care of our lives, and deaths, what shall
give us peace and acceptance before the dreadful Tribunal of God: What, but
righteousness? What righteousness, or whose? Ours, or Christ's? Ours, in the
inherent graces wrought in us, in the holy works wrought by us; or Christ's, in
his most perfect obedience, and meritorious satisfaction wrought for us,
applied to us. The Tridentine faction is for the former; we are for the
latter; God is as direct on our side as his Word can make him; Every where
blazoning the defects of our own righteousness, the imperfections of our best
Graces, the deadly nature of our least sins; the radical sinfulness of our
habitual concupiscence, the pollution of our best works: Every where
extolling the perfect obedience of our Redeemer, the gracious application of
that obedience, the sweet comfort of that application, the assurance and
vnfailablenesse of that comfort: and lastly, our happy rest in that assurance.
I instance not; open the Book, see where your eyes can look beside these*
Satis aperti (says their Cassander) The Scripture is clear ours, So is all
antiquity, if they believe that learned Arbiter; So are their more ingenuous
Doctors of the last age; So would they all be, if they had grace to know God,
themselves, grace, sin, heaven, hell; God perfectly just, themselves
miserably weak, Grace sensibly imperfect, sin vnmeasurably sinful; Lastly,
if they knew that heaven is for none but the pure, that hell is for the
presumptuous. O Savior, no man is just through thee, but he that is sanctified
by thee; What is our inherent justice, but sanctity? That we aspire toward, we
attain not to; Woe were us if we were not more just in thee, than sanctified
in our selves; we are sanctified, in part, according to the weakness of our
receipt; we are justified thoroughly* according to the perfection of thine
acceptance; were we fully sanctified here, we should be more than men; were we
not thoroughly justified, we should be no more than sinners before thee; whiles
we stand before thee as sinners, we can have no peace; Let others trust in the
Charets and Horses of their own strength, we will remember the Name of the
Lord our God; The work of thy Justice shall be our peace.

Peace is a sweet word; Every body would be glad of it; especially Peace at the
last, as the Psalmist speaks: How have the politickly religious held out twigs
for the drowning soul to catch at? Due satisfactions, undue supererogations,
patronages of Saints, bargains of Indulgences, woollward pilgrimages, and at
last (after whips and haire-clothes) leave the dying soul to a fear of Hell,
doubt of Heaven, assurance of Purgatory flames; How truly may it now say to
these Doctors, as Job to his friends, Miserable comforters are ye all;
Hearken, O ye dear Christians, to a better voice that sounds from heaven;
Come to me all ye that labor, Mat. 11. 28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Is there any of you whose unquiet breast boiles continually with the
conscience of any foul sin? whose heart is daily tired upon by the vultur of
his secret guiltiness? whose bosom is gnawed beforehand with that hellish
Worm, which can no more give over than die? It boots not to ask thee if thou
would have peace. Micah. 6.
Peace? Rather than life; Oh wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and bow
my self before the most high God? Shall I come before him with burnt
offerings? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the
fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Hear, O thou distracted heart;
what talkest thou of giving to the owner? The world is his; thou art not thine
own; Yea, were these things thine, and not his, yet know, it is not giving,
but taking that must procure thy peace: An infinite Justice is offended; an
infinite Justice has satisfied, an infinite mercy has applied it; Take thou
hold by the hand of faith on that infinite mercy, and justice of thy Savior;
The work of his Justice shall be thy peace.

Fly about whither thou will, O thou weary Dove, through all the wide Regions of
the heaven, and waters, thou shall no where find rest for the soles of thy
feet, but in this Arc of Christ's perfect righteousness: In vain shall thou
seek it in schools of morality, in learned Libraries, in spacious fields and
forests, in pleasant gardens, in sullen retiredness, in witty conversation,
in wanton Theaters, in drunken cellers, in tables of gluttony, in beds of lust,
chests of Mammon, whiffes and draughts of intoxication, songs of ribaldry,
sports of recreation; No, no, the more thou seek it in most of these, the
further it flies from thee, the further thou art from finding it; and if these
things may give some poor truce to thy thoughts, it shall soon end in a more
direful war. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked: Stray whither
thou will, O thou wounded heart, through the Lawnds and Woods; alas, the shaft
sticks still in thee, or if that be shaken out, the head; None but the
sovereign Dittany of thy Saviors righteousness can drive it out; and till it
be out, thou can have no peace. In plain terms; would thou have peace?
None but Christ can give it thee; He will give it to none but the penitent,
none but the faithful; Oh spend thy self into the sighs and tears of true
repentance; and then raise thy humbled soul to a lively confidence in thine
all-sufficient Redeemer; Set thy Lord Jesus betwixt God and thy sins; God
cannot see thy debt, but through thine acquittance; By his stripes we are
healed, by his wounds we are stanched, by his death we are quickened, by his
righteousness we are discharged; The work of his righteousness is our peace.
Oh safe and blessed condition of believers; Let sin, Satan, world, death,
hell, do their worst; Romans 8. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect; It is God that
justifies: who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
risen again; who is also at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for
us: Our enemy is now our Father, our Judge is our Savior, the offended our
surety, that precious blood our ransom, that perfect righteousness our
everlasting peace.

Thus much of our spiritual Justice, and Peace. The Civil follows: I know
these two are wide terms; Justice comprises all virtue, as Peace all
blessings; For that is just in all kinds, which has a meet adequation to the
rule; All virtue therefore conforming us to the law of God, which is the rule
of perfection, challenges justly to it self a style of justice.

Narrower bounds will serve our turn: We speak of Justice first as a single
virtue. Habits are distinguished by their acts; acts by their objects. The
object of all moral virtue is good, as of all intellectual, is True. The
object of this virtue of Justice is the good of men in relation to each other;
Other virtues order a man in regard to himself; Justice, in regard to another.
This good being either common, or private; common of all, private of some; the
acts and virtue of Justice must be suitable; Either, as man stands in an
habitude to the whole body; or as he stands to special limbs of the body: The
former of these is that which Philosophers and Casuists call a legal and
universal Justice. The latter is that particular Justice, which we use to
distinguish by Distribution, and Commutation; the one consisting in matter of
Commerce, the other in Reward, or Punishment; both of them according to a meet,
though different, equality: An Arithmeticall equality in Commutation; a
Geometrical in distribution; the former regarding the value, or worth of the
thing, the latter, regarding the proportionable difference of the person. The
work of all these three Justices, is Peace.

First, the legal Justice is the apparent mother and nurse of public Peace:
When Governors and subjects are careful to give each other their own; when
both conspire to command and obey for the common good; when men frame their
lives to the wholesome laws of their Sovereigns, not more out of fear than
conscience; when respect to the community caries men from partial reflections
upon themselves; As contrarily distractions, and private ends are the bane of
any state. When the head and members unite their thoughts and endeavors in the
center of the common good: the head to devise and command, the eyes to see, the
ear to hear, the palate to taste, the heart to move, the bellows of the
lungs to blow, the liver to sanguifie, the stomach to digest, the guts to
export, the hands to execute, the tongue to talk for the good of this natural
Commonwealth of the body, all goes well and happily; but if any of these parts
will be gathering to themselves, and obstructions grow within; and mutinous
distempers arise in the humors, ruin is threatened to the whole: If either the
Superiors miscommand, or the inferiors disobey, it is an affront to Peace. I
need not tell you that good laws are the walls of the City, the sinews of
the politic body, the rule of our life, the life of our state, without which
men would turn brute, yea monstrous; the world were a Chaos, yea an hell. It
is wisdom that makes laws, it is Justice that keeps them; Oh let this Justice
still bless us with a perpetual peace; as those that do not think the world
made for us, but our selves made for the world, let us drive at an universal
good; let there be ever that sweet correspondence betwixt Sovereignty and
subjection, that the one may be happy in the other, both in peace.

Secondly, the distributive Justice is not less fruitful of peace; when
rewards of honors, and gracious respects are suited to the well-deseruing; when
malefactors smart according to their crimes; This Justice has stocks for the
vagrant, whips for harlots, brands for pettylarzons, ropes for fellons, weights
for the contumaciously silent, stakes for blasphemous heretics, gibbets for
murderers, the hurdle, and the knife, and the pole for traitors; and upon all
these engines of Justice hangs the garland of peace. It was not for nothing
that Maximilian the first, passing by the gallows, saluted it with Salve
Iustitia. Ye never see Justice painted without a sword; when that sword
glitters with use, it is well with the public, woe be to the Nation where it
rusts. There can be no more acceptable sacrifice than the blood of the
flagitious. Immediately after Garnets execution, Father David at Ypre; in a
public Sermon declared the miracles shown thereat; Amongst the rest, that a
spring of oil brake forth suddenly in the place where that Saint was martyred;
Instead of a lie, let it be a parable; The blood of Traitors shed by the sword
of Justice, is a well of oil to fatten, and refresh the Commonwealth.

I know well how mercy befits the mouths of Gods Ministers: The soft tongue of
a Divine is no meet whetstone for the edge of severity; but withal, I dare
say, that Justice is a noble work of mercy; neither need we wish to be more
charitable, than the God of mercy that says, Thine eye shall not spare the
murderer, Numb. 35. 31. The Tempter to idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. The very sons
of Leui were appointed to win an everlasting blessing, by consecrating their
hands to God in Israelitish blood: The unjust favor, and plausibilitie of
Romish Doctors, toward capital offenders, has made their Sanctuaries (even
literally) a den of thieves, an harbor of villainy. It is memorable of Lewis
of France, (styled the Saint) that he reuersed a pardon wrought from him to a
malefactor; upon reading that verse in the Psalm, Psalm. 106. 3.
Beati qui faciunt iustitiam in omni tempore; Blessed are they that do justice
at all times: No marvel if one of those four things which Isabell of Spain
was wont to say, she loved to see; were, A Thief upon the ladder; Even through
his halter might she see the prospect of peace. Woe be to them that either for
gain or private interest engage themselves in the suit of favor to
maliciously bloody hands; that, by the dam of their bribes labor to stop the
due course of punitiue Justice; these, these are the enemies of peace; these
stain the land with that Crimson die, that cannot be washed out but by many
woeful lauers of revenge: Far, far be it from any of you, generous
Christians, to endeavor either to corrupt, or interrupt the ways of judgment,
or for a private benefit to cross the public peace: Woe be to those partial
Judges, that justify the wicked, and condemn the innocent; the girdle of
whose equity saggs down on that side where the purse hangs: Lastly, woe to
those unworthy ones that raise themselves by fraud, bribes, symony, sacrilege;
therefore are these enemies to the state, because to peace; and therefore
enemies to peace, because violaters of justice, And the work of Justice is
peace.

Thirdly, that commutatiue Justice works peace; needs no other proof than
that all the real brabbles and suits amongst men, arise from either true or
pretended injustice of contracts. Let me lead you in a term morning to the
spacious Hall of Justice: What is the cause of all that concourse? that
Hiue-like murmur? that noise at the bar, but injurious bargains, fraudulent
conueyances, false titles, disappointment of trusts, wrongful detrusions of
money, goods, lands, couzenages, oppressions, extortions: Could the honesty and
private Justice of men prevent these enormities, silence and solitude would
dwell in that wide Palace of Justice; neither would there be more Pleas than
Cob-webs under that vast roof. Every way therefore it is clear, that the
work of Justice is peace; In so much as the Guardians of peace are called
Iusticers.

This for the Commonwealth; If it please you to cast your eyes upon her Sister
the Church, you shall find that the outward peace thereof also must arise from
Justice. Alas; thence is our hopelesnesse: Never may they prosper that love
not, that wish not peace within those sacred walls; but what possibility of
peace in the peremptory repulses of Justice? What possibility of Justice in the
long usurped tyranny of the successor of Romulus? Could we hope to see Justice
once shine from those seven hills, we would make account of peace; but, oh, the
miserable injustice of that imperious Sea; Injustice of claim, injustice of
practice. Of claim, over Kings, Church, Scriptures, Conscience: Over Kings;
there is S. Paul's super-exalted ((...);) His usual title is Orbis Dominus;
Lord of the world.
Dominus vniuersorum in the mouths and pens of his flatterers: And lest
Princes should seem exempted; He is Rex Regum, Over Emperors and Kings.
as Paulus 4. says of himself; he is super Imperatores and reges, says their
Antoninus, Triumphus, Capistranus, and who not? How much? you know the
calculation of the magnitude of the two great lights: How over them? As the
master over the servant; they are the words of their Pope Nicholas; Whence but
from us?
The Imperial throne is vnde nisi a nobis, says Pope Adrian: What should I
tell you of his bridle, stirrup, toe, cup, canopie? Let the book of holy
Ceremonies say the rest; These things are stale, The world has long seen and
blushed.

Over the Church; There is challenged a proper head-ship from whom all
influences of life, sense, motion come; as their Bozius; why said I over? He
is under the Church: For he is the foundation of the Church says Bellarmine;
Over as the head, under as the foundation? What can Christ be more? Thence,
where are general counsels but under him as the stream of Jesuits; Who but
he is, regulafidei, as their Andradius: he alone has infallibility and
indefectibility, In decrees of faith or precepts of manners.
whether in decretis fidei, or in praeceptis morum, as Bellarmine. He has
power to make new Creeds, and to obtrude them to the Church; the denial
whereof was one of those Articles which Leo the tenth condemned in Luther.

Over Scriptures. There is claimed a power to authorize them for such; A power
to interpret them, sententialiter and Obligatorie, being such; A power to
dispense with them, ex causa, though such.

Over the consciences of men; In dispensing with their oaths, in allowance of
their sins. It is one head of their Canon Law, He absolues from the oath of
Allegiance.
A Iuramento fidelitatis absoluit, Decret. p. 2. Cause. 15. qu. 6. And in every
oath is understood a reservation and exception of the Popes power, say his
Parasites.

I am ashamed to tell, and you would blush to hear of the dispensation
reported to be granted by Sixtus 4. to the family of the Cardinal of Saint
Lucie; and by Alexander 6. to Peter Mendoza Cardinal of Valentia.

And as there is horrible injustice in these claims; so is there no less in
practice. Take a taste for all: What can be more unjust than to cast out of the
lap of the Church those that oppose their novelties, to condemn them to the
stake, to hell for Heretics. What more unjust than to falsify the writings of
ancient, or modern authors by secret expurgations by wilful mis-editions?
what more unjust than the with holding the remedy of general Councels, and
transacting all the affairs of the Church by a pack't Conclaue? What more
unjust than the suppression of the Scriptures, and mutilation of the Sacrament
to the Laity. What more unjust than allowance of equivocation; than upholding a
faction by willing falsehood of rumors, than plotting the subversion of King and
state by unnatural conspiracies? Well may we call heaven and earth to record
against the injustice of these claims, of these practices. What then? Is it to
hope for peace, notwithstanding the continuance of all these? So the work of
Injustice shall be peace: And an unjust and unsound peace must it needs be that
arises from Injustice; Is it to hope they will abandon these things for Peace?
Oh that the Church of God might once be so happy: That there were but any life
in that possibility; In the mean time, let God and his holy Angels witness
betwixt us, that on their part the peace fails; we are guiltless: What have
we done? What have we attempted? what have we innouated? Only we have stood
upon a just and modest negative, and have unjustly suffered. Oh that all the
innocent blood we have shed could wash their hands from Injustice, from enmity
to Peace.

That from them we may return to our selves; For the public, we enjoy an
happy Peace; Blessed be God for Justice: and if in this common harmony of
Peace, there be found some private iarres of discord, whence is it but from our
own Injustice? The world is of another mind; whose wont is to censure him
that punishes the fault, not him that makes it; Severity, not guiltiness in
common opinion, breaks the peace* Let the question be who is the great
makebate of the world; begin with the family: Who troubles the house? The like
discourse to this ye shall find in Conrad. Schlusselburgius in his preface to
his 13 th. book Catal. Haeret.
Not unruly, head strong, debaucht, children, that are ready to throw the house
out of the windows, but the nustere father, that reproues, that corrects them;
would he wink at their disorders, all would be quiet. Not careless,
sloathfull, false, lime-fingred servants, but the strict master, that observes
and rates, and chastises them; would he hold his hands, and tongue, there would
be peace.

Not the peevish and turbulent wife, who forgetting the ribbe, vsurps upon the
head, but the resolute husband, that hates to leesse his authority in his love;
remembering that though the ribbe be near the heart, yet the head is above the
shoulders; Would he fall from the terms of his honor, there would be peace.

In the Country, not the oppressing Gentleman, that tyrannizes over his
Cottagers, incroches upon his neighbors inheritance, incloses commons,
depopulates villages, scruzes his Tenants to death, but the poor souls that
when they are crushed, yield the juice of tears, exhibit bills of complaint,
throw open the new thorns, maintain the old mounds; would these men be
content to be quietly racked, and spoiled, there would be peace.

In the City; not the impure Sodomitish brothels, that sell themselves to work
wickedness; not the abominable Pandars, not the iugling cheater, not the
counterfeit Vagrant, but the Marshall that draws these to correction; Not the
deceitful Merchant that sophisticates his commodities, inhanceth prices, sells
every inch of (what he cannot warrant) Time; Not the unconscionable and
fraudulent Artisan, but the promoter and the Bench.

In the Commonwealth, not the cruel robber by sea or land, that lies in the
way, like a spider in a window, for a booty, for blood: Not the bold
night-walker that keeps savage hours fit for the guilty intentions of his
burglaries, but the watch that takes him; Not the rank adulterer that neighs
after his neighbors wife, and thirsts after only stolen waters, but the sworn
men that present him. Not the traiterous Coyner, that in every stamp reads
his own conviction, whiles he still renewes that face against which he
offends, but the Sheriff that attaches him.

Not the vnreformable drunkard, that makes a God of his liquor, a beast of
himself, and raues, and swaggers in his cups, but the Constable that punishes
him; would these officers conniue at all these villainies, there would be peace.

In the Church, not the chaffering Patron, or perjured chaplain; not the
seducing heretic, or seditious schismatike; not the scandalous Leuite, not
the careless questman, not the corrupt Official, but the clamorous Preacher,
or the rigorous High Commission. In the world, lastly, Not the ambitious
incrochers upon others dominions, not violaters of leagues, not usurpers of
mis-gotten titles and dignities, not suborners, or abettors of conspiracies,
and traitors, but the unkind patients that will not recipere ferrum: I wis the
great Potentates of the world might see a ready way to Peace.

Thus in family, country, city, commonwealth, Church, world, the greatest
part seek a licentious peace in a disordered lawlessenesse; condemning true
justice of cruelty* stripping her of the honor of peace, branding her with the
censure of troublesome. Foolish men speak foolish things: Oh noble and
incomparable blessing of peace, how injuriously art thou ascribed to unjust
neglect? Oh divine Virtue of Justice, how deservedly have the Ancients given
thee wings, and sent thee up to heaven in a detestation of these earthly
indignities; whence thou comst not down at all, unless it please that
essential and infinite Justice to communicate thee to some choice favorites.
It is but a just word, that this Island has been long approved the darling of
heaven; We have enjoyed peace, to the admiration, to the envy of
neighborhood: Would we continue it? would we traduce it to ours? Justice must
do it for us. Both Justice, and Peace, are from the throne; Peace is the Kings
Peace; and Justice descends from Sovereignty by commission; Let me have leave
to say with the princely Prophet (a word that was too good for the frequent
text of a Pope) Diligite iustitiam qui iudicatis terram. Still, o God, give thy
judgments to the King, and thy Justice to the Kings son. And if any shall
offer wrong to the Lords anointed in his person, in his seed, the work of that
injustice shall be war; yea Bellum Domini, the Lords war, (2 Samuel 25. 28) Then
let him who is both the Lord of Hosts, and the God of peace, rise up mightily
for his anointed, the true King of Peace; that he who has graciously said all
this while, Da pacem, Domine, Give peace in our time, O Lord, may superscribe
at the last his just Trophies, with, Blessed be the Lord which teaches my
hands to war, and my fingers to fight.

Ye have heard of the spiritual Justice and Peace; Ye have heard of the
Civil; may it please you to mix both of them together: My text alone does it;
if you do but with our most accurate Translation, read Righteousness for
Justice; So shall you see the spiritual disposition of Righteousness produce
the civil effect of Peace, What is Righteousness, but the sincere vprightnes
of the heart to God in all our ways: He is perfect with God, that would be so:

What need I tell you that this is the way to true inward peace, Nil conscire,
Not to be guilty of ill.
A clear heart will be a quiet one. There is no feast to a good conscience;
this is meat, music, welcome; It seems harder that true spiritual honesty
should procure even outward peace: Hear wise Solomon; By the blessing of the
upright, the city is exalted, Prou. 11. 11. When a man's ways please the Lord,
he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prou. 16. 7.
Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prou.
14. 34. It follows then as a just corollary, That the honestest, and
conscionablest man is the best subject: He may perhaps be plain, perhaps
poor, perhaps weak, but the state is more beholden to his integrity, than to
the ablest purse, than to the strongest arm; Whereas the graceless, and
vicious person, let him be never so plausible a talker, never so careful an
Officer, never so valiant a Leader, never so officious a courtier, never so
deep in subsidies, never so forward in actions, is no other than an enemy to
the state, which he professes to adore. An ill man, a good subject.
Let no Philosopher tell me of, malus vir bonus ciuis; I say from better
authority, that a lewd man can no more be a good subject, than an ill subject
can be a good man: Hear this then (wheresoever ye are) ye secret oppressors,
ye profane scoffers, ye foul-mouthed swearers, ye close adulterers, ye kind
dru^kards, and who ever come within this black list of wickedness, how can ye
be loyal, whiles you lodge traitors in your bosoms? Protest what ye will;
your sins break the peace, and conspire against the sacred Crown, and
dignity of your Sovereign; What care we that you draw your sword, and vow
your blood, and drink your healths to your Governors, when in the mean while
you provoke God to anger, and set quarrels betwixt your Country and Heaven?

That I may wind up this clew; It were folly to commend to you the worth of
peace; we know that the excellency of Princes is expressed by serenity; what
good has the earth which God does not couch under the name of Peace? Blessed
be God, and his Anointed, we have long and comfortably tasted the sweetness of
this blessing; the Lilies and Lions of our Solomon have been justly worded
with Beati pacifici. Would we have this happiness perpetuated to us, to
posterity? Oh let Prince and people meet in the ambition to be Gens iusta, a
righteous nation, righteous every way; First, let God have his own; His own
days, his own services; his fear, his love, his all: Let Religion lead all
our proiects, not follow them; let our lives be led in a conscionable obedience
to all the laws of our maker: Far be all blasphemies, curses, and obscenities
from our tongues, all outrages and violences from our hands; all presumptuous
and rebellious thoughts from our hearts. Let our hearts, hands, tongues, lives,
bodies and souls be sincerely devoted to him. Then, for men: let us give
Caesar his own: Tribute, fear, subjection, loyalty, and (if he need) our
lives; Let the nobility have honor, obcisance, observation; Let the Clergy
have their dues, and our reverence; Let the commons have truth, love, fidelity
in all their transactions: Let there be trutinae iustae, pondera iusta: Leu.
19. 36. Just balances, just weights.
Let there be no grinding of faces, no trampling on the poor ( Amos 5. 11.) no
swallowing of widows houses, no force, no fraud, no perjury, no
perfidiousnesse.

Finally, for our selves; let every man possess his vessel in holiness and
honor; framing himself to all Christian and heavenly temper, in all wisdom,
sobriety, chastity, meekness, constancy, moderation, patience, and sweet
contentation: so shall the work of our righteousness be peace of heart,
peace of state; private and public peace; Peace with our selves, peace with
the world, peace with God; temporal peace here, eternal peace and glory
above: unto the fruition whereof, he who has ordained us, mercifully bring us
for the sake of him, who is the Prince of Peace, Jesus Christ the righteous.

FINIS.

