Contemplations UPON THE Principal passages of the Holy STORY.

^

By IOS. HALL.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Henry Fetherstone. 1618.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, the LORD HAY, Baron of SALEY,
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
RIGHT HO:
Upon how just reason these my Contemplations go forth so late after their
fellows, it were needless to give account to your LO: in whose train I had
the honor (since my last) to pass both the SEA, and the TWEDE. All my private
studies have gladly vayled to the public services of my Sovereign Master: No
sooner could I recover the happiness of my quiet thoughts, then I renewed this
my divine task: Wherein I cannot but profess to place so much contentment, as
that I wish not any other measure of my life, then it; What is this other, then
the exaltation of ISAACS delight to walk forth into the pleasant fields of the
Scriptures, and to meditate of nothing under heaven? Yea what other then JACOBS
sweet vision of Angels, climbing up and down that sacred ladder, which GOD
has set betwixt heaven and earth? Yea (to rise yet hyer) what other then an
imitation of holy MOSES, in his conuersing with GOD himself, on the Horeb of
both Testaments? And if I may call your LO: forth a little from your great
affairs of Court and State, to bless your eyes with this prospect, how happy
shall you confess this change of objects? and how unwillingly shall you
obtain leave of your thoughts to return unto these sublunary employments? Our
last discourse left God's ARK amongst the Philistims; now we return to see
what it does there, and to fetch it thence: Wherein your LO: shall find the
reuenges of God never so deadly, as when he gives most way unto men; The vain
confidence of wickedness ending in a late repentance; The fearful plagues of a
presumptuous sauciness with God, not prevented with the honesty of good
intentions; The mercy of God accepting the services of an humble faithfulness in
a meaner dress. From thence you shall see the dangerous issue of an affected
innovation, although to the better; The errors of credulity, and blind
affection in the holiest governors, guilty of the peoples coffeehouse; The
stubburne heddinesse of a multitude that once finds the reins slack in their
necks, not capable of any pause, but their own fall; The untrusty promises of
a fair outside, and a plausible entrance, shutting up in a woeful
disappointment. What do I forestall a discourse so full of choice; your LO:
shall find e^^cry line useful, and shall willingly confess that the story of
God can make a man not less wise, then good.

Mine humble thankfulness knows not how to express it self otherwise, then in
these kind of presents, and in my hearty prayers for the increase of your
Honor, and Happiness, which shall never be wanting from

Your Lo: sincerely and thankfully devoted, IOS: HALL.


Contemplations.
THE ARC and DAGON.
MEN could not arise to such height of impiety, if they did not mistake God:
The acts of his just judgment are imputed to impotence; that God would send
his Arc captive to the Philistims, is so construed by them, as if he could not
keep it: The wife of Phinehas cried out, that glory was departed from Israel;
The Philistims dare say in triumph, that glory is departed from the God of
Israel; The Arc was not Isreal's, but Gods, this victory reaches higher then to
men. Dagon had never so great a day, so many sacrifices, as now that he seems
to take the God of Israel prisoner; Where should the captive be bestowed, but
in the custody of the Victor: It is not love, but insultation, that lodges the
Arc close beside Dagon: What a spectacle was this, to see uncircumcised
Philistims laying their profane hands upon the testimony of Gods presence? to
see the glorious mercy seat under the roof of an Idol? to see the two
Cherubins spreading their wings under a false God?

OH the deep and holy wisdom of the Almighty, which ouer-reaches all the
finite conceit of his creature, who while he seems most to neglect himself,
fetches about most glory to his own name; He winks, and sits still on purpose,
to see what men would do, and is content to suffer indignity from his
creature, for a time, that he may be everlastingly magnified in his justice,
and power: That honor pleases God and men best, which is raised out of
contempt.

THE Ark of God was not used to such porters; The Philistims carry it unto
Ashdod, that the victory of Dagon may be more glorious: What pains
superstition puts men unto, for the triumph of a false cause? And if profane
Philistims can think it no toil to carry the Arc where they should not, what
a shame is it for us, if we do not gladly attend it where we should? How
justly may Gods truth scorn the imparitie of our zeal?

IF the Isralites did put confidence in the Arc, can we marvel that the
Philistims did put confidence in that power which (as they thought) had
conquered the Arc? The less is ever subject unto the greater; What could they
now think, but that heaven and earth were theirs? Who shall stand out against
them, when the God of Israel has yielded? Security and presumption attend
ever at the threshold of ruin.

GOD will let them sleep in this confidence; in the morning they shall find,
how vainly they have dreamed. Now they begin to find they have but gloryed in
their own plague, and overthrown nothing but their own peace: Dagon has an
house, when God has but a Tabernacle; It is no measuring of religion by
outward glory: Into this house the proud Phoenitians come, the next morning, to
congratulate unto their god, so great a captive, such divine spoils, and in
their early devotions to fall down before him, under whom the God of Israel
was fallen: and lo, where they find their god, fallen down on the ground upon
his face, before him, whom they thought both his prisoner, and theirs: Their
god is forced to do that, which they should have done voluntarily; although
God casts down that dumb rival of his, for scorn, not for adoration. Oh ye
foolish Philistims, could ye think that the same house could hold GOD and
DAGON? could ye think a senseless stone, a fit companion and guardian, for
the living GOD? Had ye laid your Dagon upon his face, prostrate before the
Arc, yet would not God have endured the indignity of such a lodging; but now,
that ye presume to set up your carved stone, equal to his Cherubins, go read
your folly in the floor of your temple, and know that he which cast your god
so low, can cast you lower.

THE true God owes a shame to those which will be making matches betwixt
himself and Belial.

BUT this perhaps, was only a mischance, or a neglect of attendance, lay to
your hands, o ye Philistims, and raise up Dagon into his place; It is a
miserable god that needs helping up; Had ye not been more senseless then
that stone, how could you choose but think, How shall he raise us above our
enemies, that cannot rise alone? how shall he establish us in the station of
our peace, that cannot hold his own foot? If Dagon did give the foil unto the
God of Israel, what power is it, that has cast him upon his face, in his own
Temple? It is just with God, that those which want grace shall want wit too; it
is the power of superstition, to turn men into those stocks, and stones, which
they worship: They that make them are like unto them; Doubtless, this first
fall of Dagon was kept as secret, and excused as well as it might, and served
rather for astonishment, then conviction; there was more strangenes then horror
in that accident; that whereas Dagon had wont to stand, and the Philistims fall
down, now Dagon fell down, and the Philistims stood, and must become the
patrons of their own god; their god worships them upon his face, and craves
more help from them, then ever he could give: But if their sottishnes can
digest this all is well. Dagon is set in his place, and now those hands are
lift up to him, which helped to lift him up; and those faces are prostrate unto
him, before whom he lay prostrate. Idolatry and superstition are not easily put
out of countenance; But will the ielosie of the true God put it up thus? Shall
Dagon escape with an harmless fall? Surely, if they had let him lie still
upon the p^^ement, perhaps that insensible statue had found no other revenge;
but now, they will be advancing it to the rood-loft again, and affront God's Ark with it, the event will shame them, and let them know, how much God
scorns a partner, either of his own making, or theirs.

THE morning is fittest for devotion, then do the Philistims flock to the
temple of their god; What a shame is it for us to come late to ours? Although,
not so much piety as curiosity did now hasten their speed, to see what rest
their Dagon was allowed to get in his own roof; and now behold their kind
god is come to meet them in the way; some pieces of him salute their eyes upon
the threshold. Dagons head and hands are overrun their fellows, to tell the
Philistims how much they were mistaken in a god.

THIS second fall breaks the Idol in pieces, and threats the same confusion to
the worshippers of it. Easy warnings neglected end ever in destruction. The
head is for devising, the hand for execution; In these two powers of their god,
did the Philistims chiefly trust; these are therefore laid under their feet,
upon the threshold, that they might a far of see their vanity, and that (if
they would) they might set their foot on that best piece of their god, whereon
their heart was set.

THERE was nothing wherein that Idol resembled a man, but in his head, and
hands, the rest was but a scaly portraiture of a fish, God would therefore
separate from this stone, that part, which had mocked man, with the counterfeit
of himself; that man might see what an unworthy lump he had matched with
himself, and set up above himself: The just quarrel of God is bent upon
those means, and that parcel which have dared to rob him of his glory.

How can the Philistims now miss the sight of their own folly? how can they
be but enough convicted of their mad idolatry, to see their god lie broken to
morsells, under their feet? every piece whereof proclaims the power of him
that brake it, and the stupiditie of those that adored it? Who would expect any
other issue of this act, but to hear the Philistims say, we now see how
superstition has blinded us? Dagon is no god for us, our hearts shall never
more rest upon a broken statue: That only true God, which has beaten ours,
shall challenge us by the right of conquest: But here was none of this; rather
a further degree of their dotage follows upon this palpable conviction: They
cannot yet suspect that god, whose head they may trample upon, but in steed of
hating their Dagon, that lay broken upon their threshold, they honor the
threshold, on which Dagon lay; and dare not set their foot on that place,
which was hallowed by the broken head, and hands of their Deity: Oh the
obstinacy of Idolatry, which where it has got hold of the heart, knows
neither to blush, nor yield, but rather gathers strength from that which might
justly confound it. The hand of the Almighty, which moved them not in falling
upon their god, falls now nearer them upon their persons, and strikes them in
their bodies, which would not feel themselves stricken in their Idol: Pain
shall humble them, whom shame cannot. Those which had entertained the secret
thoughts of abominable Idolatry within them, are now plagued in the inwardest
and most secret part of their bodies, with a loathsome disease; and now grow
weary of themselves, in stead of their idolatry. I do not hear them
acknowledge it was Gods hand, which had stricken Dagon their god, till now,
they find themselves stricken: Gods judgments are the rack of godless men;
If one strain make them not confess, let them be stretched but one wrench
hyer, and they cannot be silent. The just auenger of sin will not loose the
glory of his executions, but will have men know from whom they smart.

THE emerods were not a disease beyond the compass of natural causes, neither
was it hard for the wiser sort, to give a reason of their complaint, yet they
ascribe it to the hand of God: The knowledge and operation of secondary causes
should be no prejudice to the first; They are worse then the Philistims, who
when they see the means, do not acknowledge the first mouer; whose active and
just power is no less seen in employing ordinary agents, then in raising up
extraordinary; neither does he less smite by a common fever, then a revenging
Angel.

THEY judge right of the cause, what do they resolve for the cure? (Let not
the Arc of the God of Israel abide with us) where they should have said, let
us cast out Dagon, that we may pacify and retain the God of Israel, they
determine to thrust out the Ark of God, that they might peaceably enjoy
themselves, and Dagon: Wicked men are upon all occasions glad to be rid of God,
but they can with no patience, endure to part with their sins, and whiles they
are weary of the hand that punishes them, they hold fast the cause of their
punishment.

THEIR first and only care is to put away him, who as he has corrected, so
can ease them. Folly is never separated from wickedness.

THEIR heart told them that they had no right to the Arc. A counsel is called
of their Princes, and Priests: If they had resolved to send it home, they had
done wisely; Now they do not carry it away, but they carry it about from
Ebenezer to Ashdod, from Ashdod to Gath, from Gath to Ekron: Their stomach was
greater then their conscience; The Arc was too sore for them, yet it was too
good for Israel; and they will rather dye, then make Israel happy. Their
conceit that the change of air could appease the Arc, God uses to his own
advantage; for by this means his power is known, and his judgments spread
over all the country of the Philistims: What do these men now, but send the
plague of God to their fellows? The justice of God can make the sins of men
their mutual executioners; It is the fashion of wicked men to draw their
neighbors into the partnership of their condemnation.

Wheresoever the Arc goes, there is destruction; the best of Gods ordinances,
if they be not proper to us, are deadly. The Israelites did not more shout for
joy, when they saw the Arc come to them, then the Ekronites cry out for
grief, to see it brought amongst them: Spiritual things are either sovereign,
or hurtful, according to the disposition of the receivers. The Arc does
either save, or kill, as it is entertained.

AT last, when the Philistims are well weary of pain and death, they are glad
to be quit of their sin; The voice of the Princes and people is changed to
the better, (Send away the Arc of the God of Israel, and let it return to his
own place,) God knows how to bring the stubbornnest enemy upon his knees,
and makes him do that out of fear, which his best child would do out of
love and duty: How miserable was the estate of these Philistims? Every man was
either dead, or sick: those that were left living (through their extremity of
pain) envied the dead, and the the cry of their whole Cities went up to
heaven. It is happy that God has such store of plagues and thunderbolts for
the wicked: If he had not a fire of judgment, wherewith the yron-hearts of men
might be made flexible, he would want obedience, and the world peace.

THE ARKES Revenge and Return.
IT had wont to be a sure rule, wheresoever God is among men, there is the
Church: Here only it failed: The testimony of Gods presence was many months
amongst the Philistims, for a punishment to his own people, whom he left; for
a curse to those forrainers, which entertained it; Israel was seven months
without God: How do we think faithful Samuel took this absence? How
desolate, and forlorn did the tabernacle of God look, without the Arc? There
were still the Altars of God, his Priests, Levites, tables, vailes, censers,
with all the legal accoustrements: These without the Arc, were as the Sun
without light, in the midst of an eclipse: If all these had bin taken away, and
only the Arc had bin remaining, the loss had bin nothing to this, that the
Arc should be gone, and they left: For what are all these without God, and how
all-sufficient is God without these? There are times, wherein God withdrawes
himself from his Church, and seems to leave her without comfort, without
protection: Sometimes we shall find Israel taken from the Arc, other-whiles
the Arc is taken from Israel: In either, there is a separation betwixt the
Arc and Israel: Heavy times to every true Israelite, yet such, as whose
example may relieve us in our desertions: Still was this people Israel; the
seed of him, that would not be left of God without a blessing; and therefore
without the testimony of his presence, was God present with them: It were wide
with the faithful, if God were not oftentimes with them, when there is no
witness of his presence.

ONE act was a mutual penance to the Israelites and Philistims, I know not to
whether more: Israel grieved for the loss of that, whose presence grieved the
Philistims, their pain was therefore no other then voluntary: It is strange,
that the Philistims would endure seven months smart with the Arc, since they
saw, that the presence of that prisoner would not requite, no nor mitigate to
them, one hours misery: Foolish men will be struggling with God, till they be
utterly either breathless, or impotent. Their hope was, that time might abate
displeasure, even whiles they persisted to offend: The false hopes of worldly
men cost them dear, they could not be so miserable, if their own hearts did
not deceive them with mis-expectations of impossible favor.

IN matters, that concern a God, who is so fit to be consulted with, as the
Priests? The Princes of the Philistims had before given their voices, yet
nothing is determined, nothing is done without the direction, and assent of
those, whom they accounted sacred: Nature it self sends us in divine things,
to those persons, whose calling is divine: It is either distrust, or
presumption, or contempt, that carries us our own ways in spiritual matters,
without aduising with them, whose lips God has appointed to preserve
knowledge: There cannot but arise many difficulties in us about the Ark of God, whom should we consult with but those, which have the tongue of the
learned?

DOVBTLES, this question of the Arc did abide much debating: There wanted not
fair probabilities on both sides: A wise Philistim might well plead, If God
had either so great care of the Arc, or power to retain it, how is it become
ours? A wiser then he would reply; If the God of Israel had wanted either care
or power, Dagon, and we had been still whole; why do we thus groan, and dye,
all that are but within the air of of the Arc, if a divine hand do not attend
it? Their smart pleads enough for the dismission of the Arc: The next demand
of their Priests and Soothsayers, is, how it should be sent home: Affliction
had made them so wise, as to know, that every fashion of parting with the Arc
would not satisfy the owner: oftentimes the circumstance of an action marres
the substance: In divine matters we must not only look, that the body of our
service be sound, but that the clothes be fit: Nothing hinders, but that
sometimes good advise may fall from the mouth of wicked men. These
superstitious Priests can counsel them not to send away the Ark of God empty,
but to give it a sin-offering: They had not lived so far from the smoke of
the Jewish Altars, but that they knew, God was accustomed to manifold
oblations, and chiefly to those of expiation. No Israelite could have said
better: Superstition is the ape of true devotion, and if we look not to the
ground of both, many times it is hard by the very outward acts to distinguish
them: Nature it self teaches us, that God loves a full hand: He that has
been so bountiful to us, as to give us all, looks for a return of some
offering from us; If we present him with nothing but our sins, how can we
look to be accepted? The sacrifices under the gospel are spiritual, with
these must we come into the presence of God, if we desire to carry away
remission and favor.

THE Philistims knew well, that it were bootlesse for them to offer, what they
listed, their next suite is to be directed in the matter of their oblation:
Pagans can teach us, how vnsaf^^ it is to walk in the ways of religion,
without a guide, yet here, their best teachers can but guess at their duty,
and must devise for the people, that, which the people durst not impose upon
themselves: The golden Emerods and Mise were but coniecturall prescripts: With
what security may we consult with them, which have their directions from the
mouth and hand of the Allmighty?

GOD stroke the Philistims at once in their god, in their bodies, in their
land: In their god, by his ruin, and dismembring: nI their bodies by the
Emerods: In their land, by the Mise: That base vermin did God send among them
on purpose to shame their Dagon, and them, that they might see, how unable
their god was (which they thought the Victor of the Arc) to subdue the least
Mouse, which the true God did create, and command to plague them: This plague
upon their fields, began together with that upon their bodies, it was not
mentioned, not complained of, till they think of dismissing the Arc: Greater
crosses do commonly swallow up the less: At least, lesser evils are either
silent or unheard, while the ear is filled with the clamor of greater. Their
very Princes were punished with the mise, as well as the emerods; God knows no
persons in the execution of judgments, the least and meanest of all Gods
creatures is sufficient to be the revenger of his Creator.

GOD sent them mise, and emerods of flesh, and blood: they return him both
these of gold, to imply, both, that these judgments came out from God, and
that they did gladly give him the glory of that, whereof he gave them pain
and sorrow, and that they would willingly buy off their pain, with the best of
their substance: The proportion betwixt the complaint and satisfaction is more
precious to him, then the metal. There was a public confession in this
resemblance, which is so pleasing unto God, that he rewards it, even in wicked
men, with a relaxation of outward punishment. The number was no less
significant, then the form: Five golden emerods, and mise for the five
Princes, and divisions of Philistims: As God made no difference in punishing,
so they make none in their oblation; The people are comprised in them, in whom
they are united, their several Princes: They were one with their Prince, their
offering is one with his; as they were ringleaders in the sin, so must they
be in the satisfaction: In a multitude, it is ever seen, as in a beast, that
the body follows the head. Of all others great men had need to look to their
ways, it is in them, as in figures, one stands for a thousand: One offering
serves not all, there must be five, according to the five heads of the offense.
Generalities will not content God; every man must make his several peace, if
not in himself, yet in his head: Nature taught them a shadow of that, the
substance and perfection whereof is taught us by the grace of the Gospel; Every
soul must satisfy God, if not in it self, yet in him, in whom we are both
one, and absolute: we are the body, whereof Christ is the head, our sin is in
our selves, our satisfaction must be in him.

SAMVEL himself could not have spoken more divinely, then these Priests of
Dagon; they do not only talk of giving glory to the God of Israel, but fall
into an holy and grave expostulation (wherefore then should ye harden your
hearts, as the Egyptians, and Pharaoh hardened their hearts, when he wrought
wonderfully among them? etc.) They confess a supereminent, and revenging hand
of God over their gods, they parallel their plagues with the Egyptian, they
make use of Pharaohs sin, and judgment; What could be better said? All
religions have afforded them, that could speak well: These good words left
them still both Philistims, and superstitious: How should men be hypocrites, if
they had not good tongues? yet (as wickedness can hardly hide it self) these
holy speeches are not without a tincture of that Idolatry, wherewith the heart
was infected: For they profess care not only of the persons, and lands of the
Philistims, but of their gods; (that he may take his hand from you, and from
your gods.) Who would think, that wisdom and folly could lodge so near
together? that the same men should have care both of the glory of the true God,
and the preservation of the false? that they should be so vain, as to take
thought for those gods, which they granted to be obnoxious unto an hyer Deity?
Oft-times even one word bewrays a whole pack of falsehood, and though
superstition be a cleanly counterfeit, yet some one slip of the tongue discouers
it, as we say of Devils, which though they put on fair forms, yet are they
known by their cloven feet.

WHAT other warrant these superstitious Priests had for the maine substance of
their advise, I know not, sure I am, the probability of the event was fair;
that two kine never used to any yoke, should run from their calves (which
were newly shut up from them) to draw the Arc home in a contrary way, must
needs argue an hand above nature; What else should overrule brute creatures to
prefer a forced carriage unto a natural burden? What should carry them from
their own home, toward the home of the Arc? What else should guide an
untamed and untaught teame, in as right a path toward Israel, as their teachers
could have gone? What else could make very beasts more wise, then their
masters? There is a special providence of God in the very motions of brute
creatures; Neither Philistims nor Israelites saw ought that drove them, yet
they saw them so run, as those that were led by a divine conduct. The
reason-lesse creatures also do the the will of their Maker; every act that is
done either by them, or to them, makes up the decree of the Almighty; and if in
extraordinary actions and events his hand is more visible, yet it is no less
certainly present in the common.

LITTLE did the Israelites of Bethshemesh look for such a sight, whiles they
were reaping their wheat in the valley, as to see the Ark of God come running
to them, without a conuoy; neither can it be said, whether they were more
affected with joy, or with astonishment, with joy at the presence of the Arc,
with astonishment at the miracle of the transportation: Down went their
sickles, and now every man runs to reap the comfort of this better harvest,
to meet that bread of Angels, to salute those Cherubims, to welcome that God,
whose absence had bin their death: But, as it is hard not to ouer-ioy in a
sudden prosperity, and, to use happiness is no less difficult, then to
forbear it; These glad Israelites cannot see, but they must gaze; they cannot
gaze on the glorious outside, but they must be (whether out of rude iollity, or
curiosity, or suspicion of the purloyning some of those sacred implements)
prying into the secrets of God's Ark: Nature is too subject to extremities, and
is ever either too dull in want, or wanton in fruition: It is no easy matter
to keep a mean, whether in good, or evil.

BETHSHEMESH was a City of Priests, they should have known better, how to
demean themselves toward the Arc; this privilege doubled their offense:
There was no malice in this curious inquisition, the same eyes that looked into
the Arc, looked also up to heaven in their offerings, and the same hands, that
touched it, offered sacrifice to the God that brought it. Who could expect any
thing now but acceptance? who would suspect any danger? It is not a following
act of devotion, that can make amends for a former sin: There was a death
owing them, immediately upon their offense, God will take his own time for the
execution; In the mean while, they may sacrifice, but they cannot satisfy,
they cannot escape. The kine are sacrificed, the cart burns them that drew it:
Here was an offering of praise, when they had more need of a
trespasse-offering; many an heart is lifted up in a conceit of joy, when it
has just cause of humiliation: God lets them alone with their sacrifice, but
when that is done, he comes over them with a back reckning for their sin:
Fifty thousand and seventy Israelites are stroke dead for this irreverence to
the Arc: A woeful welcome for the Ark of God into the borders of Israel; It
killd them for looking into it, who thought it their life to see it; It dealt
blows, and death on both hands; to Philistims, to Israelites; to both of them
for profaning it: The one with their Idol, the other with their eyes. It is a
fearful thing to use the holy ordinances of God with an vnreuerent boldness.
Fear and trembling becomes us in our access to the Majesty of the Allmighty:
Neither was there more state, then secrecy in God's Ark; some things the
wisdom of God desires to conceal: The irreverence of the Israelites was no
more faulty, then their curiosity; secret things to God, things revealed to
us, and to our children.

THE REMOVE of the Arc.
I HEAR of the Bethshemites lamentation, I hear not of their repentanc, they
complain of their smart, they complain not of their sin, and for ought I
can perceive, speak, as if God were curious, rather then they faulty: ( Who is
able to stand before this holy Lord god, and to whom shall he go from us?) as
if none could please that God, which misliked them: It is the fashion of
natural men to justify themselves in their own courses; If they cannot charge
any earthly thing with the blame of their suffering, they will cast it upon
heaven: That a man pleads himself guilty of his own wrong, is no common work
of Gods spirit. Bethshemesh bordred too near upon the Philistims; If these men
thought the very presence of the Arc hurtful, why do they send to their
neighbors of Kiriathiearim, that they might make themselves miserable? Where
there is a misconceit of God, it is no marvel, if there be a defect of
charity: How cunningly do they send their message to their neighbors? They do
not say, the Ark of God is come to us of it own accord, lest the men of
Kiriath-iearim should reply, It is come to you, let it stay with you; They say
only, the Philistims have brought it; they tell of the presence of the Arc,
they do not tell of the success, lest the example of their judgment should
have discouraged the forwardnes of their relief; and after all, the offer was
plausible; Come ye down and take it up to you, as if the honor had bin too
great for themselus; as if their modesty had been such, that they would not
forestall and engrosse happiness from the rest of Israel.

IT is no boot to teach nature, how to tell her own tale; smart and danger
will make a man witty: He is rarely constant, that will not dissemble for ease.
It is good to be suspicious of the euasions of those, which would put off
misery: Those of Bethshemesh were not more crafty, then these of Kiriathiearim
(which was the ground of their boldness) faithful: So many thousand
Bethshemites could not be dead, and no part of the rumor fly to them; they
heard, how thick, not only the Philistims, but the bordring Israelites fell
down dead before the Arc; yet they durst adventure to come, and fetch it,
even from amongst the carcasses of their brethren: They had bin formerly
acquainted with the Arc, they knew it was holy, it could not be changeable,
and therefore they well conceived this slaughter to arise from the unholiness
of men, not from the rigor of God, and thereupon can seek comfort in that,
which others found deadly: Gods children cannot by any means be discouraged
from their honor, and love to his ordinances: If they see thousands struck
down to Hell by the scepter of Gods kingdom, yet they will kiss it upon
their knees, and if their Savior be a rock of offense, and the occasion of
the fall of millions in Israel, they can love him no less: They can warm them
at the fire, wherewith they see others burned; they can feed temperately of
that, whereof others have surfeted to death etc.

BETHSHEMESH was a City of Priests, the Levites: Kiriathiearim a City of
Judah, where we hear but of one Leuite, Abinadab; yet this City was more
zealous for God, more reverent, and conscionable in the entertainment of the
Arc, then the other. We heard of the taking down of the Arc by the
Bethshemites, when it came miraculously to them, we do not hear of any man
sanctified for the attendance of it, as was done in this second lodging of the
Arc: Grace is not tied either to number, or means. It is in spiritual
matters, as in the estate: Small helps with good thrift enrich us, when great
patrimonies loose themselves in the neglect. Shiloh was wont to be the place,
which was honored with the presence of the Arc; Ever since the wickedness of
Elies sons, that was forlorn, and desolate, and now Kiriath-iearim succeeds
into this privilege: It did not stand with the royal liberty of God, no not
under the law, to tie himself unto places and persons: Unworthiness was ever a
sufficient cause of exchange. It was not yet his time to stir from the Jews,
yet he removed from one Province to another: Less reason have we to think,
that so God will reside amongst us, that none of our prouocations can drive him
from us etc.

ISRAEL, which had found the misery of Gods absence, is now resolved into
tears of contrition, and thankfulness, upon his return: There is no mention of
their lamenting after the Lord, while he was gone, but when he was returned,
and settled in Kiriath-iearim; The mercies of God draw more tears from his
children, then his judgments do from his enemies: There is no better sign of
good nature, or grace, then to be won to repentance with kindness: Not to
think of God, except we be beaten unto it, is servile: Because God was come
again to Israel, therefore Israel is returned to God; If God had not come
first, they had never come: If he, that came to them, had not made them come to
him, they had bin ever parted. They were cloyed with God, while he was
perpetually resident with them, now that his absence had made him dainty, they
cleave to him fervently, and penitently in his return: This was it, that God
meant in his departure, a better welcome at his coming back.

I heard no news of Samuel all this while, the Arc was gone: Now when the
Arc is returned, and placed in Kiriath-iearim, I hear him treat with the
people. It is not like, he was silent in this sad desertion of God; but now he
takes full advantage of the professed contrition of Israel, to deal with them
effectually, for their perfect conversion unto God, It is great wisdom in
spiritual matters, to take occasion by the fore-locke, and to strike whiles
the iron is hot: We may beat long enough at the door, but till God have opened,
it is no going in, and when he has opened, it is no delaying to enter: The
trial of sincerity is the abandoning of our wonted sins: This Samuel urges
( If ye be come again unto the Lord with all your heart, put away the strange
gods from among you, and Ashtaroth): In vain had it been to profess
repentance, whilst they continued in Idolatry; God will never acknowledge any
convert, that stays in a known sin: Graces and virtues are so linckt
together, that he, which has one, has all: The partial conversion of men
unto God is but hateful hypocrisy. How happily effectual is a word spoken in
season? Samuels exhortation wrought upon the hearts of Israel, and fetched water
out of their eyes, suites, and confessions, and vows out of their lips, and
their false gods out of their hands; yet it was not merely remorse, but fear
also, that moved Israel to this humble submission.

THE Philistims stood over them still, and threatened them with new assaults,
the memory of their late slaughter, and spoil, was yet fresh in their minds,
sorrow for the evils past, and fear of the future fetched them down upon their
knees: It is not more necessary for men to be cheered with hopes, then to be
awed with dangers; where God intends the humiliation of his servants, there
shall not want means of their deiection: It was happy for Israel that they had
an enemy. Is it possible, that the Philistims after those deadly plagues,
which they sustained from the God of Israel, should think of invading Israel?
Those, that were so mated with the presence of the Arc, that they never
thought themselves safe, till it was out of sight, do they now dare to thrust
themselves upon the new revenge of the Arc? It slew them, whiles they thought
to honor it, and do they think to escape, whilst they resist it? It slew them
in their own coasts, and do they come to it to seek death? yet behold no
sooner do the Philistims hear, that the Israelites are gathered to Mizpeh, but
the Princes of the Philistims gather themselves against them: No warnings will
serve obdurate hearts, wicked men are even ambitious of destruction; Judgments
need not to go find them out, they run to meet their bane.

THE Philistims come up, and the Israelites fear; they that had not the wit to
fear, whilst they were not friends with God, have not now the grace of
fearelesnes, when they were reconciled to God: Boldness and fear are commonly
misplaced in the best hearts; when we should tremble, we are confident, and
when we should be assured, we tremble: Why should Israel have feared, since
they had made their peace with the God of hosts? Nothing should affright
those, which are upright with God. The peace, which Israel had made with God,
was true, but tender; They durst not trust their own innocence so much, as
the prayers of Samuel; Cease not to cry to the Lord our God for us. In
temporal things nothing hinders, but we may fare better for other men's faith,
then for our own: It is no small happiness to be interessed in them, which
are favorites in the court of heaven; one faithful man in these occasions is
more worth then millions of the wavering and uncertain.

A good heart is easily won to devotion: Samuel cries, and sacrifices to
God; he had done so, though they had entreated his silence, yea his
forbearance: Whiles he is offering, the Philistims fight with Israel, and God
fights with the Philistims. ( The Lord thundered with a great thunder that day
upon the Philistims, and scattered them): Samuel fought more upon his knees,
then all Israel besides: The voice of God answered the voice of Samuel, and
speaks confusion and death to the Philistims: How were the proud Philistims
dead with fear, ere they died, to hear the fearful thunderclaps of an
angry God against them? to see, that heaven it self fought against them? He
that slew them secretly in the reuenges of his Arc, now kills them with open
horror in the fields: If presumption did not make wicked men madd, they would
never lift their hand against the Allmighty; what are they in his hands, when
he is disposed to vengance.

THE MEETING of Saul and Samuel.
SAMVEL began his acquaintance with God early, and continued it long: He began
it in his long coats, and continued to his gray hairs: (He judged Israel all
the days of his life.) God does not use to cast off his old servants; their
age indeereth them to him the more; If we be not unfaithful to him, he can not
be unconstant to us: At last his decayed age met witly ill partners, His sons
for deputies, and Saul for a King; The wickedness of his sons gave the
occasion of a change: Perhaps Israel had never thought of a King, if Samuels
sons had not been unlike their father; Who can promise himself holy
children, when the loins of a Samuel, and the education in the Temple, yielded
monsters? It is not likely; that good Samuel was faulty in that indulgence, for
which his own mouth had denounced Gods judgment against Hely: yet this holy
man succeeds Hely in his cross, as well as his place, though not in his sin,
and is afflicted with a wicked succession: God will let us find, that grace is
by gift, not by inheritance.

I fear Samuel was too partial to nature in the surrogation of his sons, I
do not hear of Gods allowance to this act: If this had been Gods choice, as
well as his, it had been like to have received more blessing. Now all Israel
had cause to rue, that these were the sons of Samuel; For now the question
was not of their virtues, but of their blood, not of their worthiness, but
their birth; even the best heart may be blinded with affection. Who can marvel
at these errors of parents love, when the that so holily judged Israel all his
life, misiudged of his own sons?

IT was Gods ancient purpose to raise up a King to his people: How does he take
occasion to perform it, but by the unruly desires of Israel? even as we say of
humane proceedings, that ill manners beget good laws. That Monarchy is the
best form of government, there is no question: Good things may be ill desired,
so was this of Israel; If an itching desire of alteration had not possessed
them, why did they not rather sue for a reformation of their governors, then
for a change of government? Were Samuels sons so desperately evil, that
there was no possibility of amendment? Or if they were past hope, were there
not some others to have succeeded the justice of Samuel, no less then these
did his person? What needed Samuel to be thrust out of place? What needed the
ancient form of administration to be altered? He that raised up their Judges,
would have found time to raise them up Kings: Their curious, and inconstant
new-fanglenes, will not abide to stay it, but with an heady importunity
labors to ouer-hasten the pace of God. Where there is a settled course of good
government (howsoever blemished with some weaknesses) it is not safe to be
ouer-forward to a change, though it should be to the better. He, by whom Kings
reign, says, they have cast him away, that he should not reign over them,
because they desire a King to reign over them: Judges were his own institution
to his people, as yet Kings were not; after that Kings were settled, to desire
the government of Judges, had bin a much more seditious inconstancy: God has
not appointed to every time and place those forms, which are simply best in
themselves, but those, which are best to them, unto whom they are appointed;
which we may neither alter, till he begin, nor recall, when he has altered.

THIS business seemed personally to concern Samuel, yet he so deals in it, not
as a party, not as a judge of his own case, but as a Prophet of God, as a
friend of his opposite; He prays to God for advise, He fore-tells the state
and courses of their future King: Wilful men are blind to all dangers, are
deaf to all good counsels. Israel must have a King, though they pay never so
dear for their longing: The vain affectation of conformity to other Nations
ouercomes all discouragements; there is no readier way to error, then to make
others examples the rule of our desires, ^^^nctions: If every man have ^^ot
grounds of his own, whereon to stand, there can be no stabilitie in his
resolutions, or proceedings.

SINCE then they choose to have a King, God will choose the King, which they
shall have. The kingdom shall begin in Benjamin, which was to endure in Judah:
It was no probability, or reason, this first King should prove well, because
he was abortiue; their humor of innovation deserved to be punished with their
own choice: Kish the father of Saul was mighty in estate; Saul was mighty in
person, ouer-looking the rest of the people in stature, no less then he should
do in dignity: The senses of the Israelites could not but be well pleased for
the time, howsoever their hearts were afterward; when men are carried with
outward shows, it is a sign, that God means them a delusion.

How far God fetches his purposes about? The asses of Kish Saul's father, are
strayed away: What is that to the news of a kingdom? God lays these small
accidents for the ground of greater designs: The asses must be lost, none but
Saul must go with his fathers servant to seek them: Samuel shall meet them in
the search: Saul shall be premonished of his ensuing royalty; Little can we, by
the beginning of any action, guess at Gods intention in the conclusion.

OBEDIENCE was a fit entrance into soueraingty: The service was homely for the
son of a great man, yet he refuses not to go, as a fellow to his fathers
servant, upon so mean a search: The disobedient and scornful are good for
nothing, they are neither fit to be subjects nor governors: Kish was a great
man in his country, yet he disdaineth not to send his son Saul upon a thrifty
errand, neither does Saul plead his disparagement from a refusal. Pride and
wantonness have marred our times: Great parents count it a disreputation to
employ their sons in courses of frugalitie; and their pampred children think
it a shame to do any thing; and so bear themselves as those, that hold it the
only glory to be either idle or wicked

NEITHER does Saul go fashionably to work, but does this service heartily and
painfully, as a man, that desires rather to effect the command, then please the
commander: He passed from Ephraim to the land of Shalisha, from Shalisha to
Salim, from Salim to Iemini, whence his house came; from Iemini to Zuph, not so
much as staying with any of his kindred, so long as to vittaile himself: He
that was afterward an ill King, approved himself a good son. As there are
diversity of relations, and offices; so there is of dispositions; those, which
are excellent in some, attain not to a mediocritie in other: It is no arguing
from private virtues to public; from dexterity in one station, to the rest:
A several grace belongs to the particular carriage of every place, whereto we
are called, which if we want, the place may well want us.

THERE was more praise of his obedience in ceasing to seek, then in seeking; he
takes care, lest his father should take care for him, that whilst he should
seem officious in the less, he might not neglect the greatest. A blind
obedience in some cases does well, but it does far better, when it is led
with the eyes of discretion; otherwise we may more offend in pleasing, then in
disobeying.

GREAT is the benefit of a wise and religious attendant, such a one puts us
into those duties and actions, which are most expedient, and least thought of.
If Saul had not had a discreet servant, he had returned but as wife as he
came; now he is drawn in, to consult with the man of God, and hears more,
then he hoped for. Saul was now a sufficient journey from his fathers house,
yet his religious servant in this remoteness, takes knowledge of the place,
where the Prophet dwells, and how honorably does he mention him to his Master?
Behold, in this City is a man of God, and he is an honorable man, all that he
says comes to pass: Gods prophets are public persons, as their function,
so their notice concerns every man: There is no reason God should abate any of
the respect due to his Ministers under the Gospel: St Paul's suite is both
universal and everlasting; I beseech you, brethren, know them that labor
amongst you.

THE chief praise is to be able to give good advise; the next is to take it.
Saul is easily induced to condescend; He, whose curiosity led him voluntarily
at last, to the witch of Endor, is now led at first by good counsel to the man
of God; neither is his care in going, less commendable, then his will to go.
For as a man, that had bin catechized not to go unto God empty-handed, he
asks, What shall we bring unto the man? What have we? The case is well altered
in our times: Every man thinks, what may I keep back? There is no gain so
sweet, as of a robbed altar; yet Gods charge is no less under the Gospel, Let
him that is taught, make his teacher partaker of all. As this faithful care of
Saul was a just presage of success, more then he looked for, or could expect;
so the sacrilegious unthankfulness of many, bodes that ruin to their soul and
estate, which they could not have grace to fear.

HE that knew the Prophets abode, knew also the honor of his place, he could
not but know, that Samuel was a mixed person: The Judge of Israel, and the Seer;
yet both Saul and his servant purpose to present him with the fourth part of a
shekell, to the value of about our five pence: They had learned, that
thankfulness was not to be measured, of good men, by the weight, but by the will
of the retributor: How much more will God accept the small offerings of his
weak servants, when he sees them proceed from great love?

THE very maids of the City can give direction to the Prophet, they had
listened after the holy affairs, they had heard of the sacrifice, and could
tell of the necessity of Samuels presence: Those that live within the sun
shine of religion, cannot but be somewhat colored with those beams: Where
there is practice and example of piety in the better fort, there will be a
reflection of it upon the meanest: It is no small benefit to live in religious
and holy places, we shall be much to blame, if all goodness fall beside us: Yea
so skillful were these damzels in the fashions of their public sacrifices,
that they could instruct Saul and his servant, unasked, how the people would
not eat, till Samuel came to bless the sacrifice. This meeting was not more a
sacrifice, then a feast: These two agree well, we have never so much cause to
rejoice in feasting, as when we have duly served our God: The sacrifice was a
feast to God, the other to men: The body may eat and drink with contentment,
when the soul has bin first fed, and has first feasted the maker of both:
Go eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy drink with a merry heart, for God
now accepts thy works. The sacrifice was before consecrated, when it was
offered to God, but it was not consecrated to them, till Samuel blessed it, his
blessing made that meat holy to the guests, which was formerly hallowed to God:
All creatures were made good, and took holiness from him, which gave them
their being; Our sin brought that curse upon them (which unless our prayers
remove it) cleaues to them still, so as we receive them not without a curse: We
are not our own friends, except our prayers help to take that away, which our
sin has brought, that so to the clean all may be clean: It is an unmannerly
godlessnes to take Gods creatures without the leave of their maker, and well
may God withold his blessing from them, which have not the grace to ask it.

THOSE guests, which were so religious, that they would not eat their sacrifice
unblessed, might have blessed it themselves: Every man might pray, though every
man might not sacrifice; yet would they not either eat, or bless, whiles they
looked for the presence of a Prophet. Every Christian may sanctify his own
meat, but where those are present, that are peculiarly sanctified to God, this
service is fittest for them: It is commendable to teach children the practice
of thanksgiving, but the best is ever most mere to bless our tables, and
those especially, whose office it is to offer our prayers to God.

LITTLE did Saul think, that his coming, and his errand was so noted of God,
as that it was fore-signified unto the Prophet, and now, behold Samuel is told
a day before of the man, the time, the place of his meeting. The eye of Gods
prouidenc is no less over all our actions, all our motions: We cannot go any
whither without him, he tells all our steps; since it pleases God therefore to
take notice of us, much more should we take notice of him, and walk with him,
in whom we move? Saul came beside his expectation to the Prophet, he had no
thought of any such purpose, till his servant made this sudden motion unto him
of visiting Samuel, and yet God says to his Prophet, I will send thee a man
out of the land of Benjamin. The over ruling hand of the Allmighty works us
insensibly, and all our affairs to his own secret determinations; so as
whiles we think we do our own wills, we do his: Our own intentions we may
know, Gods purposes we know not; we must go the way that we are called, let him
lead us to what end he pleases; It is our duty to resign our selves, and our
ways to the disposition of God, and patiently and thankfully to awaite the
issue of his decrees. The same God, that fore-shewed Saul to Samuel, now points
to him ( See this is the man), and commands the Prophet to anoint him governor
over Israel: He, that told of Saul before he came, knew before he came into the
world, what a man, what a King he would be; yet he chooses him out, and
inioynes his invnction. It is one of the greatest praises of Gods wisdom, that
he can turn the evil of men to his own glory: Advancement is not ever a
sign of love, either to the man, or to the place: It had bin better for Saul,
that his head had bin ever dry, some God raises up in judgment, that they may
fall the more uneasily; there are no men so miserable, as those, that are great
and evil.

IT seems that Samuel bore no great port in his outside, for that Saul not
discerning him, either by his habit, or attendants, comes to him, and asks him
for the Seer; yet was Samuel as yet the Judge of Israel, the substitution of
his sons had not displaced himself: There is an affable familiarity, that
becomes greatness; It is not good for eminent persons to stand always upon
the height of their state, but so to behave themselves, that as their sociable
carriage may not breed contempt, so their ouer-highnes may not breed a servile
fearfulness in their people.

How kindly does Samuel intertaine, and invite Saul, yet it was he only, that
should receive wrong by the future royalty of Saul? Who would not have looked,
that aged Samuel should have emulated rather the glory of his young rival, and
have looked churlishly upon the man, that should rob him of his authority? yet
now, as if he came on purpose to gratify him, he bids him to the feast, he
honors him with the chief seat, he reserues a select morsel for him, he
tells him ingenuously the news of his ensuing sovereignty ( On whom is set
the desire of all Israel, is it not upon thee, and thy fathers house?) Wise and
holy men, as they are not ambitious of their own burden, so they are not
unwilling to be eased, when God pleases to discharge them; neither can they
envy those whom God lifts above their heads: They make an Idol of honor,
that are troubled with their own freedom, or grudge at the promotion of
others.

DOVBTLES Saul was much amassed with the strange salutation, and news of the
Prophet, and how modestly does he put it off, as that, which was neither fit,
nor likely; disparaging his Tribe in respect of the rest of Israel, his fathers
family in respect of the Tribe, and himself in respect of his fathers
family; neither did his humility stoop below the truth: For, as Benjamin was
the youngest son of Israel, so he was now by much the least Tribe of Israel;
they had not yet recovered that universal slaughter, which they had received
from the hands of their brethren, whereby a Tribe was almost lost to Israel;
yet even out of the remainder of Benjamin does God choose the man, that shall
command Israel; out of the rubbish of Benjamin does God raise the throne. That
is not ever the best and fittest, which God chooses, but that, which God
chooses is ever the fittest; the strength or weakness of means is neither
spurr, nor bridle to the determinate choices of God, yea rather he holds it the
greatest proof of his freedom, and omnipotency to advance the unlikeliest.
It was no hollow and fained excuse, that Saul makes to put of that, which he
would feign enjoy, and to cause honor to follow him the more eagerly: It was
the sincere truth of his humility, that so dejected him under the hand of Gods
prophet. Fair beginnings are no found proof of our proceedings and ending
well: How often has a bashful childhood ended in an impudency of youth, a
strict entrance in licentiousnes, early forwardnes in Atheism? There might be
a civil meeknes in Saul, true grace there was not in him; they that be good,
bear more fruit in their age.

SAVL had but five pence in his purse to give the Prophet: The Prophet after
much good cheer gives him the kingdom, he bestows the oil of royal
consecration on his head, the kisses of homage upon his face, and sends him
away rich in thoughts, and expectation; and now least his astonishment should
end in distrust, he settles his assurance, by fore-warnings of those events,
which he should find in his way: He tells him whom he shall meet, what they
shall say, how himself shall be affected; that all these, and himself might
be so many witnesses of his following coronation; every word confirmed him. For
well might he think, He that can foretell me the motions and words of others,
cannot fail in mine; especially when (as Samuel had prophesied to him) he
found himself to prophecy; His prophesying did enough foretell his kingdom.
No sooner did Samuel turn his back from Saul, but God gave him another heart,
lifting up his thoughts and disposition to the pitch of a King: The calling of
God never leaves a man unchanged, neither did God ever employ any man in his
service, whom he did not enable to the work he set him; especially those,
whom he raises up to the supply of his own place, and the representation of
himself. It is no marvel, if Princes excel the vulgar in gifts, no less
then in dignity: Their crowns and their hearts are both in one and the same
hand; If God did not add to their powers, as well as their honors, there would
be no equality.

The Inauguration of SAVL.
GOD has secretly destined Saul to the kingdom; it could not content Israel,
that Samuel knew this, the lots must so decide the choice, as if it had not
been predetermined; That God, which is ever constant to his own decrees,
makes the lots to find him out, whom Samuel had anointed: If once we have
notice of the will of God, we may be confident of the issue: There is no chance
to the Almighty; even casual things are no less necessary, in their first
cause, then the natural. So far did Saul trust the prediction, and oil of
Samuel, that he hides him among the stuff: He knew, where the lots would
light, before they were cast: This was but a modest declination of that honor,
which he saw must come; His very withdrawing showed some expectation, why else
should he have hid himself, rather then the other Israelites? yet could he
not hope his subducing himself, could disappoint the purpose of God: He well
knew, that he, which found out and designed his name amongst the thousands of
Israel, would easily find out his person in a tent: When once we know Gods
decree, in vain shall we strive against it; Before we know it, it is
indifferent for us to work to the likeliest.

I cannot blame Saul for hiding himself from a kingdom, especially of Israel:
Honor is heavy, when it comes upon the best terms: How should it be otherwise,
when all men's cares are cast upon one? but most of all in a troubled estate? No
man can put to sea without danger, but he that launcheth out in a tempest, can
expect nothing, but the hardest event; such was the condition of Israel: Their
old enemy the Philistims were stilled with that fearful thunder of God, as
finding what it was to war against the Allmighty. There were adversaries enough
besides in their borders: It was but an hollow truce, that was betwixt Israel
and their heathenish neighbors; and Nahash was now at their gates. Well did
Saul know the difference between a peaceful government, and the perilous and
wearisome tumults of war: The quietest throne is full of cares, but the
perplexed of dangers. Cares and dangers drove Saul into this corner to hide his
head from a crown: These made him choose rather to lie obscurely among the
baggage of his tent, then to sit gloriously in the throne of State. This hiding
could do nothing but show, that both he suspected, lest he should be chosen,
and desired he should not be chosen: That God, from whom the hills and the
rocks could not conceal him, brings him forth to the light, so much more
longed for, as he was more unwilling to be seen, and more applauded, as he was
more longed for.

Now then when SAVL is drawn forth in the midst of the eager expectation of
Israel, modesty and goodlinesse showed themselves in his face: The prease
cannot hide him, whom the stuff had hid; As if he had bin made to be seen, he
ouerlookes all Israel in height of stature, for presage of the eminence of his
estate, ( from the shoulders upward was he higher then any of the people.)
Israel sees their lots are fallne upon a noted man; one, whose person showed,
he was borne to be a King, and now all the people shout for joy; they have
their longing, and applaud their own happiness, and their Kings honor: How
easy is it for us to mistake our own estates? to rejoice in that, which we
shall find the just cause of our humiliation? The end of a thing is better
then the beginning; the safest way is to reserve our joy, till we have good
proof of the worthiness and fitnes of the object. What are we the better for
having of a blessing, if we know not how to use it? The office and observance
of a King was vncowth to Israel: Samuel therefore informs the people of their
mutual duties, and writes them in a book, and lays it up before the Lord;
otherwise, nouelty might have been a warrant for their ignorance, and
ignorance for neglect: There are reciprocal respects of Princes and people,
which if they be not observed, government languisheth into confusion; these
Samuel faithfully teaches them. Though he may not be their Judge, yet he will
be their Prophet; he will instruct, if he may not rule; yea he will instruct
him that shall rule: There is no King absolute, but he, that is the King of all
gods: Earthly Monarchs must walk by a rule, which if they transgress, they
shall be accountable to him, that is higher then the highest, who has deputed
them. Not out of care of civility, so much as conscience, must every Samuel
labor to keep even terms betwixt Kings and subjects, prescribing just
moderation to the one; to the other obedience and loyalty, which who ever
endeavors to trouble, is none of the friends of God, or his Church.

THE most and best applaud their new King, some wicked ones despised him, and
said, How shall he save us? It was not the might of his parents, the
goodlinesse of his person, the privilege of his lot, the same of his
prophesying, the Panegyric of Samuel, that could sheeld him from contempt, or
win him the hearts of all: There was never yet any man, to whom some took
not exceptions; It is not possible either to please or displease all men, while
some men are in love with vice, as deeply, as others with virtue, and some (as
ill) dislike virtue, if not for it self, yet for contradiction They well saw,
Saul chose not himself, they saw him worthy to have bin chosen, if the
election should have bin carried by voices, and those voices by their eyes; they
saw him unwilling to hold, or yield, when he was chosen; yet they will envy
him: What fault could they find in him whom God had chosen? His parentage was
equal, his person above them, his inward parts more above them, then the
outward; Malcontents will rather devise then want causes of flying out, and
rather then fail, the universal approbation of others is ground enough of
their dislike. It is a vain ambition of those, that would be loved of all: The
spirit of God, when he inioynes us peace with all, he adds (if it be possible,)
and favor is more then peace; A man's comfort must be in himself, the
conscience of deserving well.

THE neighboring Ammonites could not but have heard of Gods fearful
vengeance upon the Philistims, and yet they will be taking up the quarrel
against Israel: Nahash comes up against Iabesh Gilead: Nothing but grace can
teach us to make use of others judgments; wicked men are not moved with ought,
that falls beside them; they trust nothing, but their own smart: What
fearful judgments does God execute every day? resolute sinners take no
notice of them, and are grown so peremptory, as if God had never showed
dislike of their ways.

THE Gileadites were not more base, then Naash the Ammonite was cruel: The
Gileadites would buy their peace with seruilitie, Nahash would sell them a
servile peace for their right eyes. Iephtha the Gileadite did yet stick in the
stomach of Ammon, and now they think their revenge cannot be too bloody: It
is a wonder, that he, which would offer so merciless a condition to Israel,
would yield to the motion of any delay; He meant nothing, but shame and death
to the Israelites, yet he condiscends to a seven days respite: Perhaps his
confidence made him thus careless. Howsoever, it was the restraint of God that
gave this breath to Israel, and this opportunity to Saul's courage and victory:
The enemies of Gods Church can not be so malicious, as they would, cannot
approve themselves so malicious, as they are; God so holds them in sometimes,
that a stander-by would think them favorable. The news of Gileads distress
had ^^oone filled and afflicted Israel, ^^he people think of no remedy, but
their pity and tears; Evils are easily grieved for, not easily redressed:
Only Saul is more stirred with indignation, then sorrow; That God, which put
into him a spirit of prophecy, now puts into him a spirit of fortitude: He
was before appointed to the throne, not settled in the throne, he followed the
beasts in the field, when he should have commanded men. Now as one, that would
be a King no less by merit, then election, he takes upon him, and performs
the rescue of Gilead; he assembles Israel, he leads them, he raises the
siege, breaks the troops, cuts the throats of the Ammonites: When God has any
exploit to perform, he raises up the heart of some chosen instrument with
heroical motions for the atcheiuement: When all hearts are cold and dead, it
is a sign of intended destruction.

THIS day has made Saul a complete King, and now the thankful Israelites
begin to inquire after those discontented mutiners, which had refused
allegiance unto so worthy a commander, ( Bring those men, that we may slay
them:) This sedition had deserved death, though Saul had bin foiled at Gilead;
but now his happy victory whets the people much more to a desire of this just
execution. Saul, to whom the injury was done, hinders the revenge, ( There
shall no man dye this day, for to day the Lord has saved Israel) that his
fortitude might not go beyond his mercy. How noble were these beginnings of
Saul? His prophecy showed him miraculously wise, his battle and victory no
less valiant, his pardon of his rebels, as merciful: There was not more power
showed in ouercomming the Ammonites, then in ouercomming himself, and the
impotent malice of these mutinous Israelites. Now Israel sees, they have a
King, that can both shed blood, and spare it; that can shed the Ammonites
blood, and spare theirs: His mercy wins those hearts, whom his valor could
not; As in God, so in his Deputies mercy and justice should be inseparable;
wheresoever these two go asunder, government follows them into distraction,
and ends in ruin. If it had bin a wrong offered to Samuel, the forbearance of
the revenge had not bin so commendable, although upon the day of so happy a
deliverance, perhaps it had not bin seasonable: A man has reason to be most
bold with himself; It is no praise of mercy (since it is a fault in justice)
to remit an other man's satisfaction, his own he may.

Samuels contestation.
EVERY one can be a friend to him that prospers; By this victory has Saul as
welll conquered the obstinacy of his own people: Now there is no Israelite,
that rejoices not in Saul's kingdom. No sooner have they done obiecting to
Saul, then Samuel begins to expostulate with them: The same day, wherein they
began to be pleased, God shows himself angry; All the passages of their
proceedings offended him, he deferd to let them know it till now, that the
kingdom was settled, and their hearts lifted up; Now does God cool their
courage and joy, with a back reckning for their forwardnes. God will not let
his people run away with the arrerages of their sins, but when they least
think of it, calls them to an account: All this while was God angry with their
reiection of Samuel; yet (as fi there had been nothing, but peace) he gives
them a victory over their enemies, he gives way to their joy in their
election, now he lets them know, that after their peace offerings, he has a
quarrel with them. God may be angry enough with us, whiles we outwardly
prosper: It is the wisdom of God to take his best advantages; He suffers us to
go on, till we should come to enjoy the fruit of our sin, till we seem past
the danger, either of conscience, or punishment; then (even when we begin to be
past the feeling of our sin) we shall begin to feel his displeasure for our
sins: This is only where he loves, where he would both forgive, and
reclaim; He has now to do with his Israel: But where he means utter
vengance, he lets men harden themselves to a reprobate senselessnes, and make
up their own measure without contradiction, as purposing to reckon with them
but once for ever.

SAMVEL had dissuaded them before, he reproues them not, until now: If he had
thus bent himself against them, ere the settling of the election, he had
troubled Israel in that, which God took occasion by their sin to establish;
His opposition would have sauoured of respects to himself, whom the wrong of
this innovation chiefly concerned: Now therefore, when they are sure of their
King, and their King of them, when he has set even terms betwixt them
mutually, he lets them see, how they were at odds with God: We must ever
dislike sins, we may not ever show it; Discretion in the choice of seasons for
reproving, is no less commendable and necessary, then zeal and faithfulness
in reproving: Good Physicians use not to euacuate the body in extremities of
heat or cold; wise mariners do not hoyse sails in every wind.

FIRST does Samuel begin to clear his own innocence, ere he dare charge them
with their sin: He that will cast a stone at an offender must be free
himself, otherwise he condemns, and executes himself in another person: The
conscience stops the mouth of the guilty man, and chokes him with that sin,
which lies in his own breast, and having not come forth by a penitent
confession, cannot find the way out in a reproof; or if he do reprove, he does
more shame himself, then reform another. He that was the Judge of Israel,
would not now judge himself, but would be judged by Israel; Whose ox have I
taken? whose ass have I taken? or to whom have I done wrong? No doubt Samuel
found himself guilty before God of many private infirmities, but for his
public carriage, he appeals to men: A man's heart can best judge of himself;
others can best judge of his actions. As another man's conscience and
approbation can not bear us out before God; so cannot our own before men: For
oft-times that action is censured by the beholders, as wrong full, wherein we
applaud our own justice. Happy is that man, that can be acquitted by himself in
private, in public by others, by God in both; standers by may see more: It is
very safe for a man to look into himself by others eyes; In vain shall a
man's heart absolve him, that is condemned by his actions.

IT was not so much the trial of his carriage, that Samuel appealed for, as his
justification, not for his own comfort, so much as their conviction: His
innocence has not done him service enough, unless it shame them, and make
them confess themselves faulty. In so many years wherein Samuel judged
Israel, it cannot be, but many thousand causes passed his hands, wherein both
parties could not possibly be pleased; yet so clear does he find his heart,
and hands, that he dare make the grieved part judges of his judgment: A good
conscience will make a man undauntedly confident, and dare put him upon any
trial; where his own heart strikes him not, it bids him challeng all the
world, and take up all comers: How happy a thing is it for a man to be his
own friend, and patron? He needs not to fear foreign broiles, that is at
peace at home: Contrarily, he that has a false and foul heart, lies at every
man's mercy; lives slauishly, and is feign to dawbe up a rotten peace with the
basest conditions. Truth is not afraid of any light, and therefore dare suffer
her wares to be carried from a dim shop-bord unto the street door: Perfect gold
will be but the purer with trying, whereas falsehood being a work of darkness,
loves darkness, and therefore seeks, where it may work closest.

THIS very appellation cleared Samuel, but the peoples attestation cleared him
more: Innocence and vprightnes becomes every man well, but most public
persons, who shall be else obnoxious to every offender. The throne and the
pulpit (of all places) call for holiness, not more for example of good, then for
liberty of controlling evil: All Magistrates swear to do that, which Samuel
protests he has done; if their oath were so verified, as Samuels
protestation, it were a shame for the State not to be happy: The sins of our
Teachers are the teachers of sin; the sins of governors do both command, and
countenance evil This very acquiting of Samuel was the accusation of
themselves: For how could it be but faulty to cast off a faultlesse governor?
If he had not taken away an ox, or an ass from them, why do they take away
his authority? They could not have thus cleared Saul at the end of his reign,
It was just with God, since they were weary of a just ruler, to punish them
with an unjust.

HE that appealed to them for his own vprightnes, durst not appeal to them
for their own wickedness, but appeals to heaven from them. Men are commonly
flatterers of their own cases: It must be a strong evidence, that will make a
sinner convicted in himself; Nature has so many shifts to cosen it self in
this spiritual verdict, that unless it be taken in the manner, it will hardly
yield to a truth; either she will deny the fact, or the fault, or the
measure; And now in this case they might seem to have some fair pretenses:
For though Samuel was righteous, yet his sons were corrupt. To cut of all
excuses therefore, Samuel appeals to God (the highest Judge) for his sentence
of their sin, and dares trust to a miraculous conviction. It was now their
wheat harvest: The hot and dry air of that climate did not wont to afford in
that season so much moist vapor, as might raise a cloud, either for rain, or
thunder: He that knew God could, and would do both these, without the help of
second causes, puts the trial upon this issue. Had not Samuel before consulted
with his Maker, and received warrant for his act, it had bin presumption and
tempting of God, which was now a noble improuement of faith: Rather then Israel
shall go clear away with a sin, God will accuse and arraigne them from
heaven. No sooner has Samuels voice ceased, then Gods voice begins: Every
crack of thunder spoke judgment against the rebellious Israelites, and every
drop of rain was a witness of their sin, and now they found they had
displeased him, which rules in the heaven, by rejecting the man that ruled for
him on earth: The thundering voice of God, that had lately in their sight
confounded the Philistims, they now understood to speak fearful things
against them. No marvel, if now they fell upon their knees, not to Saul, whom
they had chosen, but to Samuel, who being thus cast off by them, is thus
countenanced in heaven.

Saul's sacrifice.
GOD never meant the kingdom should either stay long in the tribe of Benjamin,
or remove suddenly from the person of Saul; Many years did Saul reign over
Israel, yet God computes him but two years a King: That is not accounted of
God to be done, which is not lawfully done; when God, which chose Saul,
rejected him, he was no more a King, but a Tyrant: Israel obeyed him still, but
God makes no reckoning of him, as his deputy, but as an usurper.

SAVL was of good years, when he was advanced to the kingdom: His son
Jonathan, the first year of his fathers reign, could lead a thousand
Israelites into the field, and give a foil to the Philistims: And now Israel
could not think themselves less happy in the^^r Prince, then in their King;
Jonathan is the heir of his fathers victory, as well as of his valor, and his
estate. The Philistims were quiet after those first thunderclaps, all the time
of Samuels government, now they begin to stir under Saul. How utterly is
Israel disappointed in their hopes? That security and protection, which they
promised themselves in the name of a King, they found in a Prophet, failed of
in a warrior; They were more safe under the mantle, then under arms: both
enmity and sauegard are from heaven, goodness has bin ever a stronger guard,
then valor: It is the surest policy always to have peace with God.

WE find by the spoils, that the Philistims had some battles with Israel,
which are not recorded; After the thunder had skared them into a peace, and
restitution of all the bordring Cities, from Ekron to Gath, they had taken new
heart, and so beslaued Israel, that they had neither weapon, nor Smith left
amongst them, yet even in this miserable nakedness of Israel, have they both
fought, and overcome. Now might you have seen the unarmed Israelites marching
with their slings, and ploughstaues, and hooks, and forkes, and other
instruments of their husbandry against a mighty and well furnished enemy, and
returning laded both with arms and victory. No armor is of proof against the
Almighty, neither is he vnweapned, that caries the revenge of God: There is the
same disadvantage in our spiritual conflicts, we are turned naked to
principalities, and powers; whilst we go under the conduct of the Prince of
our peace, we cannot but be bold and victorious.

VAIN men think to ouerpower God with munition, and multitude: The Philistims
are not any way more strong, then in conceit; Thirty thousand chariots, six
thousand horsemen, footmen like the sand for number, makes them scorn Israel
no less, then Israel fears them. When I see the miraculous success, which
had blessed the Israelites, in all their late conflicts with these very
Philistims, with the Ammonites, I cannot but wonder, how they could fear:
They, which in the time of their sin found God to raise such trophies over
their enemies, run now into caves, and rocks, and pits, to hide them from the
faces of men, when they found God reconciled, and themselves penitent. No
Israelite but has some cowardly blood in him: If we had no fear, faith would
have no maistery, yet these fearful Israelites shall cut the throats of those
confident Philistims; Doubt and resolution are not meet measures of our
success: A presumptuous confidence goes commonly bleeding ^^ome when an humble
fear retu^^nes in triumph. Fear drives those Israelites, which dare show
their heads out of the caves unto Saul, and makes them cling unto their new
King: How troublesome were the beginnings of Saul's honor? Surely, if that man
had not exceeded Israel no less in courage, then in stature, he had now hid
himself in a cave, which before hid himself among the stuff: But now, though
the Israelites ran away from him, yet he ran not away from them; It was not any
doubt of Saul's valor, that put his people to their heels, it was the absence
of Samuel; If the Prophet had come up, Israel would never have run away from
their King: Whiles they had a Samuel alone, they were never well, till they had
a Saul, now they have a Saul, they are as far from contentment, because they
want a Samuel; unless both join together, they think there can be no
safety. Where the temporal and spiritual state combine not together, there
can follow nothing but distraction in the people: The Prophets receive and
deliver the will of God, Kings execute it; The Prophets are directed by God,
the people are directed by their Kings. Where men do not see God before them
in his ordinances, their hearts cannot but fail them, both in their respects
to their superiors, and their courage in themselves. Piety is the mother of
perfect subjection: As all authority is derived from heaven, so is it thence
established; Those governors that would command the hearts of men, must show
them God in their faces.

No Israelite can think himself safe without a Prophet: Saul had given them
good proof of his fortitude, in his late victory over the Ammonites, but then
proclamation was made before the fight through all the country, that every man
should come up after Saul, and Samuel: If Samuel had not bin with Saul, they
would rather have ventured the loss of their oxen, then the hazard of
themselves: How much less should we presume of any safety in our spiritual
combats, when we have not a Prophet to lead us? It is all one (saving that it
favors of more contempt) not to have Gods Seers, and not to use them: He can
be no true Israelite, that is not distressed with the want of a Samuel.

As one, that had learned to begin his rule in obedience, Saul stays seven
days in Gilgal, according to the Prophets direction, and still he looks long
for Samuel, which had promised his presence; six days he expects, and part of
the seventh, yet Samuel is not come: The Philistims draw near, the Israelites
runneaway, Samuel comes not, they must fight, God must be supplicated, what
should Saul do? rather then God should want a sacrifice, and the people
satisfaction, Saul will command that, which he knew Samuel would, if he were
present, both command, and execute: It is not possible (thinks he) that God
should be displeased with a sacrifice, he cannot but be displeased with
indeuotion: Why do the people run from me, but for want of means to make
God sure? What would Samuel rather wish, then that we should be godly? The act
shall be the same, the only differences shall be in the (...): If Samuel be
wanting to us, we will not be wanting to God; It is but an holy prevention to
be devout unbidden: Upon this conceit, he commands a sacrifice; Saul's sins
make no great show, yet are they still hainously taken, the impiety of them was
more hidden, and inward from all eyes, but Gods. If Saul were among the
Prophets before, will he now be among the Priests? Can there be any devotion
in disobedience? O vain man! What can it avail thee to sacrifice to God
against God? Hypocrites rest only in formalities; If the outward act be done,
it suffices them, though the ground be distrust, the manner irreverence, the
carriage presumption.

WHAT then should Saul have done? Upon the trust of God and Samuel he should
have stayed out the last hour, and have secretly sacrificed himself, and his
prayers unto that God, which loves obedience above sacrifice. Our faith is most
commendable in the last act; It is no praise to hold out, until we be hard
driven: Then, when we are forsaken of means, to live by faith in our God, is
worthy of a crown: God will have no worship of our devising, we may only
do, what he bids us, not bid, what he commands not. Never did any true piety
arise out of the corrupt puddle of man's brain; If it flow not from heaven, it
is odious to heaven: What was it, that did thus taint the valor of Saul with
this weakness, but distrust? He saw some Israelites go, he thought all would
go, he saw the Philistims come, he saw Samuel came not, his diffidence was
guilty of his mis-deuotion: There is no sin, that has not his ground from
unbelief; This, as it was the first infection of our pure nature, so is the
true source of all corruption, man could not sin, if he distrusted not.

THE sacrifice is no sooner ended, then Samuel is come, and why came he no
sooner? He could not be a Seer, and not know, how much he was looked for, how
troublesome and dangerous his absence must needs be; He, that could tell Saul,
that he should prophecy, could tell, that he would sacrifice; yet he purposely
forbeares to come, for the trial of him, that must be the champion of God.
Samuel durst not have done thus, but by direction from his master: It is the
ordinary course of God to prove us by delays, and to drive us to exigents,
that we may show what we are: He that anointed Saul, might lawfully from God
control him: There must be discretion, there may not be partiality in our
censures of the greatest: God makes difference of sins, none of persons, if we
make differences of sins according to persons, we are unfaithful both to God,
and man. Scarce is Saul warm in his kingdom, when he has even now lost it:
Samuels first words after the inauguration, are of Saul's rejection, and the
choice and establishment of his successor: It was ever Gods purpose to settle
the kingdom in Judah; He that took occasion by the peoples sin to raise up
Saul in Benjamin, takes occasion by Saul's sin to establish the crown upon
David. In humane probability the kingdom was fixed upon Saul, and his more
worthy son: In Gods decree it did but pass through the hands of Benjamin to
Judah. Besides trouble, how fickle are these earthly glories? Saul doubtless
looked upon Jonathan, as the inheritor of his crown, and behold, ere his
peaceable possession, he has lost it from himself: Our sins strip us not of
our hopes in heaven only, but of our earthly blessings; The way to entaile a
comfortable prosperity upon our seed after us, is our conscionable obedience
unto GOD.

JONATHANS victory and Saul's oath.
IT is no wonder if Saules courage were much cooled with the heavy news of his
reiection: After this he stays under the pomgranate tree in Gibeah, He stirs
not toward the garrison of the Philistims: As hope is the mother of fortitude,
so nothing does more breed cowardlines, then despair: Every thing dismaies
that heart, which God has put out of protection: Worthy Jonathan (which sprung
from Saul, as some sweet impe grows out of a crabstock) is therefore full of
valor, because full of faith: He well knew, that he should have nothing, but
discouragements from his fathers fear; as rather choosing therefore, to avoid
all the blocks, that might lie in the way, then to leap over them, he departs
secretly without the dimission of his father, or notice of the people; only
God leads him, and his armor-bearer follows him. O admirable faith of
Jonathan, whom neither the steepnes of rocks, nor the multitude of enemies can
dissuade from so unlikely an assault! Is it possible, that two men, whereof one
was weaponles, should dare to think of incountring so many thousands? O divine
power of faith, that in all difficulties, and attempts, makes a man more then
men, and regards no more armies of men, then swarms of flies! There is no
restraint to the Lord, (says he) to save with many, or by few: It was not so
great news, that Saul should be amongst the Prophets, as that such a word
should come from the son of Saul.

IF his father had had but so much divinity, he had not sacrificed: The
strength of his God is the ground of his strength in God; The question is not,
what Jonathan can do, but what God can do, whose power is not in the means,
but in himself: That man's faith is well vnder-layed, that vpholds it self by
the omnipotency of God; thus the father of the faithful built his assurance
upon the power of the Almighty. But many things God can do, which he will not
do; How know thou, Jonathan, that God will be as forward, as he is able, to
give thee victory? For this (says he) I have a watchword from God, out of the
mouths of the Philistims: If they say, Come up, we will go up; for God has
delivered them into our hands: If they say, Tarry, till we come to you, we will
stand still. Jonathan was too wise to trust unto a casual presage: There might
be some far fetched conjectures of the event from the word; We will come to
you, was a threat of resolution; Come you to us, was a challenge of fear; or
perhaps, Come up to us was a word of insultation, from them, that trusted to
the inaccessiblenes of the the place, and multitudes of men. Insultation is
from pride, Pride argued a fall, but faith has nothing to do with
probabilities, as that, which acknowledges no argument, but demonstration; If
there had not bin an instinct from God of this assured warrant of success,
Jonathan had presumed in steed of believing, and had tempted that God, whom he
professed to glorify by his trust.

THERE can be no faith, where there is no promise, and where there is a
promise, there can be no presumption: Words are voluntary, The tongues of the
Philistims were as free to say, Tarry, as Come: That God, in whom our very
tongues move, ouer-ruled them so, as now they shall speak that word, which
shall cut their own throats: They knew no more harm in Come, then Tarry, both
were alike safe for the sound, for the sense; but he, that put a signification
of their slaughter in the one, not in the other, did put that word into their
mouth, whereby they might invite their own destruction: The disposition of our
words are from the providence of the Almighty, God and our hearts have not
always the same meaning in our speeches: In those words, which we speak at
random, or out of affectation, God has a further drift of his own glory, and
perhaps our judgment. If wicked men say, our tongues are our own, they could
not say so, but from him, whom they defy in saying so, and who makes their
tongue their executioner.

No sooner does Jonathan hear this invitation, then he answers it: He, whose
hands had learned never to fail his heart, puts himself upon his hands and
knees to climb up into this danger, the exploit was not more difficult, then
the way, the pain of the passage was equal to the peril of the enterprise;
that his faith might equally triumph over both, he does not say, how shall I
get up? much less, which way shall I get down again? but, as if the ground
were level, and the action dangerles, he puts himself into the view of the
Philistims: Faith is never so glorious, as when it has most opposition, and
will not see it: Reason looks ever to the means, Faith to the end, and in
steed of consulting, how to effect, resolves, what shall be effected. The way
to heaven is more steep, more painful: O God! how perilous a passage have
thou appointed for thy laboring pilgrims? If difficulties will discourage us,
we shall but climb to fall: When we are lifting up our foot to the last step,
there are the Philistims of death, of temptations, to grapple with; give us but
faith, and turn us loose to the spite either of earth, or hell.

JONATHAN is now on the top of the hill, and now, as if he had an Army at his
heels, he flies upon the host of the Philistims, his hands that might have
bin weary with climbing, are immediately commanded to fight, and deal as many
deaths, as blows to the amassed enemy: He needs not walk far for this
execution; Himself, and his armor-bearer in one half acres space have slain
20 Philistims: It is not long since Jonathan smote their garrison in the hill
of Geba, perhaps, from that time his name and presence carried terror in it, but
sure if the Philistims had not seen, and felt more then a man in the face, and
hands of Jonathan, they had not so easily groueled in death: The blows and
shrikes cannot but affect the next, who with a ghastly noise ran away from
death, and affright their fellows no less, then themselves are affrighted:
The clamor and fear runs on like fire in a train to the very foremost ranks;
Every man would fly, and thinks there is so much more cause of flight, for
that his ears apprehend all, his eyes nothing: Each man thinks his fellow
stands in his way, and therefore in steed of turning upon him, which was the
cause of their flight, they bend their swords upon those, whom they imagine to
be the hinderers of their flight; and now a miraculous astonishment has made
the Philistims, Ionathans champions and executioners; He follows, and kills
those, which helped to kill others; and the more he killed, the more they
feared, and fled, and the more they killed each other in the flight; and that
fear it self might prevent Jonathan in killing them, the earth it self
trembles under them. Thus does God at once strike them with his own hand, with
Ionathans, with theirs, and makes them run away from life, whiles they would
fly from an enemy: Where the Almighty purposes destruction to any people, he
needs not call in foreign powers, he needs not any hands or weapons, but
their own; He can make vaste bodies dye no other death, then their own
weight: We cannot be sure to be friends among our selves, whiles God is our
enemy.

THE Philistims fly fast, but the news of their flight ouerrunnes them even
unto Saul's Pomgranate tree: The watchmen discern a far of, a flight and
execution; search is made, Jonathan is found missing, Saul will consult with
the Arc: Hypocrites, while they have leisure, will perhaps be holy; For some
fitts of devotion they cannot be bettered. But when the tumult increased, Saul's
piety decreases: It is now no season to talk with a Priest; withdraw thine
hand Ahaiah, the Ephod must give place to arms: It is more time to fight, then
to pray; what needs he Gods guidance, when he sees his way before him? He that
before would needs sacrifice, ere he fought, will now in the other extreme,
fight in a wilful indeuotion: Worldly minds regard holy duties no further,
then may stand with their own carnal purposes; Very easy occasions shall
interrupt them in their religious intentions; like unto children, which if a
bird do but fly in their way, cast their eye from their book.

BUT if Saul serve not God in one kind, he will serve him in another, if he
honor him not by attending on the Arc, he will honor him by a vow; His
negligence in the one is recompensed with his zeal in the other. All Israel is
adjured not to eat any food until the evening: Hypocrisy is ever masked with
a blind and thankles zeal: To wait upon the Arc, and to consult with Gods
Priest in all cases of importance was a direct commandment of God; To eat no
food in the pursuit of their enemies was not commanded: Saul leaves that, which
he was bidden, and does that, which he was not required: To eat no food all
day was more difficult, then to attend an hour upon the Arc; The voluntary
services of hypocrites are many times more painful, then the duties enjoined
by God.

In what awe did all Israel stand of the oath even of Saul? It was not their
own vow, but Saul's for them; yet coming into the wood, where they saw the
honey dropping, and found the meat as ready, as their appetite; they dare not
touch that sustenance, and will rather endure famine, and fainting, then an
indiscreet curse: Doubtless God had brought those bees thither on purpose to
try the constancy of Israel; Israel could not but think (that, which Jonathan
said) that the vow was unadvised, and injurious, yet they will rather dye, then
violate it: How sacred should we hold the obligation of our own vows, in
things just and expedient, when the bonds of another rash vow is thus
indissoluble?

THERE was a double mischeife followed upon Saul's oath, an abatement of the
victory, and eating with the blood: For, on the one side, the people were so
faint, that they were more likely to dye, then kill, they could neither run,
nor strike in this emptiness; Neither hands nor feet can do their office,
when the stomach is neglected: On the other, an unmeet forbearance causes a
ravenous repast: Hunger knows neither choice, nor order, nor measure: The one
of these was a wrong to Israel, the other was a wrong done by Israel to God:
Saul's zeal was guilty of both: A rash vow is seldom ever free from
inconvenience; The heart that has unnecessarily entangled it self, draws
mischeife either upon it self, or others.

JONATHAN was ignorant of his fathers adiuration, he knew no reason, why he
should not refresh himself in so profitable a service, with a little taste of
honey upon his spear: Full well had he deserved this unsought dainty; and
behold this honey is turned into gall: If it were sweet in the mouth, it was
bitter in the soul; if the eyes of his body were enlightened, the light of Gods
countenance was clouded by this act. After he heard of the oath, he pleads
justly against it, the loss of so fair an opportunity of revenge, and the
trouble of Israel; yet neither his reasons against the oath, nor his ignorance
of the oath, can excuse him from a sin of ignorance in violating that, which
first he knew not, and then knew unreasonable: Now Saul's leisure would serve
him to ask counsel of God; As before Saul would not inquire, so now God will
not answer: Well might Saul have found sins enough of his own, whereto to
impute this silence: He has grace enough to know that God was offended, and
to guess at the cause of his offense: Sooner will an hypocrite find out
another man's sin, then his own, and now he swears more rashly to punish
with death, the breach of that, which he had sworn rashly: The lots were cast,
and Saul prays for the decision, Jonathan is taken: Even the prayers of wicked
men are sometimes heard, although in justice, not in mercy: Saul himself was
punished not a little, in the fall of this lot upon Jonathan; Surely Saul sinned
more in making this vow, then Jonathan in breaking it unwittingly, and now the
father smarts for the rashness of his double vow, by the unjust sentence of
death upon so worthy a son: God had never singled out Jonathan by his lot, if
he had not bin displeased with his act: Vows rashly made may not be rashly
broken; If the thing we have vowed be not evil in it self, or in the effect,
we cannot violate it without evil; Ignorance cannot acquit, if it can abate
our sin: It is like, if Jonathan had heard of his fathers adiuration, he had
not transgressed; his absence at the time of that oath, cannot excuse him from
displeasure: What shall become of those, which may know the charge of their
heavenly father, and will not? which do know his charge, and will not keep it?
Affectation of ignorance, and willing disobedience is desperate.

DEATH was too hard a censure for such an unknown offense: The cruel piety of
Saul will revenge the breach of his own charge, so as he would be loath, God
should avenge on himself the breach of his divine command: If Jonathan had not
found better friends then his father, so noble a victory had bin recompensed
with death; He that saved Israel from the Philistims, is saved by Israel from
the hand of his father: Saul has sworn Ionathans death, the people contrarily
swear his preservation; His kingdom was not yet so absolute, that he could
run away with so unmerciful a justice; their oath that sauoured of
disobedience, prevailed against his oath, that sauoured too strong of cruelty:
Neither doubt I, but Saul was secretly not displeased with this loving
resistance: So long as his heart was not false to his oath, he could not be
sorry that Jonathan should live.

Contemplations.
THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.
Containing

Saul and Agag. The Rejection of Saul, and the choice of David. David called to
the Court. David and Goliath. Ionathans love and Saul's envy. Michals wile.
David and Ahimelec.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr THOMAS EDMONDS Knight, Treasurer of his Maties
Household, and of his most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
RIGHT HO:
After your long and happy acquaintance with other Courts and Kingdoms, may it
please you to compare with them the estate of old ISRAEL; You shall find the
same hand swaying all scepters; and you shall meet with such a proportion of
dispositions, and occurrences, that you will say, men are still the same, if
their names and faces differ; You shall find Envy and Mutabilitie ancient
Courtiers; and shall confess the vices of men still alive, if themselves dye;
You shall see God still honoring those that honor him, and both rescuing
innocence, and crowning it. It is not for me to anticipate your deeper, and
more judicious observations. I am bold to dedicate this piece of my labor to
your HONOR, in a thankful acknowledgment of those noble respects, I have found
from you, both in FRANCE, and at home. In lieu of all which, I can but pray for
your happiness, and vow my self

Your Honors in all humble observance, IOS. HALL.


Contemplations.
SAVL and AGAG.
GOD holds it no derogation from his mercy to bear a quarrel long, where he
hates: He, whose anger to the vessels of wrath is everlasting, even in
temporal judgment reuengeth late: The sins of his own children are no sooner
done, and repented of, then forgotten; but the malicious sins of his enemies
stick fast in an infinite displeasure. ( I remember what Amalek did to Israel,
how they laid wait for them by the way, as they came up from Egypt): Alas
Lord, (might Amalek say) they were our forefathers, we never knew their faces,
no not their names, the fact was so far from our consent, that it is almost
past the memory of our histories: It is not in the power of time to raze out
any of the arerages of God; we may lay up wrath for our posterity: Happy is
that child, whose progenitors are in heaven, he is left an inheritor of
blessing together with estate, whereas wicked ancestors loose the thank of a
rich patrimony, by the curse, that attends it: He that thinks, because
punishment is deferd, that God has forgiven, or forgot his offense, is
unacquainted with justice, and knows not, that time makes no difference in
eternity.

THE Amalekites were wicked Idolaters, and therefore could not want many
present sins, which deserved their extirpation: That God, which had taken
notice of all their offenses, picks out this one noted sin of their
forefathers, for revenge: Amongst all their indignities, this shall bear the
name of their judgment. As in legal proceedings with malefactors, one
indictment found, gives the style to their condemnation: In the lives of those,
which are notoriously wicked, God cannot look besides a sin, yet when he
draws to an execution, he fastens his sentence upon one evil as principal,
others as accessaries, so as at the last, one sin, which perhaps we make no
account of, shall pay for all.

THE paganish Idolatries of the Amalekites could not but be greater sins to
God, then their hard measure to Israel, yet God sets this upon the file, whiles
the rest are not recorded; Their superstitions might be of ignorance, this
sin was of malice: Malicious wickednesses of all other, as they are in
greatest opposition to the goodness and mercy of God, shall be sure of the
payment of greatest vengeance. The detestation of God may be measured by his
revenge, ( slay both man, and woman, both infant, and suckling, both ox, and
sheep, camel, and ass) not themselves only, but every thing that drew life
either from them, or for their use, must dye: When the God of mercies speaks
such bloody words, the provocation must needs be vehement: sins of infirmity
do but mutter; spightfull sins cry loud for judgment in the ears of God:
Prepensed malice in courts of humane justice aggrauates the murder, and
sharpens the sentence of death.

WHAT then was this sin of Amalek, that is called unto this late reckning?
What? but their envious and unprovoked onsets upon the back of Israel; this
was it, that God took so to heart, as that he not only remembers it now by
Samuel, but he bids Israel ever to remember it, by Moses: Remember how Amalek
met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of you, all that were feeble
behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary. Besides this, did Amalek meet
Israel in a pitched battle openly, in Rephidim, for that God paid them in the
present; The hand of Moses lifted up on the hill, slew them in the valley: He
therefore repeats not that quarrel, but the cowardly, and cruel attempts upon
an impotent enemy, stick still in the stomach of the Almighty: Oppression and
wrong upon even terms, are not so heinous unto God, as those, that are upon
manifest disadvantage: In the one, there is an hazard of return; In the other,
there is ever a tyrannous insulation; God takes still the weaker part, and will
be sure therefore to plague them, which seek to put injuries on the unable to
resist.

THIS sin of Amalek slept all the time of the Judges, those governors were
only for rescue, and defense; now, so soon as Israel has a King, and that
King is settled in peace, God gives charge to call them to account: It was that,
which God had both threatened and sworn, and now he chooses out a fit season
for the execution; As we use to say of winter, the judgments of God do never
rot in the sky, but shall fall (if late, yet) surely, yet seasonably: There is
small comfort in the delay of vengeance, whiles we are sure it shall loose
nothing in the way, by length of protraction.

THE Kenites were the offspring of Hobab, or Iethro, father in law to Moses; the
affinity of him, to whom Israel owed their deliverance, and being, was worthy
of respect; but it was the mercy of that good and wise Midianite showed unto
Israel in the wilderness, by his grave advise, cheerful gratulation, and aid,
which won this grateful forbearance of his posterity: He that is not less
in mercy, then in justice, as he challenged Amaleks sin of their succeeding
generations, so he deriues the recompense of Iethros kindness, unto his
far-descended issue: Those, that were unborn many ages after Iethro's death,
receive life from his dust, and favor from his hospitality; The name of their
dead grandfather saues them from the common destruction of their neighbors.
The services of our love to Gods children are never thanklesse, when we are
dead and rotten, they shall live, and procure blessings to those, which never
knew perhaps, nor heard of their progenitors: If we sow good works,
succession shall reap them, and we shall be happy in making them so.

THE Kenites dwelt in the borders of Amalek, but in tents, (as did their issue
the Rechabites) so as they might remove with ease: They are warned to shift
their habitations, left they should perish with ill neighbors: It is the
manner of God, first to separate, before he judge, as a good husband weeds his
corn, ere it be ripe for the sickle, and goes to the fan, ere he go to the
fire: When the Kenites pack up their fardels, it is time to expect judgment;
Why should not we imitate God, and separate our selves that we may not be
judged? separate, not one Kenite from another, but every Kenite from among the
Amalekites, else if we will needs live with Amalek, we cannot think much to
dye with him.

THE Kenites are no sooner removed, then Saul falls upon the Amalekites: He
destroys all the people, but spares their King: The charge of God was
universal, for man and beast: In the corruption of partiality, lightly the
greatest escape: Covetousness, or mis-affection are commonly guilty of the
impunitie of those, which are at once most eminent in dignity, and in offense:
It is a shameful hypocrisy to make our commodity the measure and rule of our
executions of Gods command, and under pretense of godliness to pretend gain:
The unprofitable vulgar must dye; Agag may yield a rich ransom: The lean and
feeble cattle, that would but spend stouer, and dye alone, shall perish by the
sword of Israel, the best may stock the grounds, and furnish the markets. O
hypocrites, did God send you for gain, or for revenge? Went you to be
purueyors, or executioners? If you plead, that all those wealthy herds had bin
but lost in a speedy death, think ye that he knew not this, which commanded
it? Can that be lost, which is devoted to the will of the owner, and creator?
Or can ye think to gain any thing by disobedience? That man can never either
do well, or farewell, which thinks, there can be more profit in any thing, then
in his obedience to his maker: Because Saul spared the best of the men, the
people spared the best of the cattle, each is willing to favor other in the
sin: The sins of the great command imitation, and do as seldom go
without attendants, as their persons.

SAVL knew well, how much he had done amiss, and yet dare meet Samuel, and can
say, Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have fulfilled the commandment of the
Lord: His heart knew, that his tongue was as false, as his hands had bin, and
if his heart had not bin more false, then either of them, neither of them had
bin so gross in their falsehood: If hypocrisy were not either foolish, or
impudent, she durst not show her head to a Seer of God. Could Saul think, that
Samuel knew of the asses that were lost, and did not know of the oxen and
sheep, that were spared? Could he foretell his thoughts, when it was, and now
not know of his open actions? Much less when we have to do with God himself,
would dissimulation presume either of safety or secrecy? Can the God that made
the heart not know it? Can he, that comprehends all things, be shut out of our
close corners? Saul was otherwise crafty enough, yet herein his simplicity is
palpable: Sin can besot even the wisest man, and there was never but folly in
wickedness.

No man brags so much of holiness, as he that wants it: True obedience is
joined ever with humility, and fear of unknown errors; Falsehood is bold, and
can say, I have fulfilled the commandment of the Lord; If Saul had bin truly
obsequious, and holy, he had made no noise of it: A gracious heart is not a
blab of his tongue, but rests and rejoices silently in the conscience of a
secret goodness, those vessels yield most sound, that have the least liquor:
Samuel had reason to believe the sheep, and oxen above Saul; their bleating and
lowing was a sufficient conviction of a denied, and outfaced disobedience: God
opened their mouths to accuse Saul of their life, and his falsehood; but, as
sin is crafty, and never wanted a cloak, where with both to hide and deck it
self, even this very rebellion is holy: First the act, if it were evil, was
not mine, but the peoples; and secondly, their intention makes it good. For
these flocks and herds were preserved, not for gain, but for devotion: What
needs this quarrel? If any gain by this act, it is the Lord thy God: His
Altars shall smoke with these sacrifices, ye, that serve at them, shall fare
so much the better; this godly thriftines looks for thanks rather then
censure. If Saul had been in Samuels clothes, perhaps this answer would have
satisfied him: Surely himself stands out in it, as that whereto he dare
trust, and after he hears of Gods angry reproof, he auowes, and doubles his
hold of his innocence; as if the commanders should not answer for the known sins
of the people; as if our intentions could justify us to God, against God. How
much ado it is to bring sinners upon their knees, and to make their tongues
accuse their hands? But it is no halting with the maker of the heart: He knew,
it was covetousness, and not piety, which was accessarie to this forbearance;
and if it had bin as was pretended, he knew it was an odious impiety to raise
devotion out of disobedience: Saul shall hear and find, that he has dealt no
less wickedly in sparing an Agag, then in killing an innocent Israelite, in
sparing these beasts for sacrifice, then in sacrificing beasts that had bin
unclean: Why was sacrifice it self good, but because it was commanded? What
difference was there betwixt slaughter and sacifice, but obedience? To
sacrifice disobediently is wilfully to mock God in honoring him.

The rejection of Saul and the choice of David.
EVEN when Saul had abandoned God in disobedience, he would not forgo Samuel,
yea though he reproved him; when he had forsaken the substance, yet he would
maintain the formalitie; If he cannot hold the man, he will keep the pledge
of his garment, such was the violence of Saul's desire, that he will rather rend
Samuels coat, then part with his person. Little did Saul think, that he had in
his hand the pawn of his own rejection, that this act of kind importunity
should carry in it a presage of his judgment, yet so it did; This very rending
of the coat was a real prophecy, and did bode no less, then the rending of
the kingdom from him, and his posterity: Wicked men, whiles they think by
carnal means to make their peace, plunge themselves deeper into misery.

ANY stander by would have said, what a good King is this? how dear is Gods
Prophet unto him? how happy is Israel in such a Prince, as thus loves the
messengers of God? Samuel, that saw the bottom of this hollow affection,
reiects him, whom God had rejected; he was taught to look upon Saul, not as a
King, but as an offender, and therefore refuses with no less vehemency, then
Saul entreated: It was one thing, what he might do, as a subject, another what
he must do, as a Prophet; Now he knows not Saul any otherwise, then as so
much the greater trespasser, as his place was higher; and therefore he does no
more spare his greatness, then the God against whom he sinned; Neither does he
countenance that man with his presence, on whom he sees God to frown.

THERE needs no other Character of hypocrisy, then Saul in the carriage of this
one business with Agag and Samuel: First he obeyes God where there is no gain
in disobedience, then he serves God by halues, and disobeyes, where the
obedience might be loss: He gives God of the worst; he does that in a color,
which might seem answerable to the charge of God; He respects persons in the
execution; He gives good words, when his deeds were evil; He protests his
obedience against his conscience; He faces out his protestation against a
reproof; When he sees no remedy he acknowledges the fact, denies the sin,
yea he iustifies the act by a profitable intention; When he can no longer
maintain his innocence, he casts the blame from himself upon the people; He
confesses not, till the sin be wrung from his mouth; He seeks his peace out
of himself, and relies more upon another virtue, then his own penitency; He
would cloak his guiltiness with the holiness of another presence; He is more
tormented with the danger and damage of his sin, then with the offense; He
cares to hold in with men, in what terms soever he stands with God; He
fashionably serves that God, whom he has not cared to reconcile by his
repentance: No marvel if God cast him off, whose best was dissimulation.

OLD Samuel is forced to do a double execution, and that upon no less then two
Kings: The one upon Saul, in dividing the kingdom from him, who had divided
himself from God; The other upon Agag, in dividing him in pieces, whom Saul
should have divided. Those holy hands were not used to such sacrifices, yet did
he never spill blood more acceptably: If Saul had bin truly penitent, he had in
a desire of satisfaction prevented the hand of Samuel in this slaughter; Now he
coldly stands still, and suffers the weak hands of an aged Prophet to be
imbrued with that blood, which he was commanded to shed. If Saul might not
sacrifice in the absence of Samuel, yet Samuel might kill in the presence of
Saul: He was yet a Judge of Israel, although he suspended the execution: In
Saul's neglect, this charge reuerted to him; God loves just executions so well,
that he will hardly take them ill at any hands.

I do not find, that the slaughter of Agag troubled Samuel; that other act of
his severity upon Saul, though it drew no blood, yet stroke him in the
striking, and fetched tears from his eyes. Good Samuel mourned for him; that
had not grace to mourn for himself: No man in all Israel might seem to have
so much reason to rejoice in Saul's ruin, as Samuel, since that he knew him
raised up in despite of his government; yet he mournes more for him, then he
did for his sons, for himself; It grieved him to see the plant, which he
had set in the garden of Israel, thus soon withered: It is an unnatural
senselessnes not to be affected with the dangers, with the sins of our
governors: God did not blame this sorrow, but moderated it; How long will thou
mourn for Saul? It was not the affection he forbad, but the measure; In this
is the difference betwixt good men and evil, that evil men mourn not for
their own sins, good men do so mourn for the sins of others, that they will
hardly be taken off.

IF Samuel mourn because Saul has cast away God by his sin, he must cease
to mourn, because God has cast away Saul from reigning over Israel in his
just punishment: A good heart has learned to rest it self upon the justice of
Gods decree, and forgets all earthly respects, when it looks up to heaven. So
did God mean to show his displeasure against the person of Saul, that he would
show favor to Israel, he will not therefore bereave them of a King, but change
him for a better: Either Saul had slandred his people, or else they were
partners with him in the disobedience; yet (because it was their rulers fault,
that they were not ouer-ruled) we do not hear of their smarting, any
otherwise, then in the subjection to such a King, as was not loyal to God: The
loss of Saul is their gain; the government of their first King was abortiue,
no marvel if it held not. Now was the maturitie of that State, and therefore
God will bring them forth a kindly Monarchy settled where it should: Kings are
of Gods providing, it is good reason he should make choice of his own deputies;
but where goodness meets with sovereignty, both his right, and his gift are
doubled: If Kings were merely from the earth, what needs a Prophet to be seen
in the choice, or inauguration? The hand of Samuel does not now bear the
scepter to rule Israel, but it bears the horn for the anointing of him, that
must rule: Saul was sent to him, when the time was to be anointed; but now, he
is sent to anoint David: Then Israel sought a King for themselves, now God
seeks a King for Israel: The Prophet is therefore directed to the house of
Ishai the Bethleemite, the grandchild of Ruth; now is the faithful love of
that good Moabitess crowned with the honor of a kingdom, in the succeeding
generation: God fetched her out of Moab, to bring a King unto Israel: Whiles
Orpah wants bread in her own country, Ruth is grown a great Lady in
Bethleem, and is advanced to be great grandmother to the King of Israel. The
retributions of God are bountiful; never any man forsook ought for his sake,
and complained of an hard bargain.

EVEN the best of Gods saints want not their infirmities; He that never
replied, when he was sent to reprove the King, moves doubts, when he is
bidden to go, and anoint his successor. ( How can I go? If Saul hear it he
will kill me.) Perhaps desire of full direction drew from him this question,
but not without a mixture of diffidence; For the manner of doing it, does not
so much trouble him, as the success: It is not to be expected, that the most
faithful hearts should be always in an equal height of resolution. God does
not chide Samuel, but instruct him: He, which is wisdom it self, teaches him
to hide his counsels in an honest policy: ( Take an Heifar with thee, and say,
I am come to do sacrifice to the Lord). This was to say true, not to say all:
Truth may not be crossed by denialls, or equivocations, it may be concealed in
a discreet silence: except in the case of an oath, no man is bound to speak
all he knows; we are not only allowed, but commanded to be innocently
serpentine. There were doubtless heifars enough in Bethleem, Ishai had both wealth
and devotion enough to have bestowed a sacrifice upon God, and his Prophet: But
to give a more perfect color to his intention, Samuel must take an heifar with
him: The act it self was serious and necessary; There was no place, no time,
wherein it was not fit for a Samuel to offer peace-offrings unto God; but when
a King should be anointed, there was no less then necessity in this service.
Those, which must represent God to the world, ought to be consecrated to that
majesty, whom they resemble, by public devotions: Every important action
requires a sacrifice to bless it, much more that act, which imports the whole
Church, or Commonwealth.

IT was great news to see Samuel at Bethleem, he was no gadder abroad, none
but necessary occasions could make him stir from Ramah: The Elders of the
City therefore, welcome him with trembling, not for that they were afraid of
him, but of themselves; they knew, that guest would not come to them for
familiarity, straight do they suspect, it was the purpose of some judgment,
that drew him thither: Come thou peaceably? It is a good thing to stand in
awe of Gods messengers, and to hold good terms with them upon all occasions:
The Bethlemites are glad to hear of no other errand, but a sacrifice; and now
must they sanctify themselves for so sacred a business: We may not presume to
sacrifice unto God unsanctified, this were to mar an holy act, and make our
selves more profane, by profaning that, which should be holy.

ALL the Citizens sanctify themselves, but Ishai and his sons were in a
special fashion sanctified by Samuel: This business was most theirs, and all
Israel in them; the more God has to do with us, the more holy should we be.
With what desire did Samuel look upon the sons of Ishai, that he might see
the face of the man, whom God had chosen? And now, when Eliab the eldest son
came forth, a man of a goodly presence, whose person seemed fit to succeed
Saul, he thinks with himself; This choice is soon made, I have already espied
the head, on which I must spend this holy oil; This is the man, which has
both the privilege of nature in his primogeniture, and of outward goodlinesse
in proportion: Surely the Lords anointed is before him. Even the holiest
Prophet, when he goes without God, runs into error: The best judgment is
subject to deceit; It is no trusting any mortal man, when he speaks of
himself: Our eyes can be led by nothing but signs and appearances, and those
have commonly in them either a true falsehood, or uncertain truth.

THAT which should have forewarned Samuel, deceived him; he had seen the
proof of a goodly stature unanswerable to their hopes, and yet his eye errs in
the shape: He, that judges by the inside both of our hearts and actions, checks
Samuel in this mis-conceit: ( Look not on his countenance, nor on the height
of his stature, because I have refused him; for God sees not as man sees):
The King, with whom God meant to satisfy the untimely desires of Israel, was
chosen by his stature, but the King with whom God meant to please himself is
chosen by the heart. All the seven sons of Ishai are presented to the
Prophet, no one is omitted whom their father thought capable of any respect; If
either Samuel or Ishai should have chosen, David should never have bin King:
His father thought him fit to keep sheep, his brethren fit to rule men; yet
even David (the youngest son) is fetched from the fold, and by the choice of
God destined to the throne: Nature, which is commonly partial to her own,
could not suggest ought to Ishai, to make him think David worthy to be
remembered in any competition of honor, yet him has God singled out to the rule.

GOD will have his wisdom magnified in the vnlikelihoods of his election:
David's countenance was ingenuous, and beautiful, but if it had promised so
much as Eliabs, or Abinadabs, he had not bin in the fields, whiles his brethren
were at the sacrifice: If we do altogether follow our eye, and suffer our
selves to be guided by outward respects in our choice for God, or our selves,
we cannot but go amiss. What do we think the brethren of David thought, when
they saw the oil powered upon his head? surely (as they were envious enough)
they had too much repined, if they had either fully apprehended the purpose of
the Prophet, or else had not thought of some improbabilitie in the success:
Either they understood not, or believed not, what God would do with their
brother; They saw him graced with Gods spirit above his wont, but perhaps
foresaw not, whither it tended: David (as no whit changed in his condition)
returns to his sheep again, and with an humble admiration of Gods gracious
respect to him, casts himself upon the wise and holy decree of the Almighty,
resigning himself to the disposition of those hands, which had chosen him;
when suddenly a messenger is sent from Saul to call him in all haste, to that
Court, whereof he shall once be master: The occasion is no less from God, then
the event.

David called to the COURT.
THAT the kingdom is (in the appointment of God) departed from Saul, it is his
least loss; Now the spirit of God is also departed from him; One spirit is no
sooner gone, but another is come; both are from God: Even the worst spirits
have not only permission, but commission from heaven, for the infliction of
judgment. He that at first could hide himself among the stuff, that he might
not be King, is now so transported with this glory, that he grows passionate
with the thought of forgoing it: Satan takes vantage of his melancholic
dejection, and turns this passion into frenzy. God will have even evil spirits
work by means; A distempred body, and an unquiet mind are fit grounds for
Satan's vexation: Saul's courtiers, as men that were more witty, then religious,
advise him to music: They knew the strength of that skill in allaying the
fury of passions, in cheering up the dejected spirits of their master: This was
done like some fond Chirurgian, that when the bone is out of joint, lays some
soupling pultesses to the part, for the asswaging of the ach, in the mean time
not caring to remedy the luxation.

IF they had said, Sr, you know this evil comes from that God, whom you have
offended, there can be no help but in reconcilement; how easy is it for the
God of spirits to take off Satan? labor your peace with him by a serious
humiliation; make means to Samuel to further the atonement; they had bin wise
counselors, divine Physicians; whereas now they do but skin over the sore,
and leave it rankled at the bottom: The c^^mu^^ must ever proceed in the same
steps with the disease, else in vain shall we seem to heal; There is no
safety in the redress of evils, but to strike at the root. Yet since it is no
better with Saul and his courtiers, it is well it is no worse; I do not hear
either the master, or servants say, This is an ill spirit, send for some
Magitian, that may countermand him: There are forcible enchantments for these
spiritual vexations; If Samuel will not, there are witches, that may give
ease: But as one, that would rather be ill, then do worse, he contents
himself to do that, which was lawful, if insufficient. It is a shame to say,
that he, whom God had rejected for his sin, was yet a Saint to some, that
should be Christians, who care not, how much they are beholden to the Devil in
their distresses, affecting to cast out Devils by Beelzebub: In cases of loss,
or sickness they make Hell their refuge, and seek for no patronage, but of an
enemy: Here is a fearful agreement; Satan seeks to them in his temptations,
they in their consultations seek to him, and now they have mutually found each
other, if they ever part, it is a miracle.

DAVID had lived obscurely in his fathers house, his only care and ambition
was the welfare of the flock he tended, and now, whiles his father and his
brothers neglected him as fit for nothing but the field, he is talked of at
Court: Some of Saul's followers had been at Ishai's house, and taken notice of
David's skill, and now that harp, which he practiced for his private recreation,
shall make him of a shepherd a Courtier: The music, that he meant only to
himself and his sheep, brings him before Kings: The wisdom of God thought fit
to take this occasion of acquainting David with that Court, which he shall once
govern. It is good, that our education should perfect our children in all
those commendable qualities, whereto they are disposed: Little do we know, what
use God means to make of those faculties, which we know not how to employ.
Where the Almighty purposes an advancement, obscurity can be no prejudice;
small means shall set forward that, which God has decreed.

DOVBTLES old Ishai noted (not without admiration) the wonderful accordance of
Gods proceedings, that he, which was sent for out of the field to be anointed,
should now be sent for out of the country into the Court, and now he perceived,
God was making way for the execution of that which he purposed; he attends the
issue in silence, neither shall his hand fail to give furtherance to the
project of God: He therefore sends his son laden with a present to Saul: The
same God, which called David to the Court, wellcoms him thither; His
comeliness, valor, and skill have soon won him favor in the eyes of Saul.
The giver of all graces has so placed his favors, that the greatest enemies
of goodness shall see somewhat in the holiest men, which they shall affect, and
for which they shall honor the persons of them, whose virtues they dislike; as
contrarily the Saints on earth see somewhat to love in the worst creatures.

No doubt David sung to his Harp; His Harp was not more sweet, then his song
was holy: Those Psalms alone had bin more powerful to chase the evil spirit,
then the music was to calm passions; both together gave ease to Saul; and
God gave this effect to both, because he would have Saul train up his
successor: This sacred music did not more dispell Satan, then wanton music
invites him, and more cheeres him, then us: He plays and danceth at a filthy
song, he sings at an obscure dance: Our sin is his best pastime, whereas
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs are torment unto the tempter, and
music to the Angels in heaven, whose trade is to sing Alleluiahs in the Chore
of glory.

David and Goliath.
AFTER the news of the Philistims army, I hear no more mention of Saul's
frenzy: Whether the noise of war diuerted those thoughtfull passions; or
whether God for his peoples sake took off that evil spirit, least Israel
might miscarry under a frantic governor. Now David has leisure to return to
Bethleem: The glory of the Court cannot transport him to ambitious vanity; He
had rather be his fathers shepherd, then Saul's armor-bearer: All the
magnificence and state, which he saw, could not put his mouth out of the taste
of a retired simplicity; yea rather he loves his hook the better, since he saw
the Court; and now his brethren serve Saul in his steed. A good heart has
learnt to frame it self unto all conditions, and can change estates without
change of disposition, rising and falling according to occasion: The worldly
mind can rise easily, but when it is once up, knows not how to descend either
with patience, or safety.

FORTY days together had the Philistims and Israelites faced each other, they
pitched on two hills one in the sight of the other, nothing but a valley was
betwixt them: Both stand upon defense and advantage; If they had not meant to
fight, they had never drawn so near; and if they had bin eager of fight, a
valley could not have parted them: Actions of hazard require deliberation; not
fury but discretion must be the guide of war.

So had Joshua destroyed the giantly Anakims out of the land of Israel, that
yet some were left in Azzah, Gath, and Ashdod: both to show Israel, what
adversaries their forefathers found in Canaan, and whom they mastred; as also
that God might win glory to himself by these subsequent executions: Of that
race was Goliath, whose heart was as high as his head, his strength was
answerable to his stature, his weapons answerable to his strength, his pride
exceeded all: Because he saw his head higher, his arms stronger, his sword and
spear bigger, his shield heavier then any Israelite, he defies the whole host,
and walking between the two armies, braues all Israel with a challenge; ( Why
are ye come out to set your battle in array? Am not I a Philistim? and you
servants to Saul? Choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me: give
me a man, that we may fight together). Carnal hearts are carried away with
presumption of their own abilities, and not finding matches to themselves in
outward appearance, insult over the impotencie of inferiors; and as those, that
can see no invisible opposition, promise themselves certainty of success:
Insolence and selfe-confidence argues the heart to be nothing, but a lump of
proud flesh.

THE first challenge of Duel, that ever we find, came out of the mouth of an
uncircumcised Philistim; yet was that in open war, and tended to the saving
of many lives, by aduenturing one or two; and whosoever imitateth, nay
surpasses him in challenge to private Duel, in the attempt partaketh of his
uncircumcision, though he should overcome, and of his manner of punishment, if
in such private combats he cast away his life. For of all such desperate
prodigalls we may say, that their heads are cut off by their own sword, if
not by their own hand. We cannot challenge men, and not challenge God, who
justly challenges to himself both to take vengeance, and to give success.
The more Goliath challenges, and is unanswered, the more is he puffed up in the
pride of his own power: And is there none of all Israel, that will answer this
champion otherwise then with his heels? Where is the courage of him that was
higher then all Israel from the shoulders upward? The time was, when Nahash the
Ammonite had made that tyrannous demand of the right eyes of the Gileadites,
that Saul could ask unasked, What aileth the people to weep? and could hew his
oxen in pieces to raise the spirits of Israel, and now he stands still, and
sees the host turn their back, and never so much as asks, what aileth the
people to flee? The time was, when Saul slew forty thousand Philistims in one
day, and perhaps Goliath was in that discomfiture, and now one Philistim is
suffered by him to brave all Israel forty days; whence is this difference? The
spirit of God (the spirit of fortitude) was now departed from him: Saul was not
more above himself, when God was with him, then he is below others, now that
he is left of God; Valor is not merely of nature: Nature is ever like it
self, by this rule, he that is once valiant, should never turn coward: But
now we see the greatest spirits inconstant; and those, which have given good
proofs of magnanimity, at other times, have bewrayed white livers unto their
own reproach; He that is the God of hosts, gives and takes away men's hearts
at his pleasure: Neither is it otherwise in our spiritual combats, sometimes
the same soul dare challenge all the powers of darkness, which other-whiles
gives ground to a temptation; We have no strength, but what is given us, and
if the author of all good gifts remit his hand for our humiliation, either we
fight not, or are foiled.

DAVID has now lien long enough close amongst his flock in the fields of
Bethleem, God sees a time to send him to the pitched field of Israel: Good old
Ishai, that was doubtless joyful to think, that he had afforded three sons
to the wars of his King, is no less careful of their welfare, and
provision; and who (amongst all the rest of his seven sons, shall be picked
out for this service, but his youngest son David, whose former and almost
worne-out acquaintance in the Court, and employment under Saul, seemed to fit
him best for his errand* Early in the morning is David upon his way, yet not so
early, as to leave his flock unprovided: If his fathers command dismiss him,
yet will he stay, till he have trusted his sheep with a careful keeper; we
cannot be faithful shepherds, if our spiritual charg be less dear unto us;
if when necessity calls us from our flocks, we depute not those, which are
vigilant and conscionable.

ERE David's speed can bring him to the valley of Elah, both the Armies are on
foot ready to join: He takes not this excuse to stay without, as a man daunted
with the horror of war, but leaving his present with his servant, he thrusts
himself into the thickest of the host, and salutes his brethren, which were
now thinking of nothing but killing or dying, when the proud champion of the
Philistims comes stalking forth before all the troops, and renewes his
insolent challenge against Israel: David sees the man, and hears his defiance,
and looks about him, to see what answer would be given, and when he espies
nothing but pale faces, and bucks turned, he wonders, not so much, that one
man should dare all Israel, as that all Israel should run from one man: Even
while they flee from Goliath, they talk of the reward, that should be given to
that encounter, and victory, which they dare not undertake; so those which have
not grace to believe; yet can say, there is glory laid up for the faithful.
Ever since his anointing, was David possessed with Gods spirit, and thereby
filled both with courage, and wisdom: The more strange does it seem to him,
that all Israel should be thus dastardly: Those, that are themselves eminent in
any grace cannot but wonder at the miserable defects of others, and the more
shame they see in others imperfections, the more is their zeal in avoiding
those errors in themselves.

WHILES base hearts are moved by example, the want of example is encouragement
enough for an heroical mind: Therefore is David ready to undertake the
quarrel, because no man else dare do it: His eyes sparkled with holy anger,
and his heart rose up to his mouth, when he heard this proud challenger: ( Who
is this uncircumcised Philistim, that he should revile the host of the living
God?) Even so, o Savior, when all the generations of men ran away affrighted
from the powers of death and darkness, thou alone have undertaken, and
confounded them.

WHO should offer to daunt the holy courage of David, but his own brethren?
The envious heart of Eliab construes this forwardnes, as his own disgrace:
Shall I (thinks he) be put down by this puisne? shall my fathers youngest son
dare to attempt that, which my stomach will not serve me to adventure? Now
therefore he rates David for his presumption; and in steed of answering to the
recompense of the victory, (which others were ready to give) he recompenceth
the very inquiry of David with a check: It was for his brethrens sake, that
David came thither, and yet his very journey is cast upon him by them, for a
reproach; Wherefore came thou down hither? and when their bitterness can meet
with nothing else to shame him, his sheep are cast in his teeth: Is it for
thee, an idle proud boy, to be meddling with our martial matters? does not
yonder Champion look, as if he were a fit match for thee? what make thou of
thy self? or what do thou think of us? ywis it were fitter for thee to be
looking to thy sheep, then looking at Goliath; the wilderness would become thee
better then the fields: Wherein art thou equal to any man thou see, but in
arrogance and presumption? The pastures of Bethleem could not hold thee, but
thou thought it a goodly matter to see the wars: I know thee, as if I were
in thy bosom; This was thy thought, There is no glory to be got among
fleeces, I will go seek it in arms; Now are my brethren winning honor in the
troops of Israel, whiles I am basely tending on sheep, why should not I be as
forward as the best of them? This vanity would make thee strait of a shepherd,
a soldier, and of a soldier a champion; get thee home, foolish stripling, to
thy hook, and thy harp; let swords and spears alone to those, that know how
to use them.

IT is quarrel enough amongst many to a good action, that it is not their
own; there is no enemy so ready, or so spightfull, as the domestical: The
hatred of brethren is so much more, as their blood is nearer: The malice of
strangers is simple, but of a brother is mixed with envy: The more unnatural
any quality is, the more extreme it is; A cold wind from the south is
intolerable: David's first victory is of himself, next of his brother; He
ouercomes himself in a patient forbearance of his brother, he ouercomes the
malicious rage of his brother with the mildnes of his answer: If David had
wanted spirit, he had not bin troubled with the insultation of a Philistim; If
he had a spirit to match Goliath, how does he so calmely receive the affront of
a brother? What have I now done? is there not a cause? That, which would have
stirred the choler of another, allayeth his: It was a brother, that wronged
him, and that his eldest; neither was it time to quarrel with a brother,
whiles the Philistims swords were drawn, and Goliath was challenging. O that
these two motives could induce us to peace; If we have injury in our person,
in our cause, it is from brethren, and the Philistims look on: I am deceived,
if this conquest were less glorious, then the following: He is fit to be Gods
champion, that has learned to be victor of himself.

IT is not this sprinkling of cold water, that can quench the fire of David's
zeal, but still his courage sends up flames of desire, still he goes on to
inquire, and to proffer: He, whom the regard of others envy can dismay, shall
never do ought worthy of envy: Never man undertook any exploit of worth, and
received not some discouragement in the way, This courageous motion of David
was not more scorned by his brother, then by the other Israelites applauded:
The rumor flies to the ears of the King, that there is a young man desirous to
encounter the giant; David is brought forth: Saul, when he heard of a champion,
that durst go into the lists with Goliath, looked for one as much higher then
himself, as he was taller then the rest; he expected some stern face, and
brawny arm; young and ruddy David is so far below his thoughts, that he
receives rather contempt, then thanks: His words were stout, his person was
weak; Saul does not more like his resolution, then distrust his ability, (
Thou art not able to go against this Philistim to fight with him; for thou art
a boy, and he is a man of war from his youth): Even Saul seconds Eliab in the
conceit of this disparitie, and if Eliab speak out of envy, Saul speaks out of
judgment; both judge (as they were judged of) by the stature: All this cannot
weaken that heart, which receives his strength from faith: David's greatest
conflict is with his friends; The ouercomming of their disswasions, that he
might fight, was more work, then to overcome his enemy in fighting: He must
first justify his strength to Saul, ere he may prove it upon Goliath; Valor is
never made good, but by trial: He pleads the trial of his puissance upon the
Bear and the Lion, that he may have leave to prove it upon a worse beast then
they; Thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear, therefore this
uncircumcised Philistim shall be as one of them.) Experience of good success
is no small comfort to the heart, this gives possibility and hope, but no
certainty: Two things there were on which David built his confidence, on
Goliahs sin, and Gods deliverance, ( seeing he has railed on the host of the
living God: The Lord that delivered me out of the paws of the Lion and the
Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistim). Well did David
know, that if this Philistims skin had bin as hard as the brass of his shield,
his sin would make it penetrable by every stroke. After all brags of manhood
he is impotent, that has provoked God: Whiles other labor for outward
fortifications, happy and safe were we, if we could labor for innocence: He
that has found God present in one extremity, may trust him in the next; Every
sensible favor of the Almighty, invites both his gifts, and our trust.

RESOLVTION thus grounded, makes even Saul himself confident: David shall have
both his leave, and his blessing: If David came to Saul, as a shepherd, he
shall go toward Goliath, as a warrior: The attire of the King is not too rich
for him, that shall fight for his King and country; Little did Saul think, that
his helmet was now on that head, which should once wear his crown: Now that
David was arrayed in the warlike habit of a King, and girded with his sword, he
looked upon himself, and thought this outside glorious; but when he offered to
walk, and found that the attire was not so strong, as vnweeldy, and that it
might be more for show, then use, he lays down these accoustrements of honor,
and as caring rather to be an homely victor, then a glorious spoil; he craves
pardon to go in no clothes, but his own; he takes his staff in steed of the
spear, his shepherds scrip in steed of his brigandine, and in steed of his
sword he takes his sling, and in steed of darts and iauelins, he takes five
smooth stones out of the brook: Let Saul's coat be never so rich, and his
armor never so strong, what is David the better, if they fit him not? It is
not to be inquired, how excellent any thing is, but how proper: Those things
which are helps to some may be encombrances to others: An unmeet good may be as
inconvenient, as an accustomed evil: If we could wish another man's honor, when
we feel the weight of his cares, we should be glad to be in our own cote.

THOSE, that depend upon the strength of faith, though they neglect not means,
yet they are not curious in the proportion of outward means to the effect
desired: Where the heart is armed with an assured confidence, a sling and a
stone are weapons enough; To the unbelieving no helps are sufficient: Goliath,
though he were presumptuous enough, yet had one shield carried before him,
another he carried on his shoulder, neither will his sword alone content him,
but he takes his spear too. David's armor is his plain shepherds russet, and
the brook yields him his artillery, and he knows, there is more safety in his
cloth, then in the others brass; and more danger in his peebles, then the
others spear. Faith gives both heart, and arms: The inward munition is so
much more noble, because it is of proof for both soul and body: If we be
furnished with this, how boldly shall we meet with the powers of darkness, and
go away more then conquerors?

NEITHER did the quality of David's weapons bewray more confidence, then the
number: If he will put his life and victory upon the stones of the brook, why
does he not fill his scrip full of them? why will he content himself with
five? Had he bin furnished with store, the advantage of his nimblenesse might
have given him hope; If one fail, that yet another might speed: But now this
paucity puts the dispatch to a sudden hazard, and he has but five stones cast
either to death or victory; still the fewer helps the stronger faith: David had
an instinct from God, that he should overcome, he had not a particular
direction, how he should overcome. For had he bin at first resolved upon the
sling and stone, he had saved the labor of girding his sword: It seems, whiles
they were addressing him to the combat, he made account of hand-blowes, now he
is purposed rather to send, then bring death to his adversary: In either, or
both, he durst trust God with the success, and before hand (through the
conflict) saw the victory: It is sufficient, that we know the issue of our
fight: If our weapons and wards vary according to the occasion given by God,
that is nothing to the event; sure we are, that if we resist, we shall
overcome, and if we overcome, we shall be crowned.

WHEN David appeared in the lists to so unequal an adversary, as many eyes
were upon him, so in those eyes, diverse affections: The Israelites looked upon
him with pity and fear, and each man thought; Alas, why is this comely
stripling suffered to cast away himself upon such a monster? why will they let
him go unarmed to such an affray? why will Saul hazard the honor of Israel on
so unlikely an head? The Philistims, especially their great Champion, looked
upon him with scorn, disdaining so base a combatant; ( Am I a dog, that thou
come to me with staves?) What could be said more fitly? Had thou bin any
other, then a dog (o Goliath) thou had never opened thy foul mouth to bark
against the host of God, and the God of hosts: If David had thought thee any
other then a very dog, he had never come to thee with a staff and a stone.

THE last words, that ever the Philistim shall speak, are curses and brags: (
Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the heaven, and the
beasts of the field). Seldom ever was there a good end of ostentation:
Presumption is at once the presage, and cause of ruin: He is a weak
adversary, that can be killd with words: That man, which could not fear the
giants hand, cannot fear his tongue: If words shall first encounter, the
Philistim receives the first foil, and shall first let in death into his ear,
ere it enter into his forehead: ( Thou come to me with a sword, and a
spear, and a shield; but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the
God of the host of Israel, whom thou have railed upon: This day shall the Lord
close thee in my hand, and I shall smite thee, and take thine head from thee).
Here is another style, not of a boaster, but of a Prophet: Now shall Goliath
know, whence to expect his bane, even from the hands of a revenging God, that
shall smite him by David, and now shall learn too late, what it is to meddle
with an enemy, that goes under the invisible protection of the Almighty. No
sooner has David spoken, then his foot and hand second his tongue: He runs to
fight with the Philistim; It is a cold courage that stands only upon defense:
As a man, that saw no cause of fear, and was full of the ambition of victory,
he flies upon that monster, and with a stone out of his bagg smites him in the
forehead: There was no part of Goliath, that was capable of that danger, but the
face, and that piece of the face; the rest was defenced with a brazen wall,
which a weak sling would have tried to batter in vain: What could Goliath
fear to see an adversary come to him without edge or point? And behold, that
one part has God found out for the entrance of death: He that could have
caused the stone to pass through the shield and brestplate of Goliath, rather
directs the stone to that part, whose nakedness gave advantage: Where there is
power, or possibility of nature, God uses not to work miracles, but chooses
the way that lies most open to his purposes.

THE vaste forehead was a fair mark, but how easily might the sling have
missed it, if there had not bin another hand in this cast besides David's? He
that guided David into this field, and raised his courage to this combat,
guides the stone to his end, and lodges it in that seat of impudence: There now
lies the great defier of Israel groueling and grinning in death, and is not
suffered to deal one blow for his life, and bites the unwelcome earth for
indignation, that he dies by the hand of a shepherd: earth and Hell share him
betwixt them; such is the end of insolence, and presumption. O God, what is
flesh and blood to thee, which can make a little peeblestone stronger then a
Giant, and when thou will, by the weakest means can straw thine enemies in
the dust? Where now are the two sheilds of Goliath, that they did not bear off
this stroke of death? or wherefore serves that weauers beam, but to strike the
earth in falling? or that sword, but to behead his Master? What needed David
load himself with an unnecessary weapon? one sword can serve both Goliath, and
him; If Goliath had a man to bear his shield, David had Goliath to bear his
sword, wherewith that proud blasphemous head is severed from his shoulders:
Nothing more honors God, then the turning of wicked men's forces against
themselves: There is none of his enemies, but caries with them their own
destruction. Thus did thou, O son of David, foil Satan with his own
weapon, that, whereby he meant destruction to thee and us, vanquished him
through thy mighty power, and raised thee to that glorious triumph, and
super-exaltation, wherein thou art, wherein we shall be with thee.

JONATHANS love, and SAVLS envy.
BESIDES the discomfiture of the Philistims, David's victory had a double issue;
Ionathans love, and Saul's envy, which God so mixed, that the one was a remedy
of the other; A good son makes amends for a wayward father: How precious was
that stone, that killed such an enemy as Goliath, and purchased such a friend as
Jonathan? All Saul's Courtiers looked upon David, none so affected him, none did
match him but Jonathan: That true correspondence, that was both in their faith
and valor has knit their hearts: If David did set upon a Bear, a Lion, a
Giant; Jonathan had set upon a whole host, and prevailed: The same spirit
animated both, the same faith incited both, the same hand prospered both: All
Israel was not worth this pair of friends, so zealously confident, so happily
victorious: Similitude of dispositions and estates ties the fastest knots of
affection: A wise soul has piercing eyes, and has quickly discerned the
likeness of it self in another, as we do no sooner look into the glass or
water, but face answers to face; and where it sees a perfect resemblance of it
self, cannot choose but love it with the same affection, that it reflects upon
it self.

No man saw David that day, which had so much cause to disaffect him; none in
all Israel should be a looser by David's success, but Jonathan: Saul was sure
enough settled for his time, only his successor should forgo all that, which David
should gain; so as none but David stands in Ionathans light, and yet all this
cannot abate one jot, or dram of his love: Where God unites hearts, carnal
respects are too weak to disseuer them, since that, which breaks off
affection, must needs be stronger, then that which conioyneth it.

JONATHAN does not desire to smother his love by concealment, but professes it
in his carriage and actions: He puts off the robe, that was upon him, and all
his garments even to his sword, and bow, and girdle, and gives them unto his
new friend: It was not perhaps without a mystery, that Saul's clothes fitted not
David, but Ionathans fitted him, and these he is as glad to wear, as he was to
be disburthened of the other: That there might be a perfect resemblance, their
bodies are suited, as well as their hearts: Now the beholders can say, there
goes Ionathans other self; If there be another body under those clothes,
there is the same soul: Now David has cast off his russet coat, and his
scrip, and is a shepherd no more, he is suddenly become both a Courtier, and a
Captain, and a companion to the Prince; yet himself is not changed with his
habit, with his condition: yea rather (as if his wisdom had reserved it self
for his exaltation) he so manageth a sudden greatness, as that he wins all
hearts: Honor shows the man, and if there be any blemishes of imperfection,
they will be seen in the man, that is inexpectedly lifted above his fellows:
He is out of the danger of folly, whom a speedy advancement leaves wife.

JONATHAN loved David, the soldiers honored him, the Court fauord him, the
people applauded him, only Saul stomackt him, and therefore hated him, because
he was so happy in all besides himself: It had bin a shame for all Israel, if
they had not magnified their champion: Saul's own heart could not but tell him,
that they did owe the glory of that day, and the safety of himself and Israel,
unto the sling of David, who in one man slew all those thousands at a blow: It
was enough for the puissant King of Israel to follow the chase, and to kill
them, whom David had put to flight; yet he, that could lend his clothes and his
armor to this exploit, cannot abide to part with the honor of it to him, that
has erned it so deerly: The holy songs of David had not more quieted his
spirits before, then now the thankful song of the Israelitish women vexes him:
One little ditty ( of Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand)
sung unto the timbrels of Israel, fetched again that evil spirit, which David's
music had expelled: Saul needed not the torment of a worse spirit, then
envy. Oh the unreasonableness of this wicked passion! The women gave Saul more,
and David less, then he deserved: For Saul alone could not kill a thousand,
and David in that one act of killing Goliath, slew in effect, all the Philistims
that were slain that day; and yet because they give more to David, then to
himself, he that should have endited, and begun that song of thankfulness,
repines and grows now as mad with envy, as he was before with grief: Truth
and Justice are no protection against malice; Envy is blind to all objects,
save other men's happiness: If the eyes of men could be contained within their
own bounds, and not roue forth into comparisons, there could be no place for
this vicious affection; but when they have once taken this lawless scope to
themselves, they loose the knowledge of home, and care only to be employed
abroad in their own torment.

NEVER was Saul's breast so fit a lodging for the evil spirit, as now, that it
is dressed up with envy: It is as impossible, that Hell should be free from
Devils, as a malicious heart; Now does the frantic King of Israel renew his
old fitts, and walks, and talks distractedly; He was mad with David, and who
but David must be called to allay his madness? Such as David's wisdom was, he
could not but know the terms, wherein he stood with Saul; yet in the lieu of
the harsh and discordous notes of his masters envy, he returns pleasing
music unto him: He can never be good Courtier, nor good man, that has not
learned to repay, if not injuries with thanks, yet evil with good. Whiles
there was a harp in David's hand, there was a spear in Saul's, wherewith he
threatens death, as the recompense of that sweet melody: He said ( I will
smite David through to the wall). It is well for the innocent, that wicked men
cannot keep their own council: God fetches their thoughts out of their
mouths, or their countenances for a seasonable prevention, which else might
proceed to secret execution: It was time for David to withdraw himself, his
obedience did not tie him to be the mark of a furious Master; He might ease
Saul with his music, with his blood he might not: Twice therefore does he
avoid the Presence, not the Court, not the service of Saul.

ONE would have thought rather, that David should have bin afraid of Saul,
because the Devil was so strong with him, then that Saul should be afraid of
David, because the Lord was with him; yet we find all the fear in Saul of
David, none in David of Saul: Hatred and fear are ordinary companions: David
had wisdom and faith to dispell his fears, Saul had nothing but infidelity,
and dejected, selfe-condemned, distempred thoughts, which must needs nourish
them; yet Saul could not fear any hurt from David, whom he found so loyal,
and serviceable: He fears only too much good unto David; and the envious fear
is much more, then the distrustful: Now David's presence begins to be more
displeasing, then his music was sweet; Despite it self had rather prefer
him to a remote dignity, then endure him a nearer attendant: This promotion
increases David's honor and love; and this love and honor aggrauates Saul's
hatred and fear.

SAVLS madness has not bereaved him of his craft: For perceiving how great
David was grown in the reputation of Israel, he dares not offer any personal,
or direct violence to him, but hires him into the jaws of a supposed death, by
no less price, then his eldest daughter, ( Behold mine eldest daughter Merab:
her will I give thee to wife, only be a valiant son to me, and fight the
Lords battles). Could ever man speak more graciously, more holily? What could
be more graciously offered by a King, then his eldest daughter? What care could
be more holy, then of the Lords battles? yet never did Saul intend so much
mischeife to David, or so much unfaithfulness to God, as when he spoke thus:
There is never so much danger of the false-hearted, as when they make the
fairest weather: Saul's spear bad David be gone, but his plausible words invite
him to danger: This honor was due to David before, upon the compact of his
victory; yet he, that twice inquired into the reward of that enterprise, before
he undertook it, never demanded it after that atchieument; neither had Saul
the justice to offer it, as a recompense of so noble an exploit, but as a snare
to an envied victory. Charity suspects not: David construes that, as an effect
and argument of his Masters love, which was no other but a child of envy, but
a plot of mischeife; and though he knew his own desert, and the justice of his
claim to Merab; yet he in a sincere humility disparageth himself, and his
parentage with a Who am I?

As it was not the purpose of this modesty in David to reject, but to solicit
the proferd favor of Saul; so was it not in the power of this bashful
humiliation to turn back the edge of so keen an envy: It helps not that
David makes himself mean, whiles others magnify his worth: Whatsoever the
color was, Saul meant nothing to David but danger and death; and since all
those battles will not effect that which he desired, himself will not effect
that which he promised: If he cannot kill David, he will disgrace him; David's
honor was Saul's disease: It was not likely therefore, that Saul would add unto
that honor, whereof he was so sick already: Merab is given unto another,
neither do I hear David complain of so manifest an injustice; He knew, that
the God, whose battles he fought, had provided a due reward of his patience:
If Merab fail, God has a Michal in store for him, she is in love with David;
his comelines and valor have so won her heart, that she now emulates the
affection of her brother Jonathan: If she be the younger sister, yet she is
more affectionate: Saul is glad of the news, his daughter could never live to
do him better service, then to be a new snare to his adversary: She shall
be therefore sacrificed to his envy, and her honest and sincere love shall
be made a bait for her worthy and innocent husband ( I will give him her,
that she may be a snare unto him, that the hand of the Philistims may be
against him): The purpose of any favor is more then the value of it: Even the
greatest honors may be given with an intent of destruction; Many a man is
raised up for a fall. So forward is Saul in the match, that he sends spokes-men
to solicit David unto that honor, which he hopes will prove the highway to
death: The dowry is set; An hundred foreskins of the Philistims; not their
heads, but their fore-skins, that this victory might be more ignominious;
still thinking, why may not one David miscarry, as well as an hundred
Philistims? And what does Saul's envy all this while, but enhance David's zeal,
and valor, and glory? That good Captain little imagining, that himself was
the Philistim, whom Saul maligned, supererogates of his master, and brings two
hundred for one, and returns home safe, and renowned: Neither can Saul now
fly off for shame; There is no remedy but David must be a son, where he was
a rival, and Saul must feed upon his own heart, since he cannot see David's;
Gods blessing graces equally together with men's malice, neither can they
devise, which way to make us more happy, then by wishing us evil.

Michals wile.
THIS advantage can Saul yet make of David's promotion, that as his adversary
is raised hyer, so he is drawn nearer to the opportunity of death; Now has
his envy cast off all shame, and since those crafty plots succeed not, he
directly subornes murderers of his rival: There is none in all the Court that
is not set on to be an executioner; Jonathan himself is solicited to imbrue
his hand in the blood of his friend, of his brother. Saul could not but see
Ionathans clothes on David's back; he could not but know the league of their
love, yet because he knew withal, how much the prosperity of David would
prejudice Jonathan, he hoped to have found him his son in malice; Those that
have the Iaundis see all things yellow; those which are ouer-growne with
malicious passions, think all men like themselves.

I do not hear of any reply that Jonathan made to his father when he gave him
that bloody charge; but he waits for a fit time to dissuade him from so cruel
an injustice: Wisdom had taught him to give way unto rage, and in so hard an
adventure to crave aid of opportunity: If we be not careful to observe good
moods when we deal with the passionate, we may exasperate, in steed of
reforming; Thus did Jonathan, who knowing how much better it is to be a good
friend, then an ill son, had not only disclosed that ill counsel, but when
he found his father in the fields, in a calmer temper, labored to divert it:
And so far does the seasonable and pithy Oratory of Jonathan prevail, that
Saul is convinced of his wrong, and swears, As God lives, David shall not dye;
Indeed, how could it be otherwise, upon the plea of David's innocence, and well
deseruings? How could Saul say he should dye, whom he could accuse of nothing
but faithfulness? Why should he design him to death, which had given life to
all Israel? Oft-times wicked men's judgments are forced to yield unto that
truth, against which their affections maintain a rebellion: Even the foulest
hearts do sometimes intertaine good motions; like as on the contrary, the
holiest souls give way sometimes to the suggestions of evil: The flashes of
lightning may be discerned in the darkest prisons. But if good thoughts look
into a wicked heart, they stay not there; as those that like not their lodging,
they are soon gone; Hardly any thing distinguishes betwixt good and evil, but
continuance; The light that shines into an holy heart is constant, like that of
the sun, which keeps due times, and varies not his course for any of these
sublunary occasions.

THE Philistims wars renew David's victories, and David's victory renues Saul's
envy, and Saul's envy renues the plots of David's death: Vows and oaths are
forgotten: That evil spirit which vexes Saul has found so much favor with
him, as to win him to these bloody machinations against an innocent; His own
hands shall first be employed in this execution; The spear, which has twice
before threatened death to David, shall now once again go upon that message:
Wise David that knew the danger of an hollow friend, and reconciled enemy, and
that found more cause to mind Saul's earnest, then his own play, gives way by
his nimblenesse, to that deadly weapon, and resigning that stroke unto the
wall, flees for his life. No man knows how to be sure of an unconscionable
man; If either goodness, or merit, or affinity, or reasons, or oaths could
secure a man, David had bin safe; now if his heels do not more befrend him
then all these, he is a dead man. No sooner is he gone then messengers are sped
after him; It has bin seldom seen that wickedness wanted executioners;
David's house is beset with murderers, which watch at all his doors, for the
opportunity of blood: Who can but wonder to see how God has fetched from the
loins of Saul a remedy for the malice of Saul's heart? His own children are
the only means to cross him in the sin, and to preserve his guiltless
adversary; Michal has more then notice of the plot, and with her subtle wit
countermines her father, for the rescue of an husband: She taking the benefit
of the night lets David down through a window; He is gone, and disappoints the
ambushes of Saul: The messengers begin to be impatient of this delay, and now
think it time to inquire after their prisoner; She whiles them off, with the
excuse of David's sickness, (so as now her husband had good leisure for his
escape) and lays a statue in his bed; Saul likes the news of any evil
befalne to David, but fearing he is not sick enough, sends to aid his
disease; The messengers return, and rushing into the house with their swords
drawn, after some harsh words to their imagined charge, surprise a sick
statue lying with a pillow under his head; and now blush to see they have spent
all their threats upon a senseless stock; and made themselves ridiculous,
whiles they would be serviceable.

BUT how shall Michal answer this mockage unto her furious father? Hitherto she
has done like David's wife; now she begins to be Saul's daughter; ( He said to
me, Let me go, or else I will kill thee). She whose wit had delivered her
husband from the sword of her father, now turns the edge of her fathers wrath
from herself to her husband; His absence made her presume of his safety: If
Michal had not bin of Saul's plot, he had never expostulated with her in those
terms, Why have thou let mine enemy escape? neither had she framed that
answer, He said, Let me go: I do not find any great store of religion in
Michal, for both she had an image in the house, and afterward mocked David
for his devotion; yet nature has taught her to prefer an husband to a
father; to elude a father from whom she could not flee, to save an husband,
which durst not but flee from her: The bonds of matrimonial love are, and
should be stronger then those of nature; Those respects are mutual which God
appointed in the first institution of wedlock; That husband and wife should
leave father and mother for each others sake. Treason is ever odious, but so
much more in the mariage-bed by how much the obligations are deeper.

As she loved her husband better then her father, so she loved her self
better then her husband; she saved her husband by a wile, and now she saues
her self by a lie; and looses half the thank of her deliverance, by an
officious slander; Her act was good, but she wants courage to maintain it;
and therefore seeks to the weak shelter of untruth: Those that do good offices
not out of conscience, but good nature or civility; if they meet an affront of
danger, seldom comes off cleanly, but are ready to catch at all excuses,
though base, though injurious; because their grounds are not strong enough to
bear them out in suffering for that, which they have well done.

WHITHER does David flee but to the Sanctuary of Samuel? He does not (though he
knew himself gracious with the soldiers) raise forces, or take some strong
fort, and there stand upon his own defense, and at defiance with his King: but
he gets him to the College of the Prophets; as a man that would seek the
peaceable protection of the King of heaven against the unjust fury of a King
on earth: Only the wing of God shall hide him from that violence.

GOD intended to make David not a warrior, and a King only, but a Prophet too;
As the field fitted him for the first, and the Court for the second, so Naioth
shall fit him for the third. Doublesse (such was David's delight in holy
meditations) he never spent his time so contentedly, as when he was retired to
that divine Academie, and had so full freedom to enjoy God, and to satiate
himself with heavenly exercises: The only doubt is how Samuel can give harbor
to a man fled from the anger of his Prince; wherein, the very persons of both
give abundant satisfaction: for both Samuel knew the counsel of God, and durst
do nothing without it; and David was by Samuel anointed from God: This unction
was a mutual bond; Good reason had David to sue to him, which had powered the
oil on his head, for the hiding of that head which he had anointed; and good
reason had Samuel to hide him, whom God by his means had chosen, from him whom
God had by his sentence rejected: Besides, that the cause deserved
commiseration; Here was not a malefactor running away from justice, but an
innocent avoiding murder; not a traitor countenanced against his Sovereign, but
the deliverer of Israel harbored in a Sanctuary of Prophets till his peace
might be made.

EVEN thither does Saul send to apprehend David: All his rage did not incense
him against Samuel as the abettor of his adversary; Such an impression of
reverence had the person, and calling of the Prophet left in the mind of Saul,
that he cannot think of lifting up his hand against him; The same God which
did at the first put an awe of man in the fiercest creatures, has stamped in
the cruellest hearts a reverent respect to his own image in his Ministers; so
as even they that hate them, do yet honor them.

SAVLS messengers came to lay hold on David, God lays hold on them: No sooner
do they see a company of Prophets busy in those divine exercises, under the
moderation of Samuel, then they are turned from executioners to Prophets. It is
good going up to Naioth, into the holy assemblies, who knows how we may be
changed beside our intention? Many a one has come into Gods house to carpe, or
scoff, or sleep, or gaze, that has returned a convert.

THE same heart that was thus disquieted with David's happy success, is now
vexed with the holiness of his other servants. It angers him that Gods spirit
could find no other time to seize upon his agents, then when he had sent them
to kill: And now out of an indignation at this disappointment, himself will
go, and be his own servant; His guilty soul finds it self out of the danger
of being thus surprised; And behold Saul is no sooner come within the smell of
the smoke of Naioth, then he also prophesies: The same spirit that, when he
went first from Samuel, enabled him to prophecy, returns in the same effect
now that he was going (his last) unto Samuel: This was such a grace as might
well stand with reiection; an extraordinary gift of the spirit, but not
sanctifying: Many men have had their mouths opened to prophecy unto others,
whose hearts have bin deaf to God; But this (such as it was) was far from
Saul's purpose, who in steed of expostulating with Samuel, falls down before
him; and laying aside his weapons, and his robes, of a Tyran proves (for the
time) a disciple: All hearts are in the hand of their maker; how easy is it
for him that gave them their being, to frame them to his own bent? Who can be
afraid of malice, that knows what hooks God has in the nosthrills of men and
Devils? what charms he has for the most serpentine hearts?

DAVID and AHIMELEC.
WHo can ever judge of the children by the Parents, that knows Jonathan was
the son of Saul? There was never a falser heart then Saul's; there was never a
truer friend then Jonathan; Neither the hope of a kingdom, nor the frowns of a
father, nor the fear of death can remove him from his vowed amity: No son
could be more officious, and dutiful to a good father; yet he lays down
nature at the foot of grace; and for the preservation of his innocent rival
for the kingdom, crosses the bloody designs of his own parent: David needs no
other counselor, no other advocate, no other intelligencer then he; It is not
in the power of Saul's unnatural reproaches, or of his spear, to make Jonathan
any other then a friend, and patron of innocence: Even after all these
difficulties, does Jonathan shoot beyond David, that Saul may shoot short of
him: In vain are those professions of love, which are not answered with
action; He is no true friend that (besides talk) is not ready both to do, and
suffer.

SAVL is no whit the better for his prophesying; he no sooner rises up from
before Samuel, then he pursues David. Wicked men are rather the worse for those
transitory good motions they have received. If the swine be never so clean
washed, she will wallow again: That we have good thoughts, it is no thank to
us; that we answer them not, it is both our sin and judgment.

DAVID has learned not to trust these fits of devotion, but flies from Samuel
to Jonathan, from Jonathan to Ahimelech; when he was hunted from the Prophet,
he flees to the Priest; as one that knew justice and compassion should dwell in
those breasts which are consecrated unto God.

THE Arc and the Tabernacle were then separated; The Arc was at
Kiriath-iearim, the Tabernacle at Nob; God was present with both: Whither
should David flee for succor but to the house of that God, which had anointed
him.

AHIMELECH was wont to see David attended with the Troops of Israel, or with
the Gallants of the Court; it seems strange therefore to him, to see so great a
Peer and Champion of Israel come alone; These are the alterations to which
earthly greatness is subject; Not many days are past, since no man was honored
at Court but Jonathan and David; now they are both for the time in disgrace;
Now dare not the Kings son in law, brother to the Prince both in love and
marriage, show his head at the Court; nor any of those that bowed to him, dare
stir a foot with him; Princes are as the Sun, and great subjects are like
to Dialls, if the Sun shine not on the Dial, no man will look at it.

EVEN he that overcame the Bear, the Lion, the Giant, is overcome with fear:
He that had cut off two hundred foreskins of the Philistims had not
circumcised his own heart of the weak passions that follow distrust; Now that
he is hard driven, he practices to help himself with an unwarrantable shift:
Who can look to pass this pilgrimage without infirmities, when David
dissembleth to Ahimelec? A weak man's rules may be better then the best man's
actions; God lets us see some blemishes in his holiest servants, that we may
neither be too highly conceited of flesh and blood, nor too much dejected when
we have bin miscarried into sin. Hitherto has David gone upright, now he
begins to halt with the Priest of God; and under pretense of Saul's employment,
draws that favor from Ahimelech which shall afterward cost him his head.

WHAT could Ahimelech have thought too dear for Gods anointed, for Gods
Champion? It is not like but that if David had sincerely opened himself to the
Priest as he had done to the Prophet, Ahimelech would have seconded Samuel in
some secret and safe succor of so unjust a distress; whereas he is now by a
false color led to that kindness which shall be prejudicial to his life:
Extremities of evil are commonly inconsiderate; either for that we have not
leisure to our thoughts, or perhaps (so as we may be perplexed) not thoughts to
our leisure: What would David have given afterward to have redeemed this
ouer-sight?

UNDER this pretense he craves a double favor of Ahimelech; The one of bread
for his sustenance, the other of a sword for his defense: There was no bread
under the hands of the Priest but that which was consecrated to God; and
whereof none might taste, but the devoted servants of the Altar; Even that
which was with solemn dedication set upon the holy Tables before the face of
God; a sacramental bread presented to God with incense, figuring that true
bread that came down from heaven; Yet even this bread might in case of
necessity become common and be given by Ahimelech, and received by David and
his followers: Our Savior himself iustifies the act of both; Ceremonies must
give place to substance; God will have mercy and not sacrifice; Charity is the
sum and the end of the law; That must be aimed at in all our actions; wherein
it may fall out, that the way to keep the law may be to break it; the
intention may be kept, and the letter violated; and it may be a dangerous
transgression of the law to observe the words, and neglect the scope of God;
That which would have dispensed with David for the substance of the act, would
have much more dispensed with him for the circumstance; The touch of their
lawful wives had contracted a legal impuritie, not a moral; That could have
bin no sufficient reason why in an urgent necessity they might not have
partaked of the holy bread: Ahimelech was no perfect Casuist; these men might
not famish, if they were ceremonially impure, But this question bewrayed the
care of Ahimelech in distributing the holy bread; There might be in these men a
double incapacitie, the one, as they were seculars, the other, as unclean; he
saw the one must be, he feared least the other should be; as one that wished as
little indisposition (as possibly might be) in those which should be fed from
Gods table.

IT is strange that David should come to the Priest of God for a sword; Who in
all Israel was so unlikely to furnish him with weapons, as a man of peace,
whose armor was only spiritual? Doubtless David knew well where Goliahs
sword lay; as the noble relic of Gods victorious deliverance, dedicated to
the same God, which won it; at this did that suite aim? None could be so fit
for David, none could be so fit for it as David: Who could have so much right
to that sword as he against whom it was drawn, and by whom it was taken? There
was more in that sword then metal and form; David could never cast his eye
upon it, but he saw an undoubted monument of the merciful protection of the
Almighty; there was therefore more strength in that sword, then sharpnes;
neither was David's arm so much strengthened by it as his faith; nothing can
overcome him, whiles he carries with him that assured sign of victory: It is
good to take all occasions of renewing the remembrance of Gods mercies to us,
and our obligations to him.

DOEG the master of Saul's herdmen (for he that went to seek his fathers asses
before he was King, has herdes and droues now that he is a King) was now in
the court of the Tabernacle, upon some occasion of devotion; Though an
Israelite in profession, he was an Edomite no less in heart then in blood; yet
he has some vow upon him, and not only comes up to Gods house, but abides
before the Lord: Hypocrites have equal access to the public places, and
means of Gods service: Even he that knows the heart, yet shuts his doors upon
none, how much less should we dare to exclude any, which can only judge of
the heart by the face?

DOEG may set his foot as far within the Tabernacle, as David; he sees the
passages betwixt him, and Ahimelech, and lays them up for an advantage; Whiles
he should have edified himself by those holy services, he carps at the Priest
of God, and (after a lewd misinterpretation of his actions) of an attendant,
proves an accuser; To incur favor with an unjust master, he informs against
innocent Ahimelech; and makes that his act, which was drawn from him by a
cunning circumuention: When we see our auditors before us, little do we know
with what hearts they are there; nor, what use they will make of their
pretended devotion: If many come in simplicity of heart to serve their God,
some others may perhaps come to observe their teachers, and to pick quarrels
where none are; Only God and the issue can distinguish betwixt a David, and a
Doeg, when they are both in the Tabernacle. Honest Ahimelech could little
suspect that he now offered a sacrifice for his executioner; yea for the
murderer of all his family: Oh the wise and deep judgments of the Almighty!
God owed a reueng to the house of Eli, and now by the delation of Doeg, he
takes occasion to pay it; It was just in God, which in Doeg was most unjust;
Saul's cruelty, and the treachery of Doeg do not loose one dram of their guilt by
the counsel of God; neither does the holy counsel of God gather any blemish
by their wickedness; If it had pleased God to inflict death upon them sooner
without any pretense of occasion, his justice had bin clear from all
imputations; now, if Saul and Doeg be in steed of a pestilence or fever, who
can cavil? The judgments of God are not always open, but are always just;
He knows how by one man's sin to punish the sin of another, and by both
their sins and punishments to glorify himself. If his word sleep, it shall not
dye; but after long intermissions breaks forth in those effects which we had
forgotten to look for, and ceased to fear. O Lord, thou art sure when thou
threatnest, and just when thou iudgest; Keep thou us from the sentence of
death, else in vain shall we labor to keep our selves from the execution.

Contemplations UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
THE FIRST BOOK:

Containing The Angel and Zachary. The Annuntiation. The Birth of CHRIST. The
Sages and the Star. The Purification. Herod and the Infants.



TO MY MVCH HONORED, AND RIGHT WORfull FRIEND, Sr HENRY YELVERTON Knight,
Attorney General to his Majesty.
Right Worshipful,
IT is not out of any satiety, that I change from the old Testament to the new;
These two, as they are the breasts of the Church, so they yield milk equally
wholesome, equally pleasant unto able nurselings. Herein I thought good to have
respect unto my reader, in whose strength there may be difference. That other
breast perhaps, does not let down this nourishing liquor, so freely, so easily:
Even so small a variety refreshes a weak infant; Neither wid there perhaps
want some palates, which will find a more quick and pleasing relish in this
fresher sustenance; These I thought good to please with a taste, ere they come
to sat themselves with a full meal of this divine nourishment; in emulation
of the good Scribe, that brings forth both old, and new. If it please God to
enable my life and opportunities, I hope at last, to present his Church, with
the last service of the History of either page: wherein my joy, and my crown
shall be the edification of many. In the mean time, I dedicate this part unto
your name, whom I have so much cause to observe, and honor: The blessing of
that God (whose Church you have ever made your chief Client) be still upon
your head, and that honorable Society which reioyces in so worthy a leader. To
it, and your self, I shall be ever (as I have cause) humbly and unfeignedly
devoted

IOS. HALL.

The Angel and Zachary.
WHEN things are at the worst, then God begins a change: The state of the
Jewish Church was extremely corrupted, immediately before the news of the
Gospel; yet, as bad as it was, not only the Preisthood, but the courses of
attendance continued, even from David's time till Christ's: It is a desperately
depraved condition of a Church, where no good orders are left: Judea passed
many troubles, many alterations, yet this orderly combination endured above an
eleven hundred years: A settled good will not easily be defeated, but in the
change of persons will remain unchanged, and if it be forced to give way,
leaves memorable footsteps behind it: If David foresaw the perpetuation of
this holy ordinance, how much did he rejoice in the knowledge of it? who would
not be glad to do good, on condition, that it may so long outliue him?

The successiue turns of the legal ministration held on in a line never
interrupted: Even in a forlorn and miserable Church there may be a personal
succession: How little were the Jews better for this, when they had lost the
Vrim and Thummim, sincerity of doctrine and manners? This stayed with them,
even whiles they and their sons crucified Christ; What is more ordinary, then
wicked sons of holy parents? It is the succession of truth and holiness, that
makes or institutes a Church, what ever become of the persons: Never times were
so barren, as not to yield some good: The greatest dearth affords some few good
^^ares to the gleaners: Christ would not have come into the world, but he would
have some faithful to entertain him: He, that had the disposing of all times
and men, would cast some holy ones into his own times: There had bin no
equality, that all should either overrun, or follow him, and none attend
him. Zachary and Elizabeth are just; both of Aarons blood, and John Baptist of
theirs: whence should an holy seed spring, if not of the loins of Leui? It is
not in the power of parents to traduce holiness to their children: It is the
blessing of God, that feoffes them in the virtues of their parents, as they
feoffe them in their sins: There is no certainty, but there is likelihood, of
an holy generation, when the parents are such: Elizabeth was just, as well as
Zachary, that the fore runner of a Savior might be holy on both sides: If the
stock and the griffe be not both good, there is much danger of the fruit: It
is an happy match, when the husband and the wife are one, not only in
themselves, but in God, not more in flesh, then in the spirit: Grace makes no
difference of sexes, rather the weaker carries away the more honor, because it
has had less helps: It is easy to observe, that the new Testament affords
more store of good women, then the old: Elizabeth led the ring of this mercy,
whose barrenness ended in a miraculous fruit both of her body, and of her time.

This religious pair made no less progress in virtue, then in age, and yet
their virtue could not make their best age fruitful: Elizabeth was barren: A
just soul and a barren womb may well agree together: Amongst the Jews
barrenness was not a defect only, but a reproach, yet while this good woman
was fruitful of holy obedience, she was barren of children: As John, which
was miraculously conceived by man, was a fit forerunner of him, that was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, so a barren matron was meet to make way for a
virgin.

None, but a son of Aaron, might offer incense to God in the Temple; and not
every son of Aaron, and not any one at all seasons: God is a God of order, and
hates confusion no less then irreligion: Albeit he has not so straightened
himself under the Gospel, as to tie his service to persons, or places, yet
his choice is now no less curious, because it is more large: He allows none,
but the authorized; He authoriseth none but the worthy: The Incense does ever
smell of the hand, that offers it; I doubt not but that perfume was sweeter,
which ascended up from the hand of just Zachary: The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination to God: There were courses of ministration in the legal services:
God never purposed to burden any of his creatures with devotion: How vain is
the ambition of any soul, that would lode it self with the universal charge
of all men? How thanklesse is their labor, that do wilfully ouerspend
themselves in their ordinary vocations? As Zachary had a course in Gods house,
so he carefully observed it; The favor of these respites doubled his
diligence: The more high and sacred our calling is, the more dangerous is our
neglect: It is our honor, that we may be allowed to wait upon the God of
heaven in these immediate services: Woe be to us, if we slacken those duties,
wherein God honors us more, then we can honor him.

Many sons of Aaron, yea of the same family served at once in the Temple,
according to the variety of employments: To avoid all difference, they agreed
by lot to assign themselves to the several offices of each day; The lot of
this day called Zachary to offer incense in the owter Temple: I do not find
any prescription they had from God of this particular manner of designement:
Matters of good order in holy affairs may be ruled by the wise institution of
men, according to reason and expediencie.

It fell out well, that Zachary was chosen by lot to this ministration, that
Gods immediate hand might be seen in all the passages, that concerned his
great Prophet, that as the person, so the occasion might be of Gods own
choosing: In lots and their seeming cusuall disposition, God can give a reason,
though we can give none: Morning and evening, twife a day their law called them
to offer Incense to God, that both parts of the day might be consecrate to the
maker of time: The owter Temple was the figure of the whole Church upon earth,
like as the holy of holiest represented heaven: Nothing can better resemble our
faithful prayers, then sweet perfume: These, God looks, that we should (all
his Church over) send up unto him morning and evening: The eleuations of our
hearts should be perpetual, but if twice in the day we do not present God with
our solemn invocations, we make the Gospel less officious, then the law.

That the resemblance of prayers and incense might be apparent, whiles the
Priest sends up his incense within the Temple, the people must send up their
prayers without: Their breath and that incense, though remote ^^n the first
rising, met, ere ^^hey went up to heaven: The people might no more go into the
holy place to offer up the incense of prayers unto God, then Zachary might go
into the holy of holies: Whiles the partition wall stood betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, there were also partitions betwixt the Jews, and themselves: Now
every man is a Priest unto God; Every man (since the veil was rent) prays
within the Temple: What are we the better for our greater freedom of access
to God under the Gospel, if we do not make use of our privilege?

Whiles they were praying to God, he sees an Angel of God As Gedeons Angel
went up in the smoke of the sacrifice, s^^ did Zacharies Angel (as it were)
come down in the fragrant smoke of his incense: It was ever great news to see
an Angel of God, but now more; because God had long with-drawne from them all
the means of his supernatural revelations: As this wicked people were
strangers to their God in their conversation, so was God grown a stranger to
them in his apparitions; yet now, that the season of the Gospel approached, he
visited them with his Angels, before he visited them by his son: He sends
his Angel to men in the form of man, before he sends his son to take
humane form: The presence of Angels is no nouelty, but their apparition; they
are always with us, but rarely seen, that we may awfully respect their
messages, when they are seen; In the mean time our faith may see them, though
our senses do not; their assumed shapes do not make them more present, but
visible.

There is an order in that heavenly Hierarchy, though we know it not: This
Angel, that appeared to Zachary was not with him in the ordinary course of his
attendances, but was purposely sent from God with this message: Why was an
Angel sent? and why this Angel? It had bin easy for him to have raised up
the prophetical spirit of some Simeon to this prediction; the same Holy Ghost,
which revealed to that just man, that he should not see death, ere he had seen
the Messiah, might have as easily revealed unto him the birth of the
forerunner of Christ, and by him to Zachary: But God would have this voice,
which should go before his son, come with a noise; He would have it appear to
the world, that the harbinger of the Messiah should be conceived by the
marvelous power of that God, whose coming he proclaimed: It was fit the first
herald of the Gospel should begin in wonder: The same Angel, that came to the
blessed Virgin with the news of Christ's conception, came to Zachary with the
news of John's, for the honor of him, that was the greatest of them, which were
borne of women, and for his better resemblance to him, which was the seed of
the woman: Both had the Gospel for their errand, one as the messenger of it,
the other as the author; Both are foretold by the same mouth.

When could it be more fit for the Angel to appear unto Zachary, then when
prayers and incense were offered by him? Where could he more fitly appear,
then in the Temple? In what part of the Temple more fitly, then at the Altar of
Incense? and whereabouts rather, then on the right side of the Altar? Those
glorious spirits as they are always with us, so most in our devotions, and as
in all places, so most of all in Gods house: They rejoice to be with us,
whiles we are with God, as contrarily they turn their faces from us, when we
go about our sins.

He that had wont to live, and serve in the presence of the master, was now
astonished at the presence of the servant; so much difference there is betwixt
our faith, and our senses, that the apprehension of the presence of the God of
spirits by faith goes down sweetly with us, whereas the sensible apprehension
of an Angel dismaies us: Holy Zachary, that had wont to live by faith, thought
he should dye, when his sense began to be set on work; It was the weakness of
him, that served at the Altar without horror, to be daunted with the face of
his fellow servant: In vain do we look for such ministers of God, as are
without infirmities, when just Zachary was troubled in his devotions with that,
where with he should have bin comforted: It was partly the suddennes, and
partly the glory of the apparition, that affrighted him: The good Angel was
both apprehensiue, and compassionate of Zacharies weakness, and presently
incourages him with a cheerful excitation: ( Fear not Zacharias). The blessed
spirts, though they do not often vocally express it, do pity our humane
frailties, and secretly suggest comfort unto us, when we perceive it not: Good
and evil Angels, as they are contrary in estate, so also in disposition; The
good desire to take away fear, the evil to bring it: It is a fruit of that
deadly enmity, which is betwixt Satan and us, that he would, if he might,
kill us with terror; whereas the good spirits affecting our relief and
happiness, take no pleasure in terrifying us, but labor altogether for our
tranquillity and cheerfulness.

There was not more fear in the face, then comfort in the speech; Thy prayer
is heard: No Angel could have told him better news; Our desires are uttered
in our prayers: What can we wish, but to have what we would? Many good suites
had Zachary made, and amongst the rest for a son: Doubtless it was now some
space of years, since he made that request: For he was now slricken in age,
and had ceased to hope; yet had God laid it up all the while, and when he
thinks not of it, brings it forth to effect: Thus does the mercy of our God
deal with his patient, and faithful suppliants: In the feruor of their
expectation he many times holds them off, and when they least think of it, and
have forgotten their own suite, he graciously condiscends: Delay of effect may
not discourage our faith, It may be God has long granted, ere we shall know
of his grant. Many a father repents him of his fruitfulnes, and has such
sons, as he wishes unborn: But to have so gracious, and happy a son, as
the Angel foretold, could not be less comfort, then honor to the age of
Zachary: The proof of children makes them either the blessings, or crosses of
their parents: To hear what his son should be before he was; to hear that he
should have such a son; A son, whose birth should concern the joy of many;
A son, that should be great in the sight of the Lord; A son, that should
be sacred to God, filled with God, beneficial to man; An harbinger to him,
that was God and man, was news enough to prevent the Angel, and to take away
that tongue with amasement, which was after lost with incredulity.

The speech was so good, that it found not a sudden belief: This good news
surprised Zachary; If the intelligence had taken leisure, that his thoughts
might have had time to debate the matter, he had easily apprehended the
infinite power of him that had promised; the pattern of Abraham and Sara; and
would soon have concluded the appearance of the Angel more miraculous then
his prediction: Whereas now, like a man maskered with the strangeness of that
he saw and heard, he misdoubts the message, and asks: How shall I know? Nature
was on his side, and alleged the impossibility of the event, both from age and
barrenness; Supernatural tidings at the first hearing astonish the heart, and
are entertained with doubts by those, which upon further acquaintance give them
the best welcome.

The weak apprehensions of our imperfect faith are not so much to be censured,
as pitied: It is a sure way for the heart, to be prevented with the assurance
of the Omnipotent power of God, to whom nothing is impossible: so shall the
hardest points of faith go down easily with us: If the eye of our mind look
upward, it shall meet with nothing to auert, or interrupt it; but if right
forward, or downward, or round about, every thing is a block in our way.

There is a difference betwixt desire of assurance, and unbelief, we cannot
be too careful to raise up to our selves arguments to settle our faith;
although it should be no faith, if it had no feet to stand upon, but
discursiue: In matters of faith, if reasons may be brought for the conviction
of the gaine-sayers, it is well, if they be helps, they cannot be grounds of
our belief: In the most faithful heart there are some sparks of infidelity;
so to believe, that we should have no doubt at all, is scarce incident into
flesh and blood: It is a great perfection, if we have attained to overcome our
doubts. What did mis-lead Zachary, but that, which uses to guide others,
Reason? ( I am old; and my wife is of great age,) as if years, and dry loins
could be any let to him, which is able of very stones to raise up children unto
Abraham: Faith and reason have their limits; where reason ends, faith begins;
and if reason will be encroching upon the bounds of faith, she is straight
taken captive by infidelity: We are not fit to follow Christ, if we have not
denied our selves; and the chief piece of our selves is our reason: We must
yield God able to do that, which we cannot comprehend, and we must comprehend
that by our faith, which is disclaimed by reason; Hagar must be driven out of
doors, that Sara may rule alone.

The authority of the reporter, makes way for belief in things, which are
otherwise hard to pass; although in the matters of God, we should not so much
care, who speaks, as what is spoken, and from whom: The Angel tells his name,
place, office, unasked, that Zachary might not think any news impossible,
that was brought him by an heavenly messenger: Even where there is no use of
language, the spirits are distinguished by names, and each knows his own
appellation, and others: He that gave leave unto man his image, to give names
unto all his visible and inferior creatures, did himself put names unto the
spiritual; and as their name is, so are they mighty and glorious: But least
Zachary should no less doubt of the style of the messenger, then of the errand
it self: He is at once both confirmed, and punished with dumbness: That
tongue, which moved the doubt, must be tied up: He shall ask no more questions
for forty weeks, because he asked this one distrustfully.

Neither did Zachary loose his tongue for the time, but his ears also, he was
not only mute, but deaf; For otherwise, when they came to ask his allowance
for the name of his son, they needed not to have demanded it by signs, but
by words: God will not pass over slight offenses, and those which may plead
the most colorable pretenses in his best children, without a sensible check:
It is not our holy entireness with God, that can bear us out in the least
sin; yea rather the more acquaintance we have with his majesty, the more sure
we are of correction, when we offend: This may procure us more favor in our
well-doing, not less justice in evil.

Zachary stayed, and the people waited; whether some longer discourse betwixt
the Angel and him, then needed to be recorded, or whether astonishment at the
apparition and news, withheld him, I inquire not; the multitude thought him
long, yet though they could but see a far off, they would not depart, till
he returned to bless them: Their patient attendance without, shames us, that
are hardly persuaded to attend within, whiles both our senses are employed in
our divine services, and we are admitted to be coagents with our Ministers.

At last Zachary comes out speechles, and more amases them with his presence,
then with his delay: The eyes of the multitude, that were not worthy to see his
vision, yet see the signs of his vision, that the world might be put into the
expectation of some extraordinary sequel: God makes way for his voice, by
silence; His speech could not have said so much, as his dumbnes: Zachary would
feign have spoken, and could not; with us too many are dumb, and need not:
Negligence, Fear, Partiality stop the mouths of many, which shall once say,
Woe to me, because I held my peace. His hand speaks that, which he cannot with
his tongue, and he makes them by signs to understand that, which they might
read in his face; Those powers we have, we must use: But though he have ceased
to speak, yet he ceased not to minister; He takes not this dumbnes for a
dismission, but stays out the eight days of his course, as one, that knew the
eyes, and hands, and heart would be accepted of that God, which had bereaved
him of his tongue: We may not straight take occasions of withdrawing our
selves from the public services of our God, much less under the Gospel: The
Law, which stood much upon bodily perfection, dispensed with age for
attendance: The Gospel, which is all for the soul regards those inward
powers, which whiles they are vigorous, exclude all excuses of our ministration.

The Annuntiation of CHRIST.
THE spirit of God was never so accurate in any description, as that which
concerns the incarnation of God: It was fit no circumstance should be omitted
in that story, whereon the faith and salvation of all the world depends: We
cannot so much as doubt of this truth, and be saved; no not the number of the
month, not the name of the Angel is concealed: Every particle imports not more
certainty, then excellence: The time is the sixth month after John's conception,
the prime of the spring: Christ was conceived in the spring, borne in the
Solstice: He, in whom the world received a new life, receives life in the same
season, wherein the world received his first life from him; and he which
stretches out the days of his Church, and lengthens them to eternity,
appears after all the short and dim light of the Law, and inlightens the
world with his glory: The messenger is an Angel; A man was too mean to carry
the news of the conception of God: Never any business was conceived in heaven,
that did so much concern the earth, as the conception of the God of heaven in
a womb of earth: No less then an Arch-Angell was worthy to bear this
tidings, and never any Angel received a greater honor, then of this embassage.

It was fit our reparation should answer our fall; an evil Angel was the
first motioner of the one to Eve a Virgin, then espoused to Adam in the garden
of Eden: A good Angel is the first reporter of the other to Mary a Virgin
espoused to Joseph, in that place, which (as the garden of Galile, had a name
from flourishing: No good Angel could be the author of our restoration, as
that evil Angel was of our ruin; But that, which those glorious spirits
could not do themselves, they are glad to report as done by the God of
Spirits: Good news reioyces the bearer; with what joy did this holy Angel
bring the news of that Savior, in whom we are redeemed to life, himself
established in life and glory? The first preacher of the Gospel was an Angel,
that office must needs be glorious, that deriues it self from such a
predecessor: God appointed his Angel to be the first preacher, and has since
called his Preachers Angels: The message is well suited; An Angel comes to a
Virgin, Gabriel to Mary; He that was by signification the strength of God, to
her that was by signification exalted by God, to the conceiving of him, that
was the God of strength: To a maid but espowsed; a maid for the honor of
Virginity, espoused, for the honor of marriage: The marriage was in a sort made,
not consummate, through the instinct of him, that meant to make her not an
example, but a miracle of women: In this whole work God would have nothing
ordinary; It was fit, that she should be a married Virgin, which should be a
Virgin Mother: He that meant to take man's nature without man's corruption, would
be the son of man without man's seed, would be the seed of the woman without
man; and amongst all women of a pure Virgin; but amongst Virgins, of one
espoused, that there might be at once a witness, and a guardian of her fruitful
Virginity: If the same God had not bin the author of Virginity and Marriage,
he had never countenanced Virginity by marriage.

Whither does this glorious Angel come to find the mother of him, that was
God, but to obscure Galile? A part, which even the Jews themselves despised,
as forsaken of their privileges, ( Out of Galile arises no Prophet). Behold
an Angel comes to that Galile, out of which no Prophet comes, and the God of
Prophets and Angels descends to be conceived in that Galile, out of which no
Prophet arises: He that fills all places, makes no difference of places; It
is the person, which gives honor and privilege to the place, not the place to
the person; as the presence of God makes the heaven, the heaven does not make
the owner glorious: No blind corner of Nazareth can hide the blessed Virgin
from the Angel; The favors of God will find out his children, wheresoever
they are withdrawn.

It is the fashion of God to seek out the most despised, on whom to bestow his
honors, we cannot run away as from the judgments, so not from the mercies of
our God: The cottages of Galile are preferred by God to the famous palaces of
Jerusalem, he cares not how homely he converse with his own: Why should we be
transported with the outward glory of places, whiles our God regards it not? We
are not of the Angels diet, if we had not rather be with the blessed Virgin
at Nazareth, then with the proud dames, in the Court of Jerusalem: It is a
great vanity to respect any thing above goodness, and to dis-esteeme goodness for
any want. The Angel salutes the Virgin, he prays not to her; He salutes her
as a Saint, he prays not to her as a Goddess: For us to salute her, as he
did, were gross presumption; For neither are we, as he was, neither is she,
as she was: If he that was a spirit saluted her, that was flesh and blood
here on earth, it is not for us, that are flesh and blood to salute her, which
is a glorious spirit in heaven: For us, to pray to her in the Angels
salutation, were to abuse the Virgin, the Angel, the salutation.

But how gladly do we second the Angel in the praise of her, which was more
ours, then his? How justly do we bless her, whom the Angel pronounces
blessed? How worthily is she honored of men, whom the Angel proclaims
beloved of God? O blessed MARY, he cannot bless thee, he cannot honor thee too
much, that deifies thee not: That which the Angel said of thee, thou have
prophesied of thy self, we believe the Angel, and thee: All generations shall
call thee blessed, by the fruit of whose womb all generations are blessed: If
Zachary were amassed with the sight of this Angel, much more the Virgin: That
very sex has more disadvantage of fear: If it had bin but a man, that had
come to her in that secrecy and suddennes, she could not but have bin
troubled; how much more, when the shining glory of the person doubled the
astonishment.

The troubles of holy minds end ever in comfort: Joy was the errand of the
Angel, and not terror. Fear (as all passions) disquiets the heart, and makes
it for the time unfit to receive the messages of God: Soon has the Angel
cleared these troublesome mists of passions, and sent out the beams of
heavenly consolation into the remotest corner of her soul by the glad news of
her Savior: How can joy, but enter into her heart, out of whose womb shall
come salvation? what room can fear find in that breast, that is assured of
favor? Fear not Mary; for thou have found favor with God: Let those fear,
who know they are in displeasure, or know not they are gracious: Thine happy
estate calls for confidence, and that confidence for joy: What should, what can
they fear, who are favored of him, at whom the Devils tremble? Not the
presence of the good Angels, but the temptations of the evil strike many
terrors into our weakness; we could not be dismayed with them, if we did not
forget our condition: We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again, but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father: If that spirit
(O God) witness with our spirits, that we are thine, how can we fear any of
those spiritual wickednesses? Give us assurance of thy favor, and let the
powers of Hell do their worst.

It was no ordinary favor, that the Virgin found in heaven: No mortal
creature was ever thus graced, that he should take part of her nature, that was
the God of nature; that he, which made all things, should make his humane body
of hers; that her womb should yield that flesh, which was personally united to
the Godhead; that she should bear him, that vpholds the world: Lo, thou shall
conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Jesus. It is a question,
whether there be more wonder in the conception, or in the fruit; the
conception of the Virgin, or Jesus conceived: Both are marvelous, but the
former does not more exceed all other wonders, then the latter exceeds it.
For the child of a Virgin is the reimprouement of that power, which created
the world: but that God should be incarnate of a Virgin, was an abasement of
his majesty, and an exaltation of the creature beyond all example. Well was
that child worthy to make the mother blessed: Here was a double conception;
one in the womb of her body, the other of the soul: If that were more
miraculous, this was more beneficial; That was her privilege, this was her
happiness: If that were singular to her, this is common to all his chosen:
There is no renewed heart, wherein thou, O Savior, art not formed again.
Blessed be thou, that have herein made us blessed. For what womb can conceive
thee, and not partake of thee? Who can partake of thee, and not be happy?

Doubtless the Virgin understood the Angel, as he meant, of a present
conception, which made her so much more inquisitiue into the manner and means
of this event: How shall this be, since I know not a man? That she should
conceive a son by the knowledge of man after her marriage consummate, could
have bin no wonder: But how then should that son of hers be the son of God?
This demand was higher, how her present virginity should be instantly
fruitful, might be well worthy of admiration, of inquiry: Here was desire of
information, not doubts of infidelity; yea rather this question argues faith:
It takes for granted, that, which an unbelieving heart would have stuck at:
She says not, who and whence art thou? what kingdom is this, where, and when
shall it be erected? But smoothly supposing all those strange things would be
done, she insists only in that, which did necessarily require a further
intimation, and does not distrust, but demand: Neither does she say, this
cannot be, nor how can this be; but how shall this be? so does the Angel
answer, as one, that knew he needed not to satisfy curiosity, but to inform
judgment, and uphold faith: He does not therefore tell her of the manner, but
of the author of this act; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the most High shall ouershadow thee: It is enough to know, who is the
undertaker, and what he will do: O God, what do we seek a clear light,
where thou will have a shadow? No mother knows the manner of her natural
conception; what presumption shall it be for flesh and blood, to search how
the son of God took flesh and blood of his creature? It is for none, but the
Almighty to know those works, which he does immediately concerning himself;
those that concern us, he has revealed: Secrets to God, things revealed to us.

This answer was not so full, but that a thousand difficulties might arise out
of the particularities of so strange a message, yet after the Angels solution,
we hear of no more objections, no more interrogations: The faithful heart,
when it once understands the good pleasure of God, argues no more, but sweetly
rests it self in a quiet expectation; Behold the servant of the Lord, be it to
me according to thy word. There is not a more noble proof of our faith, then
to captiuate all the powers of our understanding and will to our Creator, and
without all sciscitations to go blindfold, whither he will lead us: All
disputations with God (after his will known) arise from infidelity: Great is
the mystery of godliness, and if we will give nature leave to cavil, we
cannot be Christians. O God, thou art faithful, thou art powerful: It is
enough, that thou have said it; In the humility of our obedience we resign
our selves over to thee: Behold the servants of the Lord, be it unto us,
according to thy word.

How fit was her womb to conceive the flesh of the son of God by the power
of the spirit of God, whose breast had so soon by the power of the same spirit
conceived an assent to the will of God; and now of an handmaid of God, she is
advanced to the mother of God: No sooner has she said ( be it done) then it
is done, the Holy Ghost ouer-shadowes her, and forms her Savior in her own
body. This very Angel, that talks with the blessed Virgin could scarce have
bin able to express the joy of her heart in the sense of this divine burden:
Never any mortal creature had so much cause of exultation: How could she,
that was full of God be other then full of joy in that God? Grief grows
greater by concealing; Joy by expression: The holy Virgin had understood by the
Angel, how her cozen Elizabeth was no less of kin to her in condition; the
fruitfulness of whose age did somewhat suite the fruitfulnes of her
virginity: Happiness communicated doubles it self; Here is no strayning of
courtesy; The blessed maid, whom vigor of age had more fitted for the way,
hastens her journey into the hill-country to visit that gracious Matron, whom
God had made a sign of her miraculous conception: Only the meeting of Saints
in heaven can parallel the meeting of these two Cosins: The two wonders of the
world are met under one roof, and congratulate their mutual happiness: When
we have Christ spiritually conceived in us, we cannot be quiet, till we have
imparted our joy: Elizabeth that holy Matron did no sooner welcome her blessed
Cozen, then her babe welcomes his Savior; Both in the retired closets of their
mothers womb are sensible of each others presence; the one by his omniscience,
the other by instinct: He did not more fore-runne Christ, then overrun
nature: How should our hearts leap within us, when the son of God vouchsafes to
come into the secret of our souls, not to visit us, but to dwell with us, to
dwell in us.

The birth of CHRIST.
AS all the actions of men, so especially the public actions of public men
are ordered by God to other ends then their own: This Edict went not so much
out from Augustus, as from the court of heaven. What did Caesar know Joseph and
Mary? His charge was universal to a world of subjects, through all the Roman
Empire: God intended this Cension only for the blessed Virgin and her son,
that Christ might be borne, where he should: Caesar meant to fill his cofers,
God meant to fulfill his prophesies, and so to fulfill them, that those, whom it
concerned might not feel the accomplishment: If God had directly commanded the
Virgin to go up to Bethleem, she had seen the intention, and expected the
issue; but that wise moderator of all things, that works his will in us, loves
so to do it, as may be least with our foresight, and acquaintance, and would
have us fall under his decrees unawares, that we may so much the more adore the
depths of his providence: Every creature walks blindfold, only he that dwells
in light, sees whither they go.

Doubtless, blessed Mary meant to have bin delivered of her divine burden at
home, and little thought of changing the place of conception for another of her
birth: That house was honored by the Angel, yea by the ouer-shadowing of the
Holy Ghost, none could equally satisfy her hopes, or desires: It was fit, that
he, which made choice of the womb, wherein his son should be conceived,
should make choice of the place, where his son should be borne: As the work is
all his, so will he alone contriue all the circumstances to his own ends: O
the infinite wisdom of God in casting all his designs! There needs no other
proof of Christ, then Caesar and Bethleem, and of Caesar's, then Augustus; his
government, his Edict pleads the truth of the Messiah: His government, now was
the deep peace of all the world under that quiet scepter, which made way for
him, who was the Prince of peace: If wars be a sign of the time of his
second coming, peace was a sign of his first: His Edict, now was the scepter
departed from IVDA: It was the time for Shilo to come; No power was left in the
jews, but to obey: Augustus is the Emperor of the world, under him Herod is
the King of Judea; Cyrenius is president of Syria; Jury has nothing of her
own. For Herod, if he were a King, yet he was no Jew, and if he had bin a Jew,
yet he was no otherwise a King, then tributary and titular: The Edict came out
from Augustus, was executed by Cyrenius; Herod is no actor in this service:
Gain and glory are the ends of this taxation, each man professed himself a
subject, and paid for the privilege of his servitude: Now their very heads
were not their own, but must be paid for to the head of a foreign State:
They which before stood upon the terms of their immunitie, stoop at the last:
The proud suggestions of Judas the Galilean might shed their blood, and swell
their stomachs, but could not ease their yoke, neither was it the meaning of
God, that holiness (if they had bin as they pretended) should shelter them
from subjection: A tribute is imposed upon Gods free people: This act of
bondage brings them liberty: Now when they seemed most neglected of God, they
are blessed with a Redeemer; when they are most pressed with foreign
soueraintie, God sends them a King of their own, to whom Caesar himself must
be a subject: The goodness of our God picks out the most needful times for our
relief, and comfort: Our extremities give him the most glory.

Whither must Joseph and Mary come to be taxed, but unto Bethleem David's City?
The very place proves their descent: He that succeeded David in his throne,
must succeed him in the place of his birth: So clearly was Bethleem designed
to this honor by the Prophets, that even the Priests and the Scribes could
point Herod unto it, and assure him, the King of the Jews could be no where
else borne. Bethleem justly the house of bread, the bread that came down from
heaven is there given to the world; whence should we have the bread of life,
but from the house of bread? O holy David, was this the well of Bethleem,
whereof thou did so thirst to drink of old, when thou said; O that one
would give me drink of the water of the well of Bethleem! Surely that other
water, when it was brought thee by thy Worthies, thou powredst it on the
ground, and would not drink of it: This was that living water, for which thy
soul longed, whereof thou said elsewhere; As the heart brayeth after the
water brooks, so longs my soul after thee O God: My soul thirsts for
God, for the living God.

It was no less then four days journey from Nazareth to Bethleem: How just
an excuse might the blessed Virgin have pleaded for her absence? What woman did
ever undertake such a journey so near her delivery? and doubtless Joseph, which
was now taught of God to love and honor her, was loath to draw forth a dear
wife in so unwieldy a case, into so manifest hazard: But the charge was
peremptory, the obedience exemplary; Their desire of an inoffensiue observance
even of heathenish authority, digests all difficulties: We may not take easy
occasions to withdraw our obedience unto supreme commands; yea how did thou
(O Savior) by whom Augustus reigned, in the womb of thy mother yield this
homage to Augustus: The first lesson, that ever thy example taught us, was
obedience.

After many steps are Joseph and Mary come to Bethleem: The plight, wherein
she was, would not allow any speed, and the forced leisure of the ionrney
causes disappointment: the end was worse then the way; there was no rest in
the way, there was no room in the Inn: It could not be, but that there were
many of the kindred of Joseph and Mary at that time in Bethleem: For both there
were their ancestors borne, if not themselves; and thither came up all the
cosens of their blood: yet there and then does the holy Virgin want room to
lay either her head, or her burden. If the house of David had not lost all
mercy and good nature, a daughter of David could not so near the time of her
travel, have bin destitute of lodging in the City of David. Little did the
Bethleemites think, what a guest they refused. Else they would gladly have
opened their doors to him, which was able to open the gates of heaven to them.
Now their in hospitality is punishment enough to it self: They have lost the
honor and happiness of being host to their God: Even still, O blessed Savior,
thou stand at our doors and knockest; Every motion of thy good spirit tells
us, thou art there: Now thou come in thy own name, and there thou stand,
whiles thy head is full of the deaw, and thy locks wet with the drops of the
night: If we suffer carnal desires, and worldly thoughts to take up the
lodgings of our heart, and revel within us, whiles thou waitest upon our
admission, surely our judgment shall be so much the greater, by how much better
we know, whom we have excluded? What do we cry shame on the Bethleemites,
whilst we are wilfully more churlish, more unthankful?

There is no room in my heart for the wonder at this humility: He, for whom
heaven is too strait, whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain, lies in the
strait cabin of the womb, and when he would enlarge himself for the world,
is not allowed the room of an Inn: The many mansions of heaven were at his
disposing, the earth was his, and the fullnes of it, yet he suffers himself to
be refused of a base cottage, and complains not: What measure should
discontent us wretched men, when thou (O God) farest thus from thy creatures?
How should we learn both to want and abound, from thee, which abounding with
the glory and riches of heaven, would want a lodging in thy first welcome to
the earth? Thou came to thy own, and thy own received thee not: How can it
trouble us to be rejected of the world, which is not ours? What wonder is it, if
thy servants wandered abroad in sheeps skins, and goats skins, destitute and
afflicted, when their Lord is denied harbor? How should all the world blush at
this indignity of Bethleem? He that came to save men, is sent for his first
lodging to the beasts: The stable is become his Inn, the cratch his bed: O
strange cradle of that great King, which heaven it self may envy! O Savior,
thou that were both the maker and owner of heaven, of earth, could have made
thee a palace without hands, could have commanded thee an empty room in
those houses, which thy creatures had made? When thou did but bid the Angels
avoid their first place, they fell down from heaven like lightning; and when
in thine humbled estate thou did but say, I am he, who was able to stand
before thee? How easy had it bin for thee to have made place for thy self in
the throngs of the stateliest Courts? Why would thou be thus homely, but that
by co^temning worldly glories thou might teach us to contemn them? that thou
might sanctify poverty to them, whom thou call unto want? that since
thou, which had the choice of all earthly conditions, would be borne poor
and despised, those, which must want out of necessity, might not think their
poverty grievous.

Here was neither friend to entertain, nor servant to attend, nor place wherein
to be attended, only the poor beasts gave way to the God of all the world: It
is the great mystery of godliness, that God was manifested in the flesh, and
seen of Angels, but here, which was the top of all wonders, the very beasts
might see their maker: For those spirits to see God in the flesh, it was not so
strange, as for the brute creatures to see him, which was the God of spirits:
He, that would be led into the wilderness amongst wild beasts to be tempted,
would come into the house of beasts to be borne, that from the height of his
divine glory his humiliation might be the greater: How can we be abased low
enough for thee (O Savior) that have thus neglected thy self for us?

That the visitation might be answerable to the homeliness of the place,
attendants, provision, who shall come to congratulate his birth, but poor
shepherds? The Kings of the earth rest at home, and have no summons to attend
him, by whom they reign: God has chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the mighty: In an obscure time (the night) unto obscure men
(shepherds) does God manifest the light of his Son, by glorious Angels: It is
not our meannesse (O God) that can exclude us from the best of thy mercies; yea
thus far do thou respect persons, that thou have put down the mighty, and
exalted them of low degree.

If these shepherds had been snorting in their beds, they had no more seen
Angels, nor heard news of their Savior, then their neighbors; Their
vigilancie is honored with this heavenly vision: Those which are industrious in
any calling, are capable of further blessings, whereas the idle are fit for
nothing but temptation. No less then a whole Chore of Angels are worthy to
sing the hymn, of Glory to God for the incarnation of his Son: What joy is
enough for us, whose nature he took, and whom he came to restore by his
incarnation? If we had the tongues of Angels, we could not raise this note
high enough to the praise of our glorious Redeemer.

No sooner do the shepherds hear the news of a Savior, then they run to
Bethleem to seek him: Those, that left their beds to tend their flocks, leave
their flocks to inquire after their Savior: No earthly thing is too dear to
be forsaken for Christ: If we suffer any worldly occasion to stay us from
Bethleem, we care more for our sheep, then our souls: It is not possible,
that a faithful heart should hear where Christ is, and not labor to the
sight, to the fruition of him. Where art thou (O Savior) but at home in thine
own house, in the assembly of thy Saints? Where art thou to be found, but in
thy word and sacraments? yea there thou seek for us, if there we haste not
to seek for thee, we are worthy to want thee, worthy that our want of thee
here, should make us want the presence of thy face for ever.

The SAGES and the STAR.
THE shepherdes and the cratch accorded well; yet even they saw nothing, which
they might not contemn; neither was there any of those shepherds that seemed
not more like a King, then that King, whom they came to see. But oh the divine
majesty, that shined in this baseness! There lies the babe in the stable,
crying in the manger, whom the Angels came down from heaven to proclaim, whom
the Sages come from the East to adore, whom an heavenly star notifies to the
world, that now men might see, that heaven and earth serves him, that neglected
himself. Those lights, that hang low are not far seen, but those which are
high placed are equally seen in the remotest distances. Thy light, O Savior,
was no less then heavenly: The East saw that, which Bethleem might have seen:
Oft-times those, which are nearest in place, are farthest off in affection:
Large objects, when they are too close to the eye, do so ouer-fill the sense,
that they are not discerned. What a shame is this to Bethleem? The Sages came
out of the East to worship him, whom that village refused: The Bethleemites
were Jews; The wisemen Gentiles: This first entertainment of Christ was a
presage of the sequel; The Gentiles shall come from far to adore Christ,
whiles the Jews reject him.

Those Easterlings were great searchers of the depths of nature, professed
Philosophers, them has God singled out to the honor of the manifestation of
Christ: Humane learning well improued makes us capable of divine: There is no
knowledge, whereof God is not the author; he would never have bestowed any
gift, that should lead us away from himself; It is an ignorant conceit, that
inquiry into nature should make men Atheous: No man is so apt to see the star
of Christ, as a diligent disciple of Philosophy: Doubtless this light was
visible unto more, only they followed it, which knew it had more then nature:
He is truly wise, that is wise for his own soul: If these wise men had been
acquainted with all the other stars of heaven, and had not seen the star
of Christ, they had had but light enough to lead them into utter darkness:
Philosophy without the star is but the wispe of error.

These Sages were in a mean between the Angels and the shepherds: God would
in all the ranks of intelligent creatures have some to be witnesses of his
Son: The Angels direct the shepherds, the star guides the Sages; the duller
capacity has the more clear and powerful helps: The wisdom of our good GOD
proportions the means unto the disposition of the persons: Their Astronomy had
taught them this star was not ordinary, whether in site, or in brightness, or
in motion? The eyes of nature might well see, that some strange news was
portended to the world by it: But that this star designed the birth of the
Messiah, there needed yet another light: If the star had not besides had the
commentary of a revelation from God, it could have led the wisemen only into
a fruitless wonder: Give them to be the offspring of Balaam, yet the true
prediction of that false Prophet was not enough warrant: If he told them the
Messiah should arise, as a star out of Jacob, he did not tell them, that a
star should arise far from the posterity of Jacob, at the birth of the
Messiah: He that did put that prophecy into the mouth of Balaam, did also put
this illumination into the heart of the Sages: The spirit of God is free to
breath where he lists: Many shall come from the East and the West to seek
Christ, when the children of the kingdom shall be shut out: Even then God did
not so confine his election to the pale of the Church, as that he did not
sometimes look out for special instruments of his glory.

Whither do these Sages come, but to Jerusalem? where should they hope to hear
of the new King, but in the mother City of the kingdom? The conduct of the
star was first only general to Judea; the rest is for a time left to
inquiry: They were not brought thither for their own sakes, but for Iuries,
for the worlds; that they might help to make the Jews inexcusable, and the
world faithful: That their tongues therefore might blason the birth of Christ,
they are brought to the head City of Judea, to report, and inquire: Their
wisdom could not teach them to imagine, that a King could be borne to Judea,
of that note and magnificence, that a star from heaven should publish him to
the earth, and that his subjects should not know it: and therefore as
presupposing a common notice, they say, Where is he, that is borne King of the
Jews? There is much deceit in probabilities, especially when we meddle with
spiritual matters. For God uses still to go a way by himself.

If we judge according to reason and appearance, who is so likely to understand
heavenly truths, as the profound Doctors of the world? these God passes over,
and reueales his will to babes: Had these Sages met with the shepherds of the
villages near Bethleem, they had received that intelligence of Christ which
they did vainly seek from the learned Scribes of Jerusalem: The greatest
Clarks are not always the wisest in the affairs of God; these things go not
by discourse, but by revelation.

No sooner has the star brought them within the noise of Jerusalem, then it
is vanished out of sight: God would have their eyes lead them so far, as till
their tongues might be set on work to win the vocal attestation of the
chief Priests, and Scribes to the fore-appointed place of our Saviors
nativity: If the star had carried them directly to Bethleem, the learned
Jews had never searched the truth of those prophesies, wherewith they are
since justly convinced: God never withdrawes our helps, but for a further
advantage: Howsoever our hopes seem crossed, where his name may gain, we
cannot complain of loss.

Little did the Sages think, this question would have troubled Herod; they had
(I fear) concealed their message, if they had suspected this event: Sure, they
thought it might be some son, or grandchild of him, which then held the throne,
so as this might win favor from Herod, rather then an unwelcome fear of
riualitie. Doubtless they went first to the Court; where else should they ask
for a King? The more pleasing this news had bin, if it had fallen upon Herod's
own loins, the more grievous it was to light upon a stranger: If Herod had
not overmuch affected greatness, he had not upon those indirect terms
aspired to the crown of Iewry; so much the more therefore did it trouble him
to hear the rumor of a successor, and that not of his own. Settled greatness
cannot abide either change, or partnership: If any of his subjects had moved
this question, I fear, his head had answered it. It is well, that the name of
forreyners could excuse these Sages: Herod could not be brought up among the
Jews, and not have heard many and confident reports of a Messiah, that should
ere long arise out of Israel; and now when he hears the fame of a King borne,
whom a star from heaven signifies and attends; he is netled with the news:
Every thing affrights the guilty: Usurpation is full of ielousies, and fear no
less full of proiects, and imaginations; it makes us think every bush a man,
and every man a thief.

Why art thou troubled (O Herod)? A King is borne, but such a King, as whose
scepter may ever concur with lawful sovereignty; yea such a King, as by whom
Kings do hold their scepters, not loose them: If the wise men tell thee of a
King, the star tells thee, he is heavenly: Here is good cause of security,
none of fear: The most general enmities and oppositions to good arise from
mistakings; If men could but know, how much safety and sweetness there is in all
divine truth, it could receive nothing from them but welcomes and gratulations:
Misconceits have bin still guilty of all wrongs, and persecutions. But if Herod
were troubled (as Tyranny is still suspicious) why was all Jerusalem troubled
with him? Jerusalem, which now might hope for a relaxation of her bonds, for a
recovery of her liberty, and right? Jerusalem, which now only had cause to
lift up her drouping head in the joy and happiness of a redeemer? yet not
Herod's Court, but even Jerusalem was troubled; so had this miserable City
been ouer-toyled with change, that now they were settled in a condition quietly
evil, they are troubled with the news of better: They had now got an habit of
seruilitie, and now they are so acquainted with the yoke, that the very noise
of liberty, (which they supposed would not come with ease) began to be
unwelcome.

To turn the causes of joy into sorrow argues extreme deiectednes, and a
distemper of judgment no less then desperate: Fear puts on a visor of
devotion; Herod calls his learned Council, and as not doubting, whether the
Messiah should be borne, he asks, where he shall be borne? In the disparition
of that other light, there is a perpetually fixed star, shining in the
writings of the Prophets, that guides the chief Priests and Scribes directly
unto Bethleem: As yet envy, and prejudice had not blinded the eyes, and
perverted the hearts of the Jewish teachers; so as now, they clearly justify
that Christ, whom they afterward condemn, and by thus justifying him condemn
themselves in rejecting him: The water, that is untroubled yields the visage
perfectly: If God had no more witness, but from his enemies, we have ground
enough of our faith.

Herod feared, but dissembled his fear, as thinking it a shame, that strangers
should see, there could any power arise under him, worthy of his respect or
awe: Out of an unwillingness therefore to discover the impotency of his passion,
he makes little ado of the matter, but only, after a privy inquisition into
the time, imploies the informers in the search of the person; Go, and search
diligently for the babe etc. It was no great journey from Jerusalem to
Bethleem, how easily might Herod's cruelty have secretly suborned some of his
bloody Courtiers to this enquiry, and execution? If God had not meant to mock
him, before he found himself mocked of the wisemen, he had rather sent
before their journey, then after their disappointment: But that God, in whose
hands all hearts are, did purposely besot him, that he might not find the way
to so horrible a mischief.

There is no villainy so great, but it will mask it self under a show of
piety: Herod will also worship the babe; The courtesy of a false Tyrant is
death; A crafty hypocrite never means so ill, as when he speaks fairest: The
wisemen are upon their way, full of expectation, full of desire; I see no man
either of the City, or Court to accompany them; Whether distrust, or fear
hindered them, I inquire not, but of so many thousand Jews, no one stirs his
foot to see that King of theirs, which strangers came so far to visit: yet
were not these resolute Sages discouraged with this solitariness, and small
respect, nor drawn to repent of their journey, as thinking, What do we come
so far to honor a King, whom no man will acknowledge? What mean we to
travel so many hundred miles to see that, which the inhabitants will not look
out to behold? but cheerfully renew their journey to that place, which the
ancient light of prophecy had designed; And now behold, God incourages their
holy forwardness from heaven, by sending them their first guide, as if he had
said, What need ye care for the neglect of men, when ye see heaven honors
the King, whom ye seek? What joy these Sages conceived, when their eyes first
beheld the re-appearance of that happy star, they only can tell, that after
a long and sad night of tentation, have seen the loving countenance of God
shining forth upon their souls: If with obedience and courage we can follow
the calling of God, in difficult enterprises, we shall not want supplies of
comfort. Let not us be wanting to God, we shall be sure, he cannot be wanting
to us.

He that led Israel by a pillar of fire into the land of promise, leads the
wisemen by a star, to the promised seed: All his directions partake of that
light, which is in him; For God is light: This star moves both slowly and
low, as might be fittest for the pace, for the purpose of these pilgrims: It is
the goodness of God, that in those means wherein we cannot reach him, he
descends unto us. Surely when the wisemen saw the star first stand still, they
looked about to see, what Palace there might be near unto that station, fit
for the birth of a King, neither could they think that sorry shed was it,
which the star meant to point out; but finding their guide settled over that
base roof, they go in to see, what guest it held. They enter, and, O God, what
a King do they find! how poor? how contemptible? wrapped in clowts, laid in
straw, cradled in the manger, attended with beasts! what a sight was this,
after all the glorious promises of that star, after the predictions of
Prophets, after the magnificence of their expectation?

All their way afforded nothing so despicable, as that babe, whom they came to
worship: But as those, which could not have bin wisemen, unless they had
known, that the greatest glories have arisen from mean beginnings, they fall
down, and worship that hidden majesty: This baseness has bred wonder in
them, not contempt; they well knew, the star could not lie: They, which saw
his star a far off in the East, when he lay swadled in Bethleem, do also
see his royalty further of, in the despised estate of his infancy: A royalty
more then humane: They well know, that stars did not use to attend earthly
Kings; and if their aim had not bin higher, what was a Jewish King to Persian
strangers? answerable therefore hereunto was their adoration. Neither did they
lift up empty hands to him, whom they worshipped, but presented him with the most
precious commodities of their country, Gold, Incense, Myrrh; not as thinking to
enrich him with these, but by way of homage acknowledging him the Lord of
these: If these Sages had bin Kings, and had offered a princely weight of gold,
the blessed Virgin had not needed in her purification to have offered two young
pigeons, as the sign of her penury: As God loves not empty hands, so he
measures fulness by the affection: Let it be Gold, or Incense, or Myrrh, that
we offer him, it cannot but please him, who does not use to ask, how much, but
how good.

The PVRIFICATION.
THere could be no impuritie in the son of God, and if the best substance of a
pure Virgin carried in it any taint of Adam, that was scowred away by
sanctification in the womb, and yet the Son would be circumcised, and the
mother purified: He that came to be sin for us, would in our persons be
legally unclean, that by satisfying the law, he might take away our
uncleanness: Though he were exempted from the common condition of our birth,
yet he would not deliver himself from those ordinary rites, that implied the
weakness, and blemishes of humanity: He would fulfill one law to abrogate it,
another to satisfy it; He that was above the law, would come under the Law,
to free us from the Law: Not a day would be changed, either in the circumcision
of CHRIST, or the purification of MARY. Here was neither conuenience of place,
nor of necessaries for so painful a work, in the stable of Bethleem, yet he
that made, and gave the Law, will rather keep it with difficulty, then
transgress it with ease.

Why would thou, O blessed Savior, suffer that sacred foreskin to be cut
off, but that by the power of thy circumcision, the same might be done to our
souls, that was done to thy body? we cannot be therefore thine, if our
hearts be uncircumcised: Do thou that in us, which was done to thee for us;
cut off the superfluity of our maliciousness, that we may be holy in, and by
thee, which for us were content to be legally impure.

There was shame in thy birth, there was pain in thy circumcision; After a
contemptible welcome into the world, that a sharp rasor should pass through
thy skin for our sakes, (which can hardly endure to bleed for our own) it was
the praise of thy wonderful mercy, in so early humiliation: What pain, or
contempt should we refuse for thee, that have made no spare of thy self for
us? Now is Bethleem left with too much honor, there is Christ borne, adored,
circumcised: No sooner is the blessed Virgin either able, or allowed to walk,
then she travels to Jerusalem, to perform her holy rites for her self, for
her son; to purify her-selfe, to present her son: She goes not to her own
house at Nazareth, she goes to Gods house at Jerusalem: If purifying were a
shadow, yet thanksgiving is a substance; Those whom God has blessed with fruit
of body, and safety of deliverance, if they make not their first journey to the
Temple of God, they partake more of the unthankfulness of Eve, then Mary's
devotion.

Her forty days therefore were no sooner out, then Mary comes up to the holy
City: The rumor of a new King borne at Bethleem, was yet fresh at Jerusalem,
since the report of the wisemen, and what good news had this bin for any
pick-thank to carry to the Court, Here is the babe, whom the star signified,
whom the Sages inquired for, whom the Angels proclaimed, whom the shepherds
talked of, whom the Scribes and high Priests notified, whom Herod seeks after?
yet unto that Jerusalem, which was troubled at the report of his birth, is
Christ come, and all tongues are so locked up, that he, which sent from
Jerusalem to Bethleem to seek him, finds him not, who (as to countermine
Herod) is come from Bethleem to Jerusalem. Dangers that are aloof of, and but
possible, may not hinder us from the duty of our devotion: GOD saw it not yet
time to let loose the fury of his adversaries, whom he holds up, like some
eager mastiues, and then only lets go, when they shall most shame themselves,
and glorify him.

Well might the blessed Virgin have wrangled with the law, and challenged an
immunitie from all ceremonies of purification; what should I need purging,
which did not conceive in sin? This is for those mothers, whose births are
unclean, mine is from God, which is purity it self: The law of Moses reaches
only to those women, which have conceived seed, I conceived not this seed, but
the Holy Ghost in me: The law extends to the mothers of those sons, which
are under the law, mine is above it: But as one, that cared more for her peace,
then her priuiledg, and more desired to be free from offense, then from labor
and charge, she dutifully fulfils the law of that God, whom she carried in
her womb, and in her arms: Like the mother of him, who though he knew the
children of the kingdom free, yet would pay tribute unto Caesar: Like the
mother of him, whom it behooved to fulfill all righteousness: And if she were so
officious in ceremonies, as not to admit of any excuse in the very circumstance
of her obedience, how much more strict was she in the maine duties of
morality? That soul is fit for the spiritual conception of Christ, that is
conscionably scrupulous in observing all Gods commandments, whereas he hates
all alliance to a negligent, or froward heart.

The law of purification proclaims our uncleanness: The mother is not allowed
after her childbirth to come unto the Sanctuary, or to touch any hallowed
thing, till her set time be expired; What are we, whose very birth infects
the mother that bears us? At last, she comes to the Temple, but with
sacrifices, either a lamb, and a pigeon, or turtle, or (in the meaner estate)
two turtle doves, or young pigeons: Whereof one is for a burnt offering, the
other for a sinne-offring: The one for thanksgiving, the other for expiation:
For expiation of a double sin, of the mother, that conceived, of the child,
that was conceived. We are all borne sinners, and it is a just question,
whether we do more infect the world, or the world us? They are gross
flatterers of nature, that tell her, she is clean: If our lives had no sin,
we bring enough with us; the very infant, that lives not to sin as Adam, yet
he sinned in Adam, and is sinful in himself. But oh the unspeakable mercy of
our God! we provide the sin, he prouides the remedy: Behold an expiation well
near, as early, as our sin; the blood of a young lamb, or dove, yea rather
the blood of him, whose innocence was represented by both, cleanses us
presently from our filthiness. First went circumcision, then came the
sacrifice, that by two holy acts; that which was naturally unholy, might be
hallowed unto God; Under the Gospel our baptism has the force of both: It
does away our corruption by the water of the spirit; It applies to us the
sacrifice of Christ's blood, whereby we are cleansed: Oh that we could magnify
this goodness of our God, which has not left our very infancy without
redress, but has provided such helps, as whereby we may be delivered from the
danger of our hereditary evils.

Such is the favorable respect of our wise God, that he would not have us undo
our selves with devotion, the service he requires of us is ruled by our
abilities: Every poor mother was not able to bring a lamb for her offering,
there was none so poor, but might procure a pair of turtles or pigeons. These
does God both prescribe, and accept from poorer hands, no less, then the
beasts of a thousand mountains; He looks for somewhat of every one, not of
every one alike: Since it is he, that makes differences of abilities (to whom
it were as easy to make all rich) his mercy will make no difference in the
acceptance: The truth and heartinesse of obedience is that, which he will
crown in his meanest servants: A mite from the poor widow is more worth to
him, then the talents of the wealthy.

After all the presents of those Eastern worshippers (who intended rather
homage, then ditation) the blessed Virgin comes in the form of poverty with
her two doves unto God; she could not without some charge lie all this while at
Bethleem, she could not without charge travel from Bethleem to Jerusalem; Her
offering confesses her penury; The best are not ever the wealthiest: Who can
despise any one for want, when the mother of Christ was not rich enough to
bring a lamb for her purification? We may be as happy in russet, as in tissue.

While the blessed VIRGIN brought her son into the Temple, with that pair of
doves, here were more doves then a pair: They, for whose sake that offering was
brought, were more doves, then the doves that were brought for that offering:
Her son, for whom she brought that dove to be sacrificed, was that
sacrifice, which the dove represented: There was nothing in him, but perfection
of innocence, and the oblation of him is that, whereby all mothers and sons
are fully purified: Since in our selves we cannot be innocent, happy are we, if
we can have the spotless dove sacrificed for us to make us innocent in him.

The blessed Vigin had more business in the Temple then her own; she came,
as to purify her self, so to present her fonne: Every male, that first opened
the womb was holy unto the Lord: He that was the son of God by eternal
generation before times, and by miraculous conception in time, was also by
common course of nature consecrate unto God: It was fit the holy mother should
present God with his own: Her first borne was the first borne of all creatures:
It was he, whose Temple it was, that he was presented in, to whom all the first
borne of all creatures were consecrated, by whom they were accepted, and now is
he brought in his mothers arms to his own house, and as man is presented to
himself as God: If Moses had never written law of Gods special propriety in
the first borne, this son of Gods essence and love had taken possession of
the Temple; His right had bin a perfect law to himself: Now his obedience to
that law, which himself had given, does no less call him, thither, then the
challenge of his peculiar interest.

He that was the Lord of all creatures (ever since he stroke the first borne
of the Egyptians) requires the first male of all creatures, both man and
beast, to be dedicated to him; wherein God caused a miraculous event to second
nature, which seems to challenge the first and best for the maker: By this
rule, God should have had his service done only by the heirs of Israel: But
since God for the honor and remuneration of LEVI, had chosen out that Tribe to
minister unto him, now the first borne of all Israel must be presented to God,
as his due, but by allowance redeemed to their parents: As for beasts, the
first male of the clean beasts must be sacrificed, of unclean exchanged for
a price: So much morality is there in this constitution of God, that the best
of all kinds is fit to be consecrated to the Lord of all. Every thing we have
is too good for us, if we think any thing we have too good for him.

How glorious did the Temple now seem, that the owner was within the walls of
it? Now was the hour, and guest come, in regard whereof the second Temple
should surpass the first: This was his house built for him, dedicated to him:
There had he dwelt long in his spiritual presence, in his typical: There was
nothing either placed, or done within those walls, whereby he was not
resembled, and now the body of those shadows is come, and presents himself,
where he had bin ever represented: Jerusalem is now every where: There is no
Church, no Christian heart, which is not a Temple of the living God: There is
no Temple of God, wherein Christ is not presented to his father: Look upon him
(O God) in whom, thou art well pleased, and in him, and for him be well pleased
with us.

Under the Gospel we are all first borne, all heirs: Every soul is to be
holy unto the Lord, we are a royal generation, an holy preisthood: Our
baptism as it is our circumcision, and our sacrifice of purification, so is it
also our presentation unto God: Nothing can become us but holiness. O God, to
whom we are devoted, serve thy self of us, glorify thy self by us, till we
shall by thee be glorified with thee.

HEROD and the INFANTS.
WELL might these wise men have suspected Herod's secrecy; If he had meant well,
what needed that whispering? That which they published in the streets, he asks
in his privy chamber; yet they not misdoubting his intention, purpose to
fulfill his charge: It could not in their apprehension but be much honor to
them, to make their success known, that now both King and people might see, it
was not fancy that led them, but an assured revelation: That God, which
brought them thither, diuerted them, and caused their eyes shut to guide them
the best way home.

These Sages made a happy voyage: For now they grew into further acquaintance
with God: They are honored with a second messenger from heaven: They saw the
star in the way, the Angel in their bed: The star guided their journey
unto Christ, the Angel directed their return: They saw the star by day, a
vision by night: God spoke to their eyes by the star, he speaks to their heart
by a dream: No doubt, they had left much noise of Christ behind them: They,
that did so publish his birth by their inquiry at Jerusalem, could not be
silent, when they found him at Bethleem: If they had returned by Herod, I fear
they had come short home; He that meant death to the babe for the name of a
King, could mean no other to those, that honored and proclaimed a new King,
and erected a throne besides his: They had done what they came for; and now
that God, whose business they came about, takes order at once for his sons
safety, and for theirs: God, which is perfection it self, never begins any
business, but he makes an end, and ends happily; When our ways are his, there
is no danger of miscariage.

Well did these wisemen know the difference, as of stars, so of dreams; they
had learned to distinguish between the natural and divine, and once
apprehending God in their sleep, they follow him waking, and return another
way. They were no subjects to Herod, his command pressed them so much the
less, or if the being within his dominions had been no less bond, then
native subjection, yet where God did countermand Herod, there could be no
question, whom to obey: They say not, we are in a strange country, Herod may
meet with us, it can be no less then death to mock him in his own
territories, but cheerfully put themselves upon the way, and trust God with the
success: Where men command with God, we must obey men for God, and God in
men, when against him, the best obedience is to deny obedience, and to turn
our backs upon Herod.

The wisemen are safely arrived in the East, and fill the world full of
expectation, as themselves are full of wonder: JOSEPH and MARY are returned
with the babe to that Jerusalem, where the wisemen had inquired for his birth.
The City was doubtless still full of that rumor, and little thinks, that he,
whom they talk of, was so near them: From thence they are, at least, in their
way to Nazareth, where they purpose their abode: God preuents them by his
Angel, and sends them for safety into Egypt; Joseph was not wont to be so
full of visions: It was not long since the Angel appeared unto him to justify
the innocence of the mother, and the deity of the son; now he appears for
the preservation of both, and a preservation by flight: Could Joseph now
choose, but think, Is this the King, that must save Israel, that needs to be
saved by me? If he be the son of God, how is he subject to the violence of men?
How is he Almighty, that must save himself by flight? or how must he fly to
save himself out of that land, which he comes to save? But faithful Joseph
having bin once tutored by the Angel, and having heard, what the wisemen said
of the star, what SIMEON and ANNA said in the Temple, labors not so much to
reconcile his thoughts, as to subject them, and as one, that knew it safer to
suppress doubts, then to assoile them, can believe, what he understands not,
and can wonder, where he cannot comprehend.

Oh strange condition of the King of all the world! He could not be borne in a
baser estate, yet even this he cannot enjoy with safety. There was no room for
him in Bethleem, there will be no room for him in Judea: He is no sooner come
to his own, then he must fly from them; that he may save them, he must
avoid them: Had it not bin easy for thee (O Savior) to have acquit thy self
from Herod, a thousand ways? What could an arm of flesh have done against the
God of spirits? What had it bin for thee to have sent Herod five years sooner
unto his place? what to have commanded fire from heaven on those, that should
have come to apprehend thee? or to have bidden the earth to receive them alive,
whom she meant to swallow dead? We suffer misery, because we must, thou,
because thou would: The same will that brought thee from heaven into earth,
sends thee from Jury to Egypt; as thou would be borne mean and miserable,
so thou would live subject to humane vexations, that thou, which have taught
us, how good it is to bear the yoke even in our youth, might sanctify to us
early afflictions. Or whether (O Father) since it was the purpose of thy wisdom
to manifest thy Son by degrees unto the world, was it thy will thus to hide
him for a time, under our infirmity? and what other is our condition? we are
no sooner borne thine, then we are persecuted. If the Church travel, and
bring forth a male, she is in danger of the Dragons streams: What do the
members complain of the same measure, which was offered to the head? both our
births are accompanied with tears.

Even of those, whose mature age is full of trouble, yet the infancy is
commonly quiet, but here life and toil began together. O blessed Virgin! even
already did the sword begin to pierce thy soul: Thou which were forced to
bear thy Son in thy womb from Nazareth to Bethleem, must now bear him in
thy arms from Jury into Egypt; yet could thou not complain of the way,
whilst thy Savior was with thee; His presence alone was able to make the
stable a temple, Egypt a paradise, the way more pleasing then rest. But
whither then? O whither do thou carry that blessed burden, by which thy
self and the world are vpholden? To Egypt, the slaughterhouse of Gods people,
the furnace of Isreal's ancient affliction, the sink of the world: Out of
Egypt have I called my son (says God). That thou calldst thy Son out of
Egypt, O God, is no marvel; It is a marvel, that thou calld'st him into
Egypt; but that we know, all earths are thine, and all places and men are
like figures upon a table, such as thy disposition makes them: What a change is
here? Israel the first borne of God, flies out of Egypt into the promised land
of Judea; Christ the first borne of all creatures flies from Judea into Egypt:
Egypt is become the Sanctuary, Judea the Inquisition-house of the Son of
God: He, that is every where the same, makes all places alike to his: He makes
the fiery furnace a gallery of pleasure, the Lions den an house of defense,
the Whales belly a lodging chamber, Egypt an harbor.

He flees, that was able to preserve himself from danger, to teach us, how
lawfully we may flee from those dangers, we cannot avoid otherwise: It is a
thankless fortitude to offer our throat unto the knife: He, that came to dye
for us, fled for his own preservation, and has bid us follow him; When they
persecute you in one City, flee into another: We have but the use of our
lives, and we are bound to husband them to the best advantage of God and his
Church: God has made us, not as butts to be perpetually shot at, but as the
marks of rouers moveable, as the wind and sun may best serve.

It was warrant enough for Joseph and Mary that God commands them to flee, yet
so familiar is God grown with his approved servants, that he gives them the
reason of his commanded flight: ( For Herod will seek the young child to
destroy him): What wicked men will do, what they would do, is known unto God
before hand: He that is so infinitely wise to know the designs of his enemies
before they are, could as easily prevent them, that they might not be, but he
lets them run on in their own courses, that he may fetch glory to himself
out of their wickedness.

Good JOSEPH having this charge in the night, stays not till the morning; no
sooner had God said Arise, then he starts up, and sets forward: It was not
diffidence, but obedience that did so hasten his departure; The charge was
direct, the business important: He dares not linger for the light, but breaks
his rest for the journey, and taking vantage of the dark, departs toward
Egypt: How knew he this occasion would abide any delay? We cannot be too
speedy in the execution of Gods commands, we may be too late: Here was no
treasure to hide, no hangings to take down, no lands to secure; The poor
Carpenter needs do no more, but lock the doors, and away: He goes lightly,
that wants a lode: If there be more pleasure in abundance, there is more
security in a mean estate: The Bustard or the Ostridge, when he is pursued,
can hardly get upon his wings, whereas the Lark mounts with ease; The rich
has not so much advantage of the poor in the enjoying, as the poor has of
the rich in leaving.

Now is Joseph come down into Egypt: Egypt was beholden to the name, as that
whereto it did owe no less then their universal preservation: Well might it
repay this act of hospitality to that name and blood: The going down into
Egypt had not so much difficulty, as the staying there: Their absence from
their country was little better, then a banishment; but what was this other,
then to serve a prentiship in the house of bondage? To be any where save at
home, was irksome, but to be in Egypt so many years amongst idolatrous
pagans, must needs be painful to religious hearts: The command of their God,
and the presence of Christ makes amends for all: How long should they have
thought it to see the Temple of God, if they had not had the God of the Temple
with them? How long to present their sacrifices at the Altar of God, if they
had not had him with them, which made all sacrifices accepted, and which did
accept the sacrifice of their hearts?

HEROD was subtle in mocking the wisemen, whiles he promised to worship him,
whom he meant to kill; now God makes the wisemen to mock him in disappointing
his expectation: It is just with God to punish those, which would beguile
others with illusion: Great spirits are so much more impatient of disgrace; How
did Herod now rage and fret, and vainly wish to have met with those false
spies, and tells, with what torments he would revenge their treachery, and
curses himself for trusting strangers in so important a business?

The tyrants suspicion would not let him rest long: Ere many days he sends to
inquire of them, whom he sent to inquire of Christ. The notice of their secret
departure increases his jealousy, and now his anger runs mad, and his fear
proves desperate: All the infants of Bethleem shall bleed for this one; And
(that he may make sure work) he cuts out to himself large measures both of
time, and place: It was but very lately that the star appeared, that the
wisemen reappeared not: They asked for him, that was borne, they did not name,
when he was borne: Herod for more security ouerreaches their time, and fetches
into the slaughter, all the children of two years age: The Priests and Scribes
had told him, the town of Bethleem must be the place of the Messia's
nativity: He fetches in all the children of the coasts adjoining; yea his own
shall for the time be a Bethleemite: A tyrannous guiltiness never thinks it
self safe, but ever seeks to assure it self in the excess of cruelty:
Doubtless he, which so privily inquired for Christ, did as secretly brew this
massacre: The mothers were set with their children on their laps, feeding them
with the breast, or talking to them in the familiar language of their love, when
suddenly the executioner rushes in, and snatches them from their arms, and at
once pulling forth his commission and his knife, without regard to shrikes or
tears, murders the innocent babe, and leaves the passionate mother in a mean
between madness and death. What cursing of Herod? what wringing of hands? what
condoling? what exclaiming was now in the streets of Bethleem?

O bloody Herod, that could sacrifice. so many harmless lives to thine
ambition! What could those infants have done? If it were thy person, whereof
thou were afraid, what liklyhood was it, thou could live, till those
sucklings might endanger thee? This news might affect thy successors, it could
not concern thee, if the heat of an impotent and furious envy had not made
thee thirsty of blood: It is not long, that thou shall enjoy this cruelty;
After a few hateful years thy soul shall feel the weight of so many
innocents, of so many just curses.

He, for whose sake thou killdst so many, shall thee strike with death, and
then what would thou have given to have bin as one of those infants whom thou
murtherest? In the mean time, when thine executioners returned, and told thee
of their impartial dispatch, thou smiledst to think, how thou had defeated
thy rival, and beguiled the star, and deluded the prophesies; whiles God in
heaven, and his Son on earth laugh thee to scorn, and make thy rage an
occasion of further glory to him, whom thou mentest to suppress.

He that could take away the lives of others, cannot protract his own: Herod
is now sent home; The coast is clear for the return of that holy family; Now
God calls them from their exile: Christ and his mother had not stayed so long
out of the confines of the reputed visible Church, but to teach us continuance
under the cross: Sometimes God sees it good for us not to sip of the cup of
affliction, but to make a diet-drinke of it, for constant and common use: If he
allow us no other liquor for many years, we must take it off cheerfully, and
know, that it is but the measure of our betters.

JOSEPH and MARY stir not without a command; their departure, stay, remoouall
is ordered by the voice of God: If Egypt had been more tedious unto them, they
durst not move their foot, till they were bidden: It is good in our own
business to follow reason, or custom, but in Gods business, if we have any
other guide but himself, we presume, and cannot expect a blessing.

O the wonderful dispensation of God in concealing of himself from men!
Christ was now some five year old; he bears himself as an infant, and
knowing all things, neither takes nor gives notice of ought concerning his
remoouall, and disposing, but appoints that to be done by his Angel, which the
Angel could not have done, but by him: Since he would take our nature, he
would be a perfect child, suppressing the manifestation and exercise of that
Godhead, whereto that infant nature was conjoined. Even so, O Savior, the
humility of thine infancy was answerable to that of thy birth: The more thou
hidest and abasest thy self for us, the more should we magnify thee, the more
should we deiect our selves for thee.

Unto Thee with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory now and
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Contemplations UPON THE Principal passages of the Holy STORY.

The FOVRTH VOLVME.

By IOS. HALL.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Henry Fetherstone. 1618.



Contemplations.
THE TWELVTH BOOK.
Containing

The Arc and Dagon. The Arkes Revenge and Return. The Remove of the Arc. The
meeting of Saul and Samuel. The Inauguration of Saul. Samuels Contestation.
Saul's sacrifice. Ionathans victory and Saul's oath.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, the LORD HAY, Baron of SALEY,
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
RIGHT HO:
Upon how just reason these my Contemplations go forth so late after their
fellows, it were needless to give account to your LO: in whose train I had
the honor (since my last) to pass both the SEA, and the TWEDE. All my private
studies have gladly vayled to the public services of my Sovereign Master: No
willingly confess that the story of God can make a man not less wise, then
good.

Mine humble thankfulness knows not how to express it self otherwise, then in
these kind of presents, and in my hearty prayers for the increase of your
Honor, and Happiness, which shall never be wanting from

Your Lo: sincerely and thankfully devoted, IOS: HALL.


Contemplations.
THE ARC and DAGON.
MEN could not arise to such height of impiety, if they did not mistake God:
The acts of his just judgment are imputed to impotence; that God would send
his Arc captive to the Philistims, is so construed by them, as if he could not
keep it: The wife of Phinebas cried out, that glory was departed from Israel;
The Philistims dare say in triumph, that glory is departed from the God of
Israel; The Arc was not Isreal's, but Gods, this victory reaches higher then to
men. Dagon had never so great a day, so many sacrifices, as now that he seems
to take the God of Israel prisoner; Where should the captive be bestowed, but
in the custody of the Victor: It is not love, but insultation, that lodges the
Arc close beside Dagon: What a spectacle was this, to see uncircumcised
Philistims laying their profane hands upon the testimony of Gods presence? to
see the glorious mercy seat under the roof of an Idol? to see the two
Cherubins spreading their wings under a false God?

OH the deep and holy wisdom of the Almighty, which ouer-reaches all the
finite conceit of his creature, who while he seems most to neglect himself,
fetches about most glory to his own name; He winks, and sits still on purpose,
to be what men would do, and is content to suffer indignity from his
creature, for a time, that he may be everlastingly magnified in his justice,
and power: That honor pleases God and men best, which is raised out of
contempt.

THE Ark of God was not used to such porters; The Philistims carry it unto
Ashdod, that the victory of Dagon may be more glorious: What pains
superstition puts men unto, for the triumph of a false cause? And if profane
Philistims can think it no toil to carry the Arc where they should not, what
a shame is it for us, if we do not gladly attend it where we should? How
justly may Gods truth scorn the imparitie of our zeal?

IF the Israelites did put confidence in the Arc, can we marvel that the
Philistims did put confidence in that power which (as they thought) had
conquered the Arc? The less is ever subject unto the greater; What could they
now think, but that heaven and earth were theirs? Who shall stand out against
them, when the God of Israel has yielded? Security and presumption attend
ever at the threshold of ruin.

GOD will let them sleep in this confidence; in the morning they shall find,
how vainly they have dreamed. Now they begin to find they have but gloryed in
their own plague, and overthrown nothing but their own peace: Dagon has an
house, when God has but a Tabernacle; It is no measuring of religion by
outward glory: Into this house the proud Phoenitians come, the next morning, to
congratulate unto their god, so great a captive, such divine spoils, and in
their early devotions to fall down before him, under whom the God of Israel
was fallen: and lo, where they find their god, fallen down on the ground upon
his face, before him, whom they thought both his prisoner, and theirs: Their
god is forced to do that, which they should have done voluntarily; although
God casts down that dumb rival of his, for scorn, not for adoration. Oh ye
foolish Philistims, could ye think that the same house could hold GOD and
DAGON? could ye think a senseless stone, a fit companion and guardian for
the living GOD? Had ye laid your Dagon upon his face, prostrate before the
Arc, yet would not God have endured the indignity of such a lodging; but now,
that ye presume to set up your carved stone, equal to his Cherubins, go read
your folly in the floor of your temple, and know that he which cast your god
so low, can cast you lower.

THE true God owes a shame to those which will be making matches betwixt
himself and Belial.

BUT this perhaps, was only a mischance, or a neglect of attendance, lay to
your hands, o ye Philistims, and raise up Dagon into his place; It is a
miserable god that needs helping up; Had ye not been more senseless then
that stone, how could you choose but think, How shall he raise us above our
enemies, that cannot rise alone? how shall he establish us in the station of
our peace, that cannot hold his own foot? If Dagon did give the soil unto the
God of Israel, what power is it, that has cast him upon his face, in his own
Temple? It is just with God, that those which want grace shall want wit too; it
is the power of superstition, to turn men into those stocks, and stones, which
they worship: They that make them are like unto them; Doubtless, this first
fall of Dagon was kept as secret, and excused as well as it might, and served
rather for astonishment, then conviction; there was more strangenes then horror
in that accident; that whereas Dagon had wont to stand, and the Philistims fall
down, now Dagon fell down, and the Philistims stood, and must become the
patrons of their own god; their god worships them upon his face, and craves
more help from them, then ever he could give: But if their sottishnes can
digest this all is well. Dagon is set in his place, and now those hands are
lift up to him, which helped to lift him up; and those faces are prostrate unto
him, before whom he lay prostrate. Idolatry and superstition are not easily put
out of countenance; But will the ielosie of the true God put it up thus? Shall
Dagon escape with an harmless fall? Surely, if they had let him lie still
upon the pauement, perhaps that insensible statue had found no other revenge;
but now, they will be advancing it to the roodlost again, and affront God's Ark with it, the event will shame them, and let them know, how much God
scorns a partner, either of his own making, or theirs.

THE morning is fittest for devotion, then do the Philistims flock to the
temple of their god; What a shame is it for us to come late to ours? Although,
not so much piety as curiosity did now hasten their speed, to see what rest
their Dagon was allowed to get in his own roof; and now behold their kind
god is come to meet them in the way; some pieces of him salute their eyes upon
the threshold. Dagons head and hands are overrun their fellows, to tell the
Philistims how much they were mistaken in a god.

THIS second fall breaks the Idol in pieces, and threats the same confusion to
the worshippers of it. Easy warnings neglected end ever in destruction. The
head is for devising, the hand for execution; In these two powers of their god,
did the Philistims chiefly trust; these are therefore laid under their feet,
upon the threshold, that they might a far of see their vanity, and that (if
they would) they might set their foot on that best piece of their god, whereon
their heart was set.

THERE was nothing wherein that Idol resembled a man, but in his head, and
hands, the rest was but a scaly portraiture of a fish, God would therefore
separate from this stone, that part, which had mocked man, with the counterfeit
of himself; that man might see what an unworthy lump he had matched with
himself, and set up above himself: The just quarrel of God is bent upon
those means, and that parcel which have dared to rob him of his glory.

How can the Philistims now miss the sight of their own folly? how can they
be but enough convicted of their mad idolatry, to see their god lie broken to
morsells, under their feet? every piece whereof proclaims the power of him
that brake it, and the stupiditie of those that adored it? Who would expect any
other issue of this act, but to hear the Philistims say, we now see how
superstition has blinded us? Dagon is no god for us, our hearts shall never
more rest upon a broken statue: That only true God, which has beaten ours,
shall challenge us by the right of conquest: But here was none of this; rather
a further degree of their dotage follows upon this palpable conviction: They
cannot yet suspect that god, whose head they may trample upon, but in steed of
hating their Dagon, that lay broken upon their threshold, they honor the
threshold, on which Dagon lay; and dare not set their foot on that place,
which was hallowed by the broken head, and hands of their Deity: Oh the
obstinacy of Idolatry, which where it has got hold of the heart, knows
neither to blush, nor yield, but rather gathers strength from that which might
justly confound it. The hand of the Almighty, which moved them not in falling
upon their god, falls now nearer them upon their persons, and strikes them in
their bodies, which would not feel themselves stricken in their Idol: Pain
shall humble them, whom shame cannot. Those which had entertained the secret
thoughts of abominable Idolatry within them, are now plagued in the inwardest
and most secret part of their bodies, with a loathsome disease; and now grow
weary of themselves, in stead of their idolatry. I do not hear them
acknowledge it was Gods hand, which had stricken Dagon their god, till now,
they find themselves stricken: Gods judgments are the rack of godless men;
If one strain make them not confess, let them be stretched but one wrench
hyer, and they cannot be silent. The just auenger of sin will not loose the
glory of his executions, but will have men know from whom they smart.

THE emerods were not a disease beyond the compass of natural causes, neither
was it hard for the wiser sort, to give a reason of their complaint, yet they
ascribe it to the hand of God: The knowledge and operation of secondary causes
should be no prejudice to the first; They are worse then the Philistims, who
when they see the means, do not acknowledge the first mouer; whose active and
just power is no less seen in employing ordinary agents, then in raising up
extraordinary; neither does he less smite by a common fever, then a revenging
Angel.

THEY judge right of the cause, what do they resolve for the cure? (Let not
the Arc of the God of Israel abide with us) where they should have said, let
us cast out Dagon, that we may pacify and retain the God of Israel, they
determine to thrust out the Ark of God, that they might peaceably enjoy
themselves, and Dagon: Wicked men are upon all occasions glad to be rid of God,
but they can with no patience, endure to part with their sins, and whiles they
are weary of the hand that punishes them, they hold fast the cause of their
punishment.

THEIR first and only care is to put away him, who as he has corrected, so
can ease them. Folly is never separated from wickedness*

THEIR heart told them that they had no right to the Arc. A counsel is called
of their Princes, and Priests: If they had resolved to send it home, they had
done wisely; Now they do not carry it away, but they carry it about from
Ebenezer to Ashdod, from Ashdod to Gath, from Gath to Ekron: Their stomach was
greater then their conscience; The Arc was too sore for them, yet it was too
good for Israel; and they will rather dye, then make Israel happy. Their
conceit that the change of air could appease the Arc, God uses to his own
advantage; for by this means his power is known, and his judgments spread
over all the country of the Philistims: What do these men now, but send the
plague of God to their fellows? The justice of God can make the sins of men
their mutual executioners; It is the fashion of wicked men to draw their
neighbors into the partnership of their condemnation.

Wheresoever the Arc goes, there is destruction; the best of Gods ordinances,
if they be not proper to us, are deadly. The Israelites did not more shout for
joy, when they saw the Arc come to them, then the Ekronites cry out for
grief, to see it brought amongst them: Spiritual things are either sovereign,
or hurtful, according to the disposition of the receivers. The Arc does
either save, or kill, as it is entertained.

AT last, when the Philistims are well weary of pain and death, they are glad
to be quit of their sin; The voice of the Princes and people is changed to
the better, (Send away the Arc of the God of Israel, and let it return to his
own place,) God knows how to bring the stubbornnest enemy upon his knees,
and makes him do that


