THE RIGHTEOUS MAMMON:

An Hospitall-Sermon Preached in the solemn Assembly of the CITY on Monday in
EASTER-weeke 1618.

By IOS HALL D. of D.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniell Butter. 1618.

TO MY MVCH HONORED FRIEND Sr HENRY BAKER Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
AMongst many to whom my poor labonrs owe much for their acceptance, I know
none that can challenge so deep a debt as your self. If others have tasted of
my well-meant papers, you have fed heartily on them; and so made them your
own, that your memory may compare with others eyes, and your practice with
the speculation of others: Neither have your hand or tongue bin niggardly
dissemblers of your spiritual gain. Unto you therefore (to whose name I had
long since in my desires devoted my next) do I send this mean present: A
Sermon importunately desired of many: That which the present Auditors found
useful, the Press shall communicate to posterity; The gain of either, or
both is no less mine: I doubt not but you have already so acted that part of
this discourse which concerns you, that the direction I give to others is but
an history of what you have done. And go on happily (worthy Sir) in those your
holy courses which shall lead you to immortality; and so use your riches that
they may be made up into a crown for your head in a better world: My hearty
well-wishes shall not be wanting to you, and your virtuous Lady, as whom you
have obliged to be justly

Worcester April 14. Yours Jos. HALL.

1 TIMOTHY 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high
minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us
richly all things to enjoy. etc.
THOSE things which are excellent, and beneficial in their use, are dangerous
in their miscariage: It were lost labor for me to persuade you how good riches
are: your pains and your cares are sufficient proofs of your estimation; And
how deadly the abuse of them is, many a soul feels that cannot return to
complain; There is nothing more necessary therefore, for a Christian heart,
than to be rectified in the menaging of a prosperous estate; and to learn so
to be happy here, that it may be more happy hereafter; A task which this Text
of ours undertakes, and (if ye be not wanting to it and your selves) will be
sure to perform: What should I need to entreat your attention (Right
Honorable, right Worshipful, and beloved) to a business so nearly concerning
you? The errand is Gods; the use of it yours.

I never held it safe to pull Scripture in pieces: These words fall alone into
their parts. Timothy is set upon the spiritual Bench, and must give the
charge. A charge, to whom? Of what? To whom? To the rich: Of what? what they
must avoid, what they must endeavor: What must they avoid? Hy-mindednesse,
and Trust in wealth: What are the duties they must labor unto? Confidence in
God; Beneficence to men: And every one of these is backed with a reason to
enforce it: Why should they not be hy-minded? Their wealth is but in this
world; Why should they not trust in Riches? They are uncertain. Why should
they trust in God? He is a living God, and a liberal God: Why should they
extend their beneficence to men? By this they lay up to themselves a sure
foundation: Here is work enough you see for my discourse, and your practice:
The God of heaven bless it in both our hands.

Charge has (Ianus-like) a double aspect; Charge
one that looks up to S. Paul, the other that looks down to Timothy, and
from him, to the rich: In the first there is Apostolical superiority; for
((...)) Charge thou, referres to (...) verse 13. I Charge thee; so Paul charges
Timothy to charge the rich; He that gives the Charge, if he be not the chief
of the Bench, yet he is greater than the Jury; The first foundation of the
Church is laid in an inequality; and has ever since so continued; There can
be no harmony where all the strings or voices are of one tenor; In the
latter, as it looks on Timothy, it carries in it Episcopal power, Evangelical
sufficiency: Episcopal power; for this Charge is by the vulgar turned, and
the Translation of the Syriac, Praecipe, command; and so do we translate it in
the first of this Epistle, and the third verse; Timothy was left at Ephesus
((...)) to command.

The rich are commonly great; Nobility in the account of God is joined with
wealth; Curse not the King in thy thought, nor the Rich in thy Bedchamber,
says Solomon; so Dives at whose gates Lazarus lay is by some no mean ones
guessed to be Herod, Maldona^ could incline to that. in locum.
or some other King; and so are Jobs friends termd by the seventy* Yea the rich
is not only a little King amongst his neighbors, but Dives, quasi Diuus; as a
petty God to his underlings, and yet even the rich man that (as Solomon notes)
speaks with command unto others, he must be spoken to with command. Command
the rich. That foolish shaueling soared too hye a pitch, when in his imperious
Bull he mands the Angels: Francis of Assise and he, were both of a Diet; But
we may safely say that all powers below the Angels, are liable to our
spiritual Charge; and this Command implies obedience; Else, to what purpose do
we command and go without? Christ gave us the keys; (for that which the
Romanists would plead out of Origin, of Claues coeli, The keys of heaven to
the rest, and Claues coelorum, The keys of the heavens to Peter is a
distinction without a difference); What becomes of them? That I may not say on
some of our hands they are suffered to rust for want of use; on others, (as the
Pontificians) the wards are altered, so as they can neither open nor shut; Sure
I am that (if they be not lost on our behalf whether in dis-vse, or abuse) the
power of them is lost in the hearts of many: They have secret pick-locks of
their own making, Presumption and security, whereby they can open heaven gates
though double locked by our censures, and shut the gates of hell at pleasure,
which their own sins have opened wide to receive them; What use is there of
us, but in our chair? and there, but to be heard, and seen? Even in this
sense spectaculo facti sumus; we are to gaze on, not to employ: Now ye are
full, now ye are rich, ye reign as Kings without us; we are weak, ye are
strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised; It was well noted by one, that
the good father of the prodigal, though he might himself have brought forth
the prime robe; or have led his son into his wardrobe to take it, yet he
commands his servants to bring it forth (Proferte stolam) because he would
bring means into credit; because he would have his sons beholden to his
servants for their glory. It is a bold word, but a true one, Ye shall never
wear the long white robe, unless his servants your ministers bring it, and
put it on. He that can save you without us, will not save you but by us: He
has not tied himself to means, man he has; He could create you immediately
to himself, but he will have you begotten by the immortal seed of your
spiritual fathers: Woe be to you therefore, if our word have lost the power of
it in you: you have lost your right in heaven: Let us never come there if you
can come thither ordinarily without us. The words of the wife (says Solomon)
are like goades, like nails; But if these goades light upon the skin of a
Leuiathan, who esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood; If these
nails meet with iron, or marble in their driving, that they turn again;
What shall we say but our Gospel is hid to them that perish; and woe unto your
souls, Es. 3. 9.
for ye have rewarded evil to your selves.

Hitherto the power employed in this charge; the sufficiency follows: This
Euangelicus must be parangelicus; Like as the forerunner of Christ had a
charge for all sorts, so must his followers; So has Timothy in this Epistle, A
charge for wives, for Bishops, for Deacons, for widows, for servants, and
here for the rich; He must charge; and how shall he charge, if he have neither
shot nor powder? It is no brag to say that no Nation under heaven since the
Gospel looked forth into the world, ever had so many, so learned teachers as
this ISLAND has at this day. Hierom said of old to his Paulinus, De
Hierosolymis and de Britannia aequaliter patet aula coelestis; Heaven is as
open in Britayne as in Jerusalem; It holds well if you take it for a
prophetical comparison betwixt Jerusalem as it had been, and Britayne as it
should be: Jerusalem the type of Gods Church upon earth, in the glory of all
her legal magnificence was never more blessed, then this Church of ours: For
the Northern part of it beyond the Twede, we saw not, we heard not of a
Congregation (whereof indeed there is not so great frequence) without a
preaching Minister; Somewhat above eight hundred.
and though their maintenance has been generally but small, yet their pains
have been great, and their success suitable: And now lately, his sacred
Majesty in his last years journey (as if the sun did out of compassion go
beyond his Tropic line, to give heat unto the Northern climate) has so
ordered it, that their means shall be answerable to their labors; so as both
Pastors and people profess themselves mutually blessed in each other; and
bless GOD and their KING for this blessedness: As for the learning and
sufficiency of those Teachers (whether Prelates or Presbyters) our ears were
for some of them sufficient witnesses, and we are not worthy of our ears, if
our tongues do not thankfully proclaim it to the world. As for this Southern
part, when I consider the face of our Church in an universality, me thinks I
see the firmament in a clear night, bespangled with goodly stars of all
magnitudes, that yield a pleasing diversity of light unto the earth; But
withal, through the incomparable multitude of Cures, and the incompetent
provision of some, we cannot but see some of our people (especially in the
utmost skirts) like to those that live under the Southern pole, where the
stars are thinner set; and some stars there are in our Hemisphere, like those
little sparkles in the Galaxy, or Milky circle, wherein ye can scarce discern
any light; The desire of our hearts must be that every Congregation, every
soul might have a Timothy to deliver the charge of God powerfully unto it;
even with S. Paul's change of note; That every one which has a charge were
((...)) able to give the charge; and every hearer ((...)) ready to take it:
Wherein I cannot but thankfully congratulate the happiness of this famous City,
which if in other riches it equalize the best, I am sure in this it exceeds
all. There is not a City under the cope of heaven so wealthy in the spiritual
provision; yea there are whole countries in Christendom, that have not so
many learned Preachers, as are within these walls and liberties; Hear this,
ye Citizens, and be not proud, but thankful; Others may exceed you in the
glory of outward structure, in the largeness of extent, in the uniform
proportion of streets, or ornaments of Temples, but your pulpits do surpass
theirs; and if preaching can lift up Cities unto heaven, ye are not upon
earth; Happy is it for you if ye be as well fed as taught, and woe be to you
if you do not think your selves happy.

Charge then, The Rich*
but whom? The rich: Man that came naked out of the womb of the earth, was
even then so rich, that all things were his; Heaven was his roof or Canopy,
earth his floor, the sea his pond, the Sun and Moon his torches, all
creatures his vassals: And if he lost the fulness of this lordship by being a
slave to sin, yet we have still Dominium gratificum, as Gerson terms it;
Every son of Abraham is heir of the world: Romans 4. 13.
But to make up the true reputation of wealth (for thus, we may be as having
all things, and possessing nothing) another right is required besides
spiritual, which is a civil and humane right; wherein I doubt not but our
learned Wiclef, and the famous Archbishop of Armach, and the more famous
Chancellor of Paris (three renowned Divines of England, France, and Ireland have
had much wrong, whiles they are accused to teach, that men in these earthly
things have no tenure but grace, no title but Charity: Titulu^ Charitatis Dom.
a Soto de Iustitia and Iure.
which questionless they intended in foro interiori, in the Consistory of God,
not in the Common Pleas of men; in the Courts, not of Law, but of Conscience;
in which only it may fall out, that the Civil owner may be a spiritual
usurper, and the spiritual owner may be a civil beggar. God frames his
language to ours, and speaking according to that Ius Gentium, whereon the
division of these earthly possessions are grounded, he calls some Rich,
others, poor: Those heretics which called themselves Apostolic (as some
body does now at Rome) before the time of Epiphanius and Augustine, which
taught the unlawfulness of all earthly proprieties; seconded in Austens time, by
our countryman Pelagius, and in our times by some of the illuminate Elders of
Munster; are not worth confutation; or, if they were, our Apostle has done it
to our hands, in this one word, Rich; for there can be neither Rich nor poor
in a community; Neither does he say, Charge men that they be not rich, but
Charge the rich that they be not hye-minded.

With these, let us couple our ignorant Votaries, that place holiness in want;
with whom, their very crosses cannot deliver their coin from sin; which, to
make good the old rule, that it is better to give then to receive, give all
they have away at once, for but a license to beg for ever. Did these men ever
hear that the Blessing of God makes rich? That the wings of riches carry them
up to heaven? That the crown of the wise is their wealth? Do they not know
that if Lazarus were poor, yet Abraham was rich, and Pium pauperem suscepit
sinus diuitis; It was the happiness of poor Lazarus that he was lodged in the
bosom of rich Abraham. I am no whit afraid, (o ye rich Citizens) least this
paradoxe of our holy Mendicants shall make you out of love with your wealth; I
fear some of you would be rich, though ye might not; Now we tell you from
him, whose title is Rich in mercy, that ye may be at once Rich and holy; In
diuitijs cupiditatem reprehendit, non facultatem says Austen: It is a true
word of the son of Sirach, which I would have you carry home with you, and
write it as a fit Motto, in your Counting House; Bona est substantia, si non
sit peccatum in conscientia; Substance does well in the hand, if there be not
evil in the heart. Ecclesiasticus 13. 25.

Charge the Rich; Who are they? There is nothing wherein is greater mesprison.
One man in a Laodicean conceitednes thinks himself rich, when he has nothing;
Another, in a covetous humor thinks he has nothing, when he is rich; and how
easy is it for another man to mistake us, if we may thus easily mistake our
selves? I fear some of you are like the Pageants of your great solemnities,
wherein there is the show of a solid body, whether of a Lion, or Elephant, or
Unicorn, but if they be curiously looked into, there is nothing but cloth, and
sticks, and air; Others of you contrarily are like a dissembling Covent, that
professes poverty, and purchases Lordships; The very same did Solomon observe
in his time, in the great Burgomasters of Jerusalem Pro. 13. 7. For the
avoiding of both extremes, let us inquire who is rich. And tho greatness and
riches be in the rank of those things, which are held to have no absolute
determination, but consist rather in respect and comparison (for a rich Farmer
is yet poor to a rich Merchant, and a rich Merchant is but poor to a Prince,
and he to some great Emperor; That great Mammonist would say he is rich that
can maintain an Army, a poor man would say according to that Italian
inscription, He is rich that wants not bread); Yet certainly there are certain
general stakes and bounds, which divide betwixt poverty and competence,
betwixt competency and wealth; As there were variety of shekels among the
Jews, yet there was one shekell of the Sanctuary that varied not; Who then is
rich? I must give you a double answer; One will not serve; The one according to
true morality, the other according to vulgar use: In the first he is rich that
has enough, whether the world think so or not; Even Esau tho he were poor in
grace, yet in estate he was rich, I have enough my brother; And he that said,
Soul thou have goods enough for many years, was almost so; It was not his fault
that he thought he had enough, but that he meant to lie down, and wallow in
it. A man's wealth or poverty is most-what in himself; And though nature have
professed to read unto heathen men this lesson of wise moderation, yet it has
been seldom seen that any thing but true piety, has taught them to take it
out; Godliness is great gain with contentment: Victus and vestitus diuitiae
Christianorum, says Hierom: Food and raiment are the Christians wealth; Those
men therefore, which are still in the horse leeches note, sucking and craving;
which like Pharaohs lean kine are ever feeding, and never the fatter, are as
far from true wealth, as they would be from poverty, and further I am sure
they cannot be, and not further from wealth then godliness; Having is the
measure of outward wealth, but it is thinking that must measure the inward;
thoughts, I say, of contentment, cheerefullnes, and thankfulness, which if ye
want, it is not either or both the Indyes that can make you rich.

In the latter, he is rich that has more then enough, whether he think so or
no* He that has the possession (whether civil, or natural) of more then
necessary: Now if necessary and superfluous seem as hard to define as rich;
know there are just limits for both the^^^ Superfluous is defined by
necessary; for what is (...) necessary, is superfluous: There is then a
double necessary; One of nature, the other of estate: That is necessary to
nature without which we cannot live, that to estate, without which we cannot
live well: That is necessary to estate, which were superfluous to nature; and
that which were superfluous to nature, is not so much as necessary to estate;
Nature goes single, and bears little breadth; Estate goes ever with a train;
The necessity of nature admits little difference, especially for quantities;
the necessity of estate requires as many diversities, as there are several
degrees of humane conditions, and several circumstances in those degrees.
Justly therefore do the Scholemen and Casuists teach, that this necessary to
the decency of estate does not confist in puncto indiuiduo, but has much
latitude; That is necessary to scarlet, which to russet were superfluous; that
is but necessary to a Nobleman, which to an Esquire were superfluous; That
were ^^pe^fluous to a Pere, which to a Prince is but necessary: That is
necessary to the father of a family, which to a single man were superfluous:
Neither does this necessity look only to the present, but to the future; not
to what may be (which were an endless prospect) but to what must be, the
marriage of a daughter, the education of a son, the honest provision for
posterity: He that in a just estimate can go beyond the bounds of this
necessary, enters into the superfluous estate, and may well pass with the
world for rich.

Such a one is rich; let him look how he became so: That God which can allow
you to be rich, will not allow you always to your wealth: He has set up a
golden goal, to which he allows you all to run, but ye must keep the
beaten rode of honesty, justice, charity, and truth; if ye will leave this
path, and will be crossing over a shorter cut through by-ways of your own,
ye may be rich with a vengeance. The heathen Poet (one of them whom S. Paul
cited) could observe ((...)) which Solomon translates to us Prou. 28. 20.
Menander.
He that makes have to be rich shall not be innocent. If you have filled your
bags with fraud, usury, extortion, this gain may be honey in your mouth, but it
will be gravel in your throat, and poison in your soul: There are some means
of wealth in an ill name, as those two trusty servants of Mammon, use and
brocage; there are others as bad as they, little said to: Since I speak to
Citizens, let me be bold to say, there is not so errand usury in letting of
money, as in sale of wares. This oppression is both more, and more universal.
There are two maxims that do usually mis-lead men of Trafique, all the world
over; The one i, Res valet quanti vendi potest, A thing is worth what it may be
sold for; The other, Caveat emptor, At the buyers peril: The one is in regard
of the price, the other in regard of the quality of the wares. In the first,
whereas our Casuists have set three prices, low, mean, rigorous, they super
add a fourth, excessive; and think they may lawfully get what they can:
Whereas they shall once find, that as the rigorous price is a strain of
charity, so the excessive is a violation of justice; neither does this gain
differ ought from theft, but that it is honested by a fair cozenage. In the
second; It matters not how defective the measure be, how vicious the substance,
how false the kind, let this be the buyers care; No man is bound to buy, no
man can do wrong to himself; Such wares must be put off, (perhaps not to
customers) with concealment of faults, if not with protestations of
faultlesnes. In Salomons time, It is naught, it is naught said the buyer, and
when he was gone apart, he boasted; But now, It is good, it is good, says the
seller, and when the buyer is gone, he boasts of his deceit. Let me appeal
to your bosoms, if these two, Excess of price, and Deficiency of worth have
not been the most serviceable factors to bring in some of your wealth; And let
me tell you, if these be guilty of your gains, you may mis-name your trades,
Mysteries, but sure these tricks are mysteries of iniquity. It were envious
and infinite to arraigne the several sciences of their adulteration and fraud;
let me rather shut them all up together in that fearful sentence of wise
Solomon, Pro. 21. 6,
Vhe gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue, is a vanity tossed to and
fro of them that seek death: and (if ye please) read on in the next verse, 7.
The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them. Search your chests, search your
hearts (o all ye that hear me this day) and if any of you find any of this
adulterine gold amongst your heaps, away with it, as ye love your selves, away
with it; Else know that (as Chrysostom wittily) ye have locked up a thief in
your counting house, which will carry away all, and if ye look not to it the
sooner, your souls with it.

Rich, In this world, I^ this world.
not Of it. As S. John distinguishes of being in the Church, and being of it,
so does S. Paul of the world; Those are the rich of the world which are
worldlings in heart, as well as in estate; Those are rich in the world, whose
estate is below, whose hearts are above: The rich of the world are in it, but
the rich in the world are not of it: Marvel not there should be so much
difference in little particles; The time was when this very difference of (...),
and (...), set the the whole world together by the ears in the controversy of
Eutyches, and Dioscorus; and here, you see there is no less distance between
them, then betwixt heaven and earth: If Timothy, or S. Paul either, should have
charged the rich of the world he had charmed a deaf adder; Yea perhaps even
with this charge (like a rustie or ill-wrought piece) they had recoyled in his
face with those Athenians, What will this babbler say? The Prophet is a fool,
the spiritual man is mad, as they say in the Prophet: There is no good to be
done on a worldly heart; it is both hard and cold; Let the Smith strike a bar
new-come out of the fire (though it be iron) it bows, let him strike on his
anvile never so long, there is no impression, but rather a rebound of the
stroke: The maker of all hearts tells us, that the unregenerate man has Cor
lapideum, an heart of stone, and to what purpose do we with our venerable
Countryman preach to an heap of stones? Will ye have the reason why we preach
our selves hoarse and dead, and prevail not? The world is in men's ears, the
world is in their hearts; and they are not in the world, but of it; and there
can be nothing in them that are of the world, but that which is enmity to God;
and that which God repayes with enmity, so as there is no way for them but
perishing with the world: It is for those only whose hearts are not in their
bags, to receive the charge from God for their wealth, and to return glory to
him by it: To these (whereof I hope here are many before me) must Timothies
charge, and my speech be directed: Let these hear their condition first, and
then their duty: Their condition, They are rich, but In this world; For
distinction, for limitation; one implies the estate of their riches, the other
the time.

Their estate, as learned Beza, that they are but worldly riches. The very word
imports that there are other riches, not of the world; as Austen distinguishes
of Pauper in animo, and in sacculo; poor in mind, and in purse; so may we of
the rich: There is a spiritual wealth, as well as a secular; and so true and
precious is the spiritual, that the secular wealth is but stark beggary to
it; This outward wealth is in acres of earth, in the bowels of the earth, the
fruits of the earth, beasts of the earth; and all of it is valued by pieces of
earth, and one mouth-full of earth makes an end of all; Who knows not that
Earth is the basest piece of the world, and yet earth is at the end of all
these riches, and all of them end in the earth: See what it is that the world
dotes and dreams of (for these earthly hopes, as the divine Philosopher said,
are but dreams of the waking) even Nebuchadnezzars image, a composition of
metals, and the foot of all is clay. Earthly men tread upon their felicity,
and yet have not the wit to contemn it and to seek a better, which is the
spiritual wealth; the cabinet whereof is the soul, and the treasure in it,
God himself. Oh happy resolution of that blessed Father, Austen.
Omnis mihi copia, quae Deus meus non est, egestas est, All wealth besides my
God, is penury. Ambiant terrena, says another, Let the Gentiles seek after
earthly things which have no right to heavenly, let them desire the present,
which believe not the future; The Christians wealth is his Savior, and how can
he complain of measure that has the author of all? What should I need to say
more of the Christian heart, He is rich in God; and therefore well may he sing
that contented ditty of the Psalmist, Funes ceciderunt mihi in praeclaris, My
lot is fallen in a good ground, and I have a goodly heritage: Oh that it could
be our ambition that Nazianzen reports of his Philagrius, lutum contemnere, to
scorn this base and (pardon an homely word) dirty God of the world, and to
aspire unto the true riches; and when Satan shall offer to greaze us in the
fist to remit but a little of the rigor of a good conscience, we could cast it
in his face with S. Peter's indignation, Thy gold and thy silver perish with
thee.

The estate of wealth is not more described by this world, then the time; For (
world.
(...)) when it is absolutely spoken, be, as the Philosopher ( euer-being
(...)) yet when it is restrained with a ( Now.
(...)) it is scarce a time; and at the most, is turned justly seculum a
sequendo, as Isidore. (...)
Like as the same word in the Hebrew that signifies eternity, at other times
signifies but fifty years, the compass of a Iubilee; So as ((...)) is but the
space of humane life, which how short soever, is the utmost extent of the use
of worldly riches. Wealth is like unto words, by imposition, not natural; for
commodities are as they are commonly valued; we know bracelets of glass, and
copper chains, and little bells, and such like trifles are good merchandise
somwhere, though contemptible with us; and those things which the Indians
regard not, Europe holds precious: What are coins where their use and
valuation ceases? The Patars, and Souses, and Deniers, and Quart-d'escus that
are current beyond the water, serve but for counters to us: Thus it is with all
our wealth: Consider I beseech you that all our Crowns, and Soueraynes, and
Pieces, and halfe-peeces, and Ducats, and double Ducats are current but to
the brim of the grave, there they cease; and we justly laugh at the folly of
those Eastern pagans, which put coin into the dead man's hand for his
provision in another world: What should we do therefore, if we will be
provident trauelers, but make over our money here, to receive it by exchange in
the world to come; It is our Saviors counsel, Make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that they may receive you into everlasting habitations: And
as a Father says sweetly, If ye will be wise merchants, thrifty and happy
usurers, part with that which ye cannot keep, that you may gain that which
ye cannot loose; Which that ye may do, both in preparation of mind, and
(when need is) in a charitable abdication, harken to the Duties which GOD
lays upon you. The remouall of evil must make room for good; First therefore
our Apostle would have our hearts cleared of evil dispositions, then settled in
good: The evil dispositions that do commonly attend wealth, are Pride and
Misconfidence: Against these our Apostle bends his charge; That they be not
hye-minded; That they trust not in uncertain riches.

For the first; That they be not ^ye-min^ed.
It is strange to see how this earthly dross, which is of it self heavy, and
therefore naturally sinks downward, should raise up the heart of man; and yet
it commonly carries a man up, even to a double pitch of Pride, one above
others, the other above himself, Above others in contempt, above himself in
ouer-weening; The poor and proud is the Wise-mans monster, but the proud and
rich are no news: It is against all reason that metals should make difference
of reasonable men, of Christians; for as that wise Lawgiver said, Theodericus
refer. Cassiodore.
A free man can be valued at no price; Yet Solomon noted in his time, The rich
rules the poor; not the wise; and Siracides in his, The rich speaks proudly,
and what fellow is this? and S. James in his, The man with the gold ring looks
to sit highest. And not to cast back our eyes, Do ye not see it thus in our
times? If a man be but worth a foot-cloth, how big he looks on the inferior
passengers? and if he have purchased a little more land, or title then his
neighbors, you shall see it in his garb; If he command, it is imperiously,
with sirrah, and fellow; If he salute, it is ouerly, with a surly and silent
nod; if he speak, it is oracles; if he walk, it is with a grace; if he
control, it is in the killing accent; if he intertaine, it is with insolence,
and whatsoever he does, he is not as he was, nor, as the Pharisee says, like
other men. He looks upon vulgar men, as if they were made to serve him, and
should think themselves happy to be commanded; and if he be crossed a little,
he swells like the sea in a storm; Let it be by his equal, he cares more for
an affront, then for death, or hell; Let it by his inferior, (although in a
just cause) that man shall be sure to be crushed to death for his presumption:
And alas when all is done, after these hye terms, all this is but a man, and
(God knows) a foolish one too, whom a little earthly trash can affect so deeply.

Neither does this pride raise a man more above others, then above himself; And
what wonder is it if he will not know his poor neighbors, which has
forgotten himself? As Saul was changed to another man presently upon his
anointing, so are men upon their advancement; and according to our ordinary
proverb, Their good and their blood rises together; Now it may not be taken as
it has been; Other carriage, other fashions are fit for them; Their attire,
fare, retinue, houses, furniture displease them, new must be had; together with
coaches, and lacquaies, and all the equipage of greatness: These things (that no
man mistake me) I mislike not; they are fit for those that are fit for them.
Charity is not strait-laced, but yields much latitude to the lawful use of
indifferent things; (although it is one of Salomons vanities that servants
should ride on horseback, and he tells us it becomes not a swine to be ringd
with gold) but it is the heart that makes all these evil; when that is puffed up
with these windy vanities, and has learned to borrow that part of the Devils
speech, All these things are mine; and can say with him that was turned into a
beast, Is not this great Babel that I have built, or with that other pattern
of pride, I sit as a Queen, I am, and there is none beside me, now all these
turn into sin.

The bush that hangs out, shows what we may look for within; Whither does the
conceit of a little inheritance transport the Gallants of our time? O God, what
a world of vanity have thou reserved us to? I am ashamed to think that the
Gospel of Christ should be disgraced with such disguised clyents. Are they
Christians, or Antickes in some Carnevale, or childrens puppets that are thus
dressed? Pardon, I beseech you, men, brethren, and fathers, this my just and
holy impatience, that could never express it self in a more solemn assembly
(although I perceive those whom it most concerns, are not so devout as to be
present). Who can without indignation look upon the prodigyes, which this
mis-imagination produces in that other sex, to the shame of their husbands,
the scorn of religion, the damnation of their own souls. Imagine one of our
forefathers were alive again, and should see one of these his gay daughters
walk in Cheapside before him; what do you think he would think it were?
Here is nothing to be seen but a verdingale, a yellow ruff, and a periwig,
with perhaps some fether wauing in the top; three things for which he could not
tell how to find a name: Sure, he could not but stand amazed to think what
new creature the times had yielded since he was a man: And if then he should
run before her, to see if by the fore-side he might guess what it were, when
his eyes should meet with a poudred firzle, a painted hide shadowed with a fan
not more painted, breasts displayed, and a loose lock erring wantonly over her
shoulders, betwixt a painted cloth, and skin, how would he yet more bless
himself to think, what mixture in nature could be guilty of such a monster.
Is this (thinks he) the flesh and blood, is this the hair, is this the shape
of a woman? or has nature repented of her work since my days, and begun a
new frame? It is no marvel if their forefathers could not know them; God
himself that made them, will never acknowledge that face he never made, the
hair that he never made theirs, the body that is ashamed of the maker, the
soul that thus disguises the body; Let me therefore say to these Dames, as
Benet said to Totilaes servant, Depone filia quod portas, quia non est tuum;
Lay down that ye wear, it is none of your own: Let me persuade them (for
that can work most) that they do all this in their own wrong: All the world
knows that no man will rough cast a marble wall, but mud, or unpolished ragge:
That beauty is like truth, never so glorious, as when it goes plainest; that
false art in stead of mending nature, marres it: But if none of our persuasions
can prevail; Hear this ye garish popingayes of our time, if you will not be
ashamed to cloth your selves in this shameless fashion, God shall cloth you
with shame and confusion: Hear this, ye plaisterfaced Iezebels, if you will
not leave your dawbing and your hye washes, God shall one day wash them off
with fire and brimstone.

I grant, it is not wealth alone that is accessory to this pride; there are
some that (with the Cynick, or that worse dog, the patch't Cistertian) are
proud of rags; there are others, that are rich of nothing but clothes,
somewhat like to Nazianzens country of Ozizala, that abounded in flowers, but
was barren of corn; Their clothes are more worth then all the rest; as we use
to say of the Elder, that the flower of it, is more worth then all the tree
besides; but if there be any other causes of our hye-mindednesse, wealth is
one, which does ordinarily lift up our heads, above our selves, above others;
and if there be here any of these empty bladders, that are pufft up with the
wind of conceit, give me leave to prick them a little; and first, let me tell
them they may have much, and be never the better; The chimnye ouer-lookes all
the rest of the house, is it not (for all that) the very basest piece of the
building? The very heathen man could observe ((...) etc.) (...) etc. Arist.
That God gives many a man wealth for their greater mischeife; As the
Israelites were rich in Quails, but their sauce was such, that famine had been
better; little cause had they to be proud that they were fed with meat of
Princes, with the bread of Angels, whiles that which they put into their
mouths, God fetched out of their nosthrils. Haman was proud that he alone was
called to the honor of Esters feast, this advancement raysd him fifty cubits
hyer, to a stately gibbet; If your wealth be to any of you an occasion of
falling, if your gold be turned into fetters, it had been better for you to
have lived beggars. Let me tell them next, of the folly of this Pride; They are
proud of that which is none of theirs. That which law, and case-diuinitie
speaks of life, that man is not dominus vitae suae sed custos, Sene^.
is as true of wealth: Nature can tell him in the Philosopher, that he is not
Dominus but Colonus, not the Lord but the farmer: It is a just observation of
Philo, that God only by a propriety is styled the possessor of heaven and
earth, by Melchisedech, in his speech to Abraham; Genesis 14.
We are only the Tenants, and that at the will of the Lord; At the most (if we
will as Divines) we have ius ad rem, not dominium in rem, right to these
earthly things, not lordship over them; but right of favor from their
proprietarie, and Lord in heaven, and that liable to an account: Do we not
laugh at the groom that is proud of his Masters horse, or some vain whiffler,
that is proud of a borrowed chain? So ridiculous are we to be pufft up with
that, whereof we must needs say, with the poor man, of the hatchet, Alas
master it is but borrowed; and whereof our account shall be so much more great,
and difficult, as our receipt is more; Has God therefore laded you with these
earthly riches, be ye like unto the full ear of corn, hang down your heads
in true humility toward that earth from which you came: And if your stalk be
so stiff, that it bears up above the rest of your ridge, look up to heaven,
not in the thoughts of pride, but in the humble vows of thankfulness, and be
not hye-minded, but fear.

Hitherto of the hye-mindednesse that follows wealth; And that they trust not
Now where our pride is, there will be our confidence; As the wealthy therefore
may not be proud of their riches, so they may not trust in them; What is this
trust, but the setting of our hearts upon them, the placing of our joy and
contentment in them; in a word, the making of them our best friend, our patron,
our idol, our God? This the true and ielous God cannot abide, and yet nothing
is more ordinary; The rich man's wealth is his strong City, says Solomon, and
where should a man think himself safe but in his fort? He sees Mammon can do
so much, and hears him talk of doing so much more, it is no marvel if he
yield to trust him, Mammon is so proud a boaster, that his clients which
believe in him, cannot choose but be confident of him; For what does he not
brag to do? Silver answers to all, says Solomon; That we grant; although we
would be loath it could answer to Truth, to justice, to judgment: But yet more,
he vaunts to procure all, to pacify all, to conquer all; He says he can
procure all, secular offices, titles, dignities; yea (I would I might not say
in some sacrilegious and perjured wretches) the sacred promotions of the
Church; and ye know that old song of the Pope, and his Roman trafique, Keys,
Altars, Christ.
Claues, Altaria, Christum: Yea foolish Magus makes full account the Holy Ghost
himself may be had for money: He says he can pacify all; A gift in the
bosom appeaseth wrath; yea he says (look to it ye that sit in the seats of
judicature) he can sometimes bribe off sins, and pervert judgment: He says he
can overcome all, according to the old Greek verse, (...). etc.
Fight with silver lances, and you cannot fail of victory; yea he would make
us believe he thought this a bait to catch the son of God himself withal
(All these will I give thee), briefly he says according to the French
proverb, Silver does all; And let me tell you indeed, what Mammon can do; He
can bar the gates of heaven, he can open the gates of hell to the
unconscionable soul, and help his followers to damnation: This he can do;
but for other things, howsoever with us men, the foolish Siluer-smiths may
shout out, Great is Mammon of the worldlings, yet if we weigh his power aright,
we shall conclude of Mammon (as Paracelsus does of the Devil) that he is a
base and beggarly spirit: For what I beseech you, can he do? Can he make a man
honest? can he make him wise? can he make him healthful? Can he give a man to
live more merrily, to feed more heartily, to sleep more quietly? Can he buy
off the gout, cares, death, much less the pains of another world? nay, does
he not bring all these? Go to then, thou rich man; God is offended with thee,
and means to plague thee with disease and death; Now try what thy bags can do;
Begin first with God, and see whether thou can bribe him with thy gifts, and
buy off his displeasure; Wherewith shall thou come before the Lord and bow thy
self before the hye God? Micha 6.
will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers
of oil? The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts,
Haggai 2. If that speed not, go to the sergeant of God, death; see if thou
can fee him, not to arrest thee; He looks thee sternely in the face, and
tells thee with Ehud he has a message to thee from God; and bids thee with
the Prophet set thine house in order, for thou must dye; Yet, if he hear thee
not, go to the vnder-bayliffe of Death, disease, see if he can be wrought to
forbear thee; he answers thee with Laban, This thing is proceeded of the Lord
I cannot therefore say to thee evil or good. In sum, Disease will summon
thee unto death; Death will arrest thee to the judgment seat of God, God will
pass his doom upon thee, and in all these Riches avail not in the day of
wrath: And who would be so mad as to trust a friend that he knows will be sure
never to fail him, but when he has most need? Take heed therefore, as ye
love your souls, how ye bestow your Trust upon riches; Ye may use them, and
serve your selves of them; yea ye may enjoy them in a Christian moderation;
God will allow it you: That praise which the Jesuits College at Granado gives
of their Sanchez, Collegium Granatense Praef. ad lectorem con^^^. vitam R. P.
Tho. Sanchez. prae^^^. Operi Morali in praecepta Decal.
that (though he lived where they had a very sweet garden) yet he was never
seen to touch a flower, and that he would rather dye then eat salt, or pepper,
or ought that might give relish to his meat; like as that of some other Monks,
that they would not see the sun, nor shift their clothes, nor cleanse their
teeth, carries in it more superstition and austeritie and slouenry, then wit or
grace: Wherefore has God made his creatures but for use? This niggardlines is
injurious to the bounty of their maker; we may use them, we may not trust to
them; we may serve our selves of them, we may not serve them; we may enjoy
them, we may not ouer-ioy in them; So must we be affected to our goods, C.
Sol. Apollin. Sidon. Epist. de Theoder.
as Theoderic the good King of Aquitayne, was with his play, In bonis iactibus
tacet, in malis ridet, in neutris irascitur, in vtrisque philosophatur; In good
casts he was silent, in ill, merry; in neither angry, a philosopher in both.
But if we will be making our wealth a rival unto God, now the jealousy of God
shall burn like fire; this is the way to bring a curse upon our riches, and
us; If we lean upon this reed, it shall break, and run into our hand; and
he that trusts in riches shall fall. Prou. 11. 28.

Now as the disdainful rival will be sure to cast reproaches upon his base
competitor; In uncertain riches.
so does God, that we may see how unworthy riches are of our trust, he tells us
they are uncertain, (...).
yea uncertainty it self. Were our wealth tied to our life, it were uncertain
enough; what is that but a flower, a vapor, a tale, a dream, a shadow, a
dream of a shadow, a thought, as nothing? What are great men but like
hailstones, that leap up on the Tiles, and straight fall down again, and lie
still, and melt away? But now, as we are certain that our riches determine
with our uncertain life (for goods and life are both in a bottom, both are
cast away at once;) so we cannot be certain they will hold so long; Our life
flies hastily away, but many times our riches have longer wings, and out-flie
it; It was a witty observation of Basil that wealth roles along by a man,
(...). etc. Basil. in Ps. 61.
like as an heddy stream glides by the banks; Time will molder away the very
bank it washes, but the current stays not for that, but speeds forward from
one elbow of earth unto another; so does our wealth even while we stay, it is
gone' In our penal laws, there are more ways to forfait our goods, then our
lives; On our hye ways, how many favorable thieves take the purse, and save
the life? And generally, our life is the tree, our wealth is the leaves, or
fruit; the tree stands still when the leaves are fallne, the fruit beaten
down; Yea many a one is like the Pine Tree, which (they say) if his bark be
pulld off lasts long, else it rots; so does many a man live the longer for his
losses; If therefore life and wealth strive whether is more uncertain, wealth
will sure carry it away. Job was yesterday the richest man in the East; to day
he is so needy that he is gone into a proverb, As poor as Job: Belisarius the
great and famous Commander, to whom Rome owed her life twice at least, came to
Date obolu^ Belisario; one halfe-penny to Belisarius. What do I instance? This
is a point wherein many of you Citizens, that are my auditors this day, might
rather read a lecture unto me; You could tell me how many you have known,
reputed in your phrase, goodmen, which all on the sudden have shut up the shop
windows, and broken for thousands; You could reckon up to me a catalogue of
them, whom either casualty of fire, or inundation of waters, or robbery of
thieves, or negligence of servants, or suretyship for friends, or oversight of
reckonings, or trusting of customers, or unfaithfulness of Factors, or
inexpected falls of markets, or pyracie by sea, or unskillfulness of a pilot, or
violence of tempests have brought to an hasty poverty; and could tell me that
it is in the power of one gale of wind to make many of you either rich
Merchants, or beggars: Oh miserable uncertainty of this earthly pelf, that
stands upon so many hazards, yea that falls under them! who would trust it? who
can dote upon it? what madness is it in those men, which (as Menot says) like
unto hunters, that kill an horse of price, in the pursuit of an hare worth
nothing, endanger yea cast away their souls upon this worthless and fickle
trash. Glasses are pleasing vessels, yet because of their brittlenesse, who
esteems them precious? All Salomons state was not comparable to one Tulip, his
royal crown was not like the Crown Imperial of our Gardens; and yet because
these are but flowers, whose destiny is fading and burning, we regard them
thereafter; No wise man bestows much cost in painting mud-walls. What mean
we (my beloved) to spend our lives and hearts upon these perishing treasures?
It was a wise meditation of Nazianzen to his Asterius; that good is to no
purpose if it continue not; yea there is no pleasant thing in the world, says
he, that has so much joy in the welcome, as it has sorrow in the farewell:
Look therefore upon these heaps, o ye wise-hearted Citizens, with careless
eyes, as those things whose parting is certain, whose stay is uncertain; and
say with that worthy father, By all my wealth, and glory, and greatness this
alone have I gained, that I had something to which I might prefer my Savior.
And know that as Abraham whiles he was in his own country (it is Cyrills
note) had never God appearing to him, save only to bid him go forth, but
after, when he was gone forth, had frequent visions of his maker; So whiles in
our affections we remain here below in our cofers, we cannot have the
comfortable assurances of the presence of God; but if we can abandon the love
and trust of these earthly things, in the conscience of our obedience, now God
shall appear to us, and speak peace to our souls; and never shall we find
cause to repent us of the change. Let me therefore conclude this point with
that divine charge of our Savior, Lay not up for your selves treasures on
earth, where mothe and rust do corrupt, and thieves break thorough and
steal, but lay up for your selves treasure in heaven.

Thus much of the negative part of our charge; Wherein we have dwelt so long,
that we may scarce soiourne in the other. Trust not, But (trust) in God.
but Trust; The heart of man is so conscious of his own weakness, that it will
not go without a prop; and better a weak stay then none at all; Like as in
matter of policy, the very state of Tyranny is preferred to the want of a
King; The same breath therefore that withdrawes one refuge from us, substitutes
a better; and in steed of Riches, which is the false God of the world, commends
to us the True and living God of heaven and earth; Even as some good Carpenter
raises up the studds, and in steed of a rotten groundsell lays a sound; The
same trust then must we give to God, which which we may not give to Riches; The
object only is changed, the act is not changed. Him must we esteem above all
things, to him must we look up in all, on him must we depend for all both
protection, and provision; from his goodness and mercy must we acknowledge
all, and in him must we delight with contempt of all; and this is to Trust in
God. It was a sweet ditty of the Psalmist, which we must all learn to sing,
Bonum est considere in Domino, It is good to trust in the Lord: Good, in
respect of him, and good for us. For him, It is one of the best pieces of his
glory, to be Trusted to: as, with us, Joseph holds Potiphar cannot do him a
greater honor, then in Trusting him with all; And his glory is so precious,
that he cannot part with that to any creature; All other things he imparts
willingly, and reserues nothing to himself but this: Being, life, knowledge,
happiness are such blessings, as are eminently, originally, essentially in
God, and yet, Being, he gives to all things, Life to many, Knowledge to some
kinds of creatures, happiness to some of those kinds, as for Riches, he so
gives them to his creature, that he keeps them not at all to himself; But as
for his glory (whereof our trust is a part) he will not endure it communicated
to Angel, or man; not to the best guest in heaven, much less to the dross of
the earth; Whence is that curse not without an indignation, Cursed be the man
trusts in man; that makes flesh his arm, yea or spirit either, besides the
God of spirits; Whom have I in heaven but thee? Herein therefore we do justice
to God, when we give him his own, that is, his glory, our confidence.

But the greatest good is our own; and God shows much more mercy to us in
allowing and inabling us to trust him, then we can do justice in trusting him;
For alas he could in his just judgment glorify himself in our not Trusting
him, in taking vengeance of us for not glorifying him: Our goodness reaches not
to him; but his goodness reaches down to us in that our hearts are raised up to
confidence in him. For, what safety, what unspeakable comfort is there in
Trusting to God? When our Savior in the last words of his
diuine-Farewell-Sermon to his Disciples would persuade them to confidence, he
says ((...)): Joh. 16. vlt.
and so does the Angel to Paul in prison; a word that signifies Boldness;
implying that our confidence in God causes Boldness and courage; And what is
there in all the world that can work the heart to so comfortable and
unconquerable resolution as our reposall upon God? The Lord is my trust, whom
then can I fear? In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then to my soul,
flee hence as a bird to the hills? Yea how often does David infer upon this
Trust, a non confundar, I shall not be ashamed; And this case is general, That
they that put their trust in the Lord are as mount Sion that cannot be moved;
Faith can remove mountains, but the mountains that are raisd on faith, are
unremovable. Here is a stay for you (o ye wealthy and great) worthy of your
trust; If ye were Monarchs on earth, or Angels in heaven, ye could be no way
safe but in this trust; How easy is it for him to enrich, or impouerish you,
to hoyse you up to the seats of honor, or to spurn you down? What mines, what
Princes can raise you up to wealth, against him, without him? He can bid the
winds and seas favor your vessels, he can bid them sink in a calm. Prou. 22.
The rich and the poor meet together, God is the maker of both; Ye may trade,
and toil, and carke, and spare, and put up, and cast about, and at last sit
you down with a sigh of late repentance and say, Except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it; It is in vain to rise early, and
lie down late, and eat the bread of sorrow. Unto how many of you may I say
with the prophet Haggai, Ye have sown much, and bring in little; Ye eat and
have not enough, ye drink, but ye are not filled, ye cloth you, but ye be
not warm; and he that earneth much, puts his gains into a broken bagg. And
whence is all this? Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little; when ye
brought it home I did blow upon it, says the Lord of hosts. Behold how easy a
thing it is for the God of heaven to blast all your substance; yea not only to
diminish, but to curse it unto you, and to make you weary of it, and of your
selves. Oh cast your selves therefore into those Allmighty hands, seek him in
whom only you shall find true rest and happiness; Honor him with your
substance, that has honored you with it; Trust not in riches, but trust in GOD.

It is motive enough to your Trust, that he is a God; all arguments are
infolded in that one; yet this text gives you certain explicit inforcements of
this confidence; Every one of these reasons (implying a secret kind of
disdainful comparison betwixt the true God and the false) persuade you to
trust in God; Riches are but for this world, the true God is Lord of the other,
and begins his glory where the glory of the world ends: therefore Trust in him.
Riches are uncertain, the true GOD is Amen, the first and the last; ever like
himself, therefore trust in him. Riches are but a liuelesse and senseless
metal, the true God is a living God, therefore trust in him. Riches are but
passiues in gift, they cannot bestow so much as themselves, much less ought
besides themselves, the true God gives you all things to enjoy, therefore Trust
in him; the two latter, because they are more directly stood upon, and now fall
into our way, require a further discourse.

(El-chai) The living God, The living.
is an ancient and usual title to the Almighty; especially when he would
disgrace an unworthy rival. As S. Paul in his speech to the Lystrians, opposes
to their vain Idols, the living GOD. Viuo ego, As I live, is the oath of God
for this purpose, as Hierom notes, neither do I remember any thing besides
his holiness, and his life that he swears by: When Moses asked Gods name, he
described himself by, I AM; He is, he lives; and nothing is, nothing lives
absolutely, but he; all other things by participation from him. In all other
things, their life and they are two; but God is his own life, and the life of
God is no other then the living God: And because he is his own life, he is
eternal; for (as Thomas argues truly against the Gentiles) Nothing ceases to
be but by a separation of life, and nothing can be separated from it self; for
every separation is a division of one thing from another; Most justly therefore
is he which is absolute, simple, eternal in his being, called the living God:
Although, not only the life that he has in himself, but the life that he
gives to his creatures challenges a part in this title; A glimpse whereof
perhaps the Heathen saw, when they called their Jupiter, ((...)) from ((...))
which signifies to live: In him we live (says S. Paul to his Athenians). As
light is from the Sun, so is life from God, (which is the true soul of the
world, and more; for without him it could not be so much as a carcass; and
spreads it self into all the animate creatures. Life (we say) is sweet; and so
it is indeed; the most excellent and precious thing that is derived from the
common influence of God. There is nothing before life, but Being; and Being
makes no distinction of things; for that can be nothing, that has no Being;
Life makes the first and greatest division; Those creatures therefore, which
have life, we esteem far beyond those, that have it not, how noble soever
otherwise; Those things therefore which have the perfitest life must needs be
the best; Needs then must it follow that he which is life it self, who is
absolute, simple, eternal, the fountain of all that life which is in the
world, is most worthy of all the adoration, joy, love, and confidence of our
hearts, and of the best improuement of that life which he has given us. Trust
therefore in the living GOD. Covetousness (the spirit of God tells us) is
Idolatry, or (as our old Translation turns it) worshipping of Images. Every
stamp or impression in his coin is to the covetous man a very Idol; And what
madness is there in this Idolatry, to dote upon a base creature, and to bestow
that life which we have from God, upon a creature that has no life in it
self, and no price but from men: Let me then persuade every soul that hears
me this day, as Jacob did his household, Put away the strange Gods that are
among you, Genesis 35. ^.
and be clean; and as S. Paul did his Lystrians; Oh turn away from these
vanities unto the living God.

The last attractiue of our Trust to God is his mercy, Who gives us richly all
things to enjoy.
and liberality; Who gives us richly all things to enjoy: A theme, wherein ye
will grant it easy to leese our selves. First God not only has all in
himself, but he gives to us, He gives, not somewhat (though a crust is more
then we are worthy of) but all things. And not a little of all, but richly; and
all this, not to look on, but to enjoy; Every word would require not a
several hour, but a life to meditate of it; and the tongue not of men, but
Angels to express it. It is here with us, as in a throng; we can get neither
in nor out; But as we use to say of Cares, so it shall be with our discourse,
that the greatness of it shall procure silence; and the more we may say of this
head, the less we will say: It shall content us only to top these sheaues,
since we cannot stand to thresh them out.

Whither can ye turn your eyes to look beside the bounty of God? If ye
look upward; His mercy reaches to the heavens. If downward; The earth is
full of his goodness, and so is the broad sea. If ye look about you; What is
it that he has not given us? Air to breath in, fire to warm us, water to
cool us, clothes to cover us, food to nourish us, fruits to refresh us, yea
delicates to please us; beasts to serve us, Angels to attend us, heaven to
receive us, and which is above all, his own Son to redeem us. Lastly, if
ye look into your selves; Has he not given us a soul to inform us, senses
to inform our soul, faculties to furnish that soul. Understanding, the great
survayer of the secrets of nature, and grace; Fantasy and Invention the master
of the works; Memory the great keeper or Master of the rolls of the soul, a
power that can make amends for the speed of Time, in causing him to leave
behind him those things, which else he would so carry away, as if they had not
been: Will, which is the Lord Paramount in the state of the soul, the
commander of our actions; the elector of our resolutions. Judgment, which is
the great Counselor of the will: Affections, which are the servants of them
both. A body fit to execute the charge of the soul, so wondrously disposed,
as that every part has best opportunity to his own functions; so qualified
with health arising from proportion of humors that like a watch kept in good
tune it goes right, and is fit to serve the soul, and maintain it self. An
estate that yields all due conueniences for both soul, and body; seasonable
times, rain, and sunshine; Peace in our borders; competency, if not plenty of
all commodities, good laws, religious, wise, just governors, happy and
flourishing days, and above all the liberty of the Gospel. Cast up your
books, o ye Citizens, and sum up your receipts, I am decei'd if he that has
least shall not confess his obligations infinite. There are three things
especially wherein ye are beyond others, and must acknowledge your selves
deeper in the books of God, then the rest of the world; Let the first be the
clear deliverance from that woeful judgment of the Pestilence. Oh remember
those sorrowful times, Above 30000 in one year.
when every month swept away thousands from among you; When a man could not
set forth his foot but into the jaws of death; when piles of carcasses were
carried to their pits as dung to the fields; when it was cruelty in the sick
to admit visitation, and love was little better then murderous; And by how much
more sad and horrible the face of those evil times looked, so much greater
proclaim you the mercy of God, in this happy freedom which you now enjoy; that
you now throng together into Gods house without fear, and breath in one
another face without danger: The second is the wonderful plenty of all
provisions both spiritual and bodily; You are the Sea, all the rivers of the
land run into you; Of the land? yea of the whole world, Sea and land conspire
to enrich you. The third is the privilege of careful government; Your
charters as they are large and strong, wherein the favor of Princes has made
exceptions from the general rules of their municipall laws, so your form of
administration is excellent, and the execution of Justice exemplary, and such
as might become the mother City of the whole earth. For all these you have
reason to ask, Quid retribuam with David; What shall I render to the Lord for
all his benefits? and to excite one another unto thankfulness with that sweet
singer of Israel, Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness: and (as beneficence is a binder) these favors of God call for your
confidence: What should you do but ever trust that God, whom you have found so
gracious? Let him be your God, be ye his people for ever; and let him make
this free and open challenge to you all; If there be any power in heaven, or in
earth that can do more for you then he has done let him have your hearts and
yourselues.

And thus from that duty we owe to God in our confidence, and his beneficence
to us, we descend to that beneficence which we owe to men; expressed in the
variety of four Epithets, Doing good, That they do good, and be rich in good
works.
being rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; all to
one sense; all is but beneficence: The scriptures of God least any Atheist
should quarrel at this waste, have not one word superfluous; Here is a
redoubling of the same words without fault of Tautologie; a redoubling of the
same sense in diverse words, without idleness. There is feruor in these
repetitions, not loosenes; as it was wont for this cause to be observed both
in Councels, and acclamations to Princes, how often the same word was reiterated,
that by the frequence they might judge of the vehemence of affection. It were
easy to instance in many of this kind, as especially Exodus 25. 35. Psalm. 89.
30. Ioh. 1. 20. and so many more, as that their mention could not be void of
that superfluity which we disclaim. This heap of words therefore shows the
vehement intention of his desire of good works, and the important necessity
of their performance; and the manner of this expression inforces no less,
Charge the rich, that they do good, and be rich in doing good. Harken then ye
rich men of the world; it is not left arbitrary to you, that you may do good
if you will, but it is laid upon you as your charge and duty; You must do good
works, and woe be to you if you do not. This is not a counsel, but a precept;
Although I might say of God, as we use to say of Princes, his will is his
command; The same necessity that there is of Trusting in God, the same is in
Doing good to men. Let me sling this stone into the brazen forheads of our
adversaries, which in their shameless challenges of our religion dare tell the
world, we are all for faith, nothing for works; and that we hold works to
salvation as a parenthesis to a clause, that it may be perfect without them:
Heaven and earth shall witness the injustice of this calumniation; and your
consciences shall be our compurgators this day, which shall testify to you,
both now, and on your deathbeds, that we have taught you there is no less
necessity of good works, then if you should be saved by them; and that though
you cannot be saved by them, as the meritorious causes of your glory, yet that
you cannot be saved without them, as the necessary effects of that grace which
brings glory.

It is an hard sentence of some Casuists (concerning their fellows) that but a
few rich men's Confessors shall be saved; I imagine, for that they dawbe up
their consciences with untempered mortar, and sooth them up in their sins; Let
this be the care of them whom it concerns; For us, we desire to be faithful
to God, and you; and tell you roundly what you must trust to; Do good therefore
ye rich, if ever ye look to receive good; if ever ye look to be rich in
heaven, be rich in good works upon earth: It is a shame to hear of a rich man
that dies, and makes his will of thousands, and bequeaths nothing to pious and
charitable uses: God and the poor are no part of his heir; We do not houer
over your expiring souls on your deathbeds, as Ravens over a carcass; we do
not beg for a Covent, nor fright you with Purgatory, nor chaffer with you,
for that invisible treasure of the Church whereof there is but one Key-keeper
at Rome; but we tell you that the making of friends with this Mammon of
unrighteousness is the way to eternal habitations: They say of Cyrus that he
wont to say he laid up treasures for himself, whiles he made his friends rich;
but we say to you, that you lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, whiles
you make the poor your friends upon earth: We tell you there must be a Date,
ere there can be a Dabitur; that he which gives to the poor, lends upon use
to the Lord; which pays large increase for all he borrowes; and how shall he
give you the interest of glory, where he has not received the principal of
beneficence? How can that man ever look to be Gods heir in the kingdom of
heaven, that gives all away to his earthly heirs, and lends nothing to the God
of heaven? As that witty Grecian said of extreme tall men, that they were
Cypresse-trees (...) etc. fair and tall, but fruitless, so may I say of a
strait-handed rich man; And these Cypresses are not for the garden of paradise;
none shall ever be planted there but the fruitful: And if the first paradise
had any trees in it only for pleasure, I am sure the second, Revel. 22. 2.
which is in the midst of the new Jerusalem, shall have no tree that bears not
twelve fruits, yea whose very leaves are not beneficial; Do good therefore o
ye rich, and show your wealth to be, not in having, but in doing good. And if
GOD have put this holy resolution into any of your hearts, take this with you
also, from him; Do not talk, and purpose, and project, but execute; Do not so
do good that we may thank your deathbed for it, and not you: Late beneficence
is better then none, but so much as early beneficence is better then late; He
that gives not till he dies, shows that he would not give, if he could keep
it, and God loves a cheerful giver; That which you give thus, you give it by
your Testament, I can scarce say you give it by your will: The good man's praise
is, Dispersit, dedit, he disperses his goods, not, he left them behind him;
and his distribution is seconded with the retribution of God, His
righteousness endures for ever, Psalm. 112. 9. Our Savior tells us that our
good works are our light, Let your light so shine, that men may see your good
works; which of you lets his light go behind him, and has it not rather
carried before him, that he may see which way it goes, and which way himself
goes by it? Do good therefore in your life, that you may have comfort in your
death, and a crown of life after death.

Now all this have I spoken, not for that I have ought (as S. Paul says)
whereof to accuse my Nation; Blessed be God, as good works have abounded in
this age, so this place has super-abounded in good works. Be it spoken to the
glory of that God, whose all our good works are, to the honor of the Gospel,
to the conviction of that lewd slander of Solifidianisme. LONDON shall vye good
works with any City upon earth; This day and your ears are abundant
witnesses; As those therefore that by an handful guess at the whole sack, it
may please you by this years breife to judge of the rest; Wherein I do not
fear least Envy it self shall accuse us of a vainglorious ostentation;
Those obstreperous benefactors that (like to hens which cannot lay an egg but
they must cackle straight) give no alms but with trumpets, loose their thanks
with God; Alms should be like oil, which though it swim aloft when it is
fallne, yet makes no noise in the falling; not like water, that still sounds
where it lights: But howsoever private beneficence should not be acquainted
with both the hands of the giver, but silently expect the reward of him that
sees in secret, yet God should be a great looser, if the public fruits of
charity should be smothered in a modest secrecy: To the praise therefore of
that good GOD, which gives us to give, and rewards us for giving, to the
example of posterity, to the honor of our profession, to the encouragement of
the well-deseruing, and to the shame of our malicious adversaries, hear what
this year has brought forth.

Here followed a breife memorial of the charitable acts of the City this year
last past. etc.

And if the season had not hindered, your eyes should have seconded your ears
in the comfortable testimony of this beneficence, Euge etc. Well done good and
faithful servants; Thus should your profession be graced, thus should the
incense of your alms ascend in pillars of holy smoke into the nosthrils of
God; thus should your talents be turned into Cities: This color is no other
then celestial, and so shall your reward be; Thus should the foundation be
laid of that building, whose walls reach up unto heaven, whose roof is
finished and laid on, in the heaven of heavens, in that immortality of glory,
which the God of all glory, peace, and comfort has provided for all that love
him; Unto the participation whereof the same God of ours mercifully bring us,
through the son of his love, Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, one infinite and incomprehensible God be given all
praise, honor, and glory now and forever.

Amen.

