PHARISAISME AND CHRISTIANITY: Compared and set forth in a Sermon at Paul's
Cross, May 1. 1608. By I. H. Upon MATTHEW. 5.20. Except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, you shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

LONDON, Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bul-head. ANNO 1608.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, and my very good Lord, THOMAS Lord Bishop
of LONDON, I. H. wishes all grace and happiness.
RIGHT REVEREND and HONORABLE,
I Know there is store of Sermons extant; The pulpit scarce affords more than
the Press. I add to the number, and complain not: In all good things
abundance is an easy burden. If the soul may feed it self with variety,
both by the ear, and by the eye, it has no reason to find fault with choice.
But if any weaker stomach (as in our bodily Tables) shall fear to surfeit at
the sight of too much, it is easy for that man to look off, and to confine
his eyes to some few: who cannot much sooner abate to himself, than multiply
to another? Let not his nice sullenness prejudice that delight and profit
which may arise to others from this number. For me, I dare not be so envious,
as not to bless God for this plenty, and seriously to rejoice that Gods
people may thus liberally feast themselves by both their senses: neither know I
for whether more; The sound of the word spoken pierces more, the letter
written endures longer; the ear is taught more suddenly, more stirringly: the
eye with leisure and continuance. According to my poor ability I have desired
to do good both ways, not so much fearing censures, as caring to edify. This
little labor submisselie offers it self to your Lordship, as justly yours:
being both Preached at your call, and (as it were) in your charge, and by one
under the charge of your fatherly jurisdiction, who unfeignedly desires by all
means to show his true heart to Gods Church, together with his humble
thankfulness to your Lordship; and professes still to continue

Your Lordships in all humble duty and observance IOS. HALL.

MATTHEW. chap. 5. verse. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.


THE curious Doctors Petr. Galatin. de arcan. fidei Cath. ad finem.

Ex glos. Rab. Sh^lom^h.


of the Jews had reduced all Gods statute law to six hundred and thirteen
precepts; so many as there are days in the year, and members in the body. It
was an honest and (which were strange) a Christian conceit of one of their
Rabbis, that David abridges all these to eleven in his Psalm. 15. Esaias to six,
in his 33.15. Micha^ yet lower to three, in his 6.8. Esaias yet again to two, in
his 56 1. Habacue to one, The just man shall live by faith. Lex est Eua^gelium
praedictum: Euangelium lex completa.
So ye see, the Law ends in the Gospel; and that Father said not a miss, The
Law is the Gospel foretold* and the Gospel is the Law fulfilled. These two
are the freehold of a Christian; and what but they?

The Jews of these times perverted the Law, rejected the Gospel. Our Savior
therefore that great Prophet of the World (as it was high time) cleares the Law,
delivers and settles the Gospel: well approving in both these, that he came
not to consume, but to consummate the Law. 1. Cor. 16.9
Wherein (as Paul to his Corinths) he had a great door, but many adversaries:
Ioh. 3. Art thou a Master in Israel?
amongst these were the great masters of Israel (so our Savior terms the
Phariseis) and their fellows, and yet their riuals, the Scribes: both so much
harder to oppose, by how much their authority was greater.

Truth has no room till falsehood be removed; Our Savior therefore (as
behooved) first shows the falsehood of their Glosses, and the hollownesse of
their profession; and if both their life and Doctrine be naught; what free part
is there in them? And lo both of these so faulty, that Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

What were the men? What was their righteousness? What wanted it? Follow me, I
beseech you, in these three, and if my discourse shall seem for a while, more
thornie and perplexed, remedy it with your attention.

Those things which are out of the ken of sense or memory, must be fetched
from Story. The Sect (or order whether) of the Phariseis ceased with the
Temple; since that, no man reads of a Pharisie; and now is grown so far out
of knowledge, that the modern Jews are more ready to learn of us who they
were: There is no point, wherein it is more difficult, to avoid variety, yea
ostentation of reading; without any curious traversing of opinions, I study for
simple truth, as one that will not lead you out of the rode-way to show you the
turnings. Scribes were ancient; Esr. 6.7.
Esra is called (Sopher mahir) a prompt Scribe. As long before him, soever
since they continued till Christ's time; but in two ranks; some were (...):
others (...): Some popular, others legal: Some the peoples, others, Gods: The
one Secretaries, Recorders, Notaries, as 2. Chron. 24.11. ( Sopher hamelec) the
Kings Scribe: The other Doctors of the Law of God: Ier. 8.8.
The Law of the Lord is with us, in vain made he it, the pen of the Scribe is
in vain.

As the Phariseis were ((...) (...);) Law-masters: so these are the same which
Luc. 11.45. are called ((...)) interpreters of the Law. Tho to some not mean
Critickes, it seems these should be a third sort; which consider not, that our
Savior on purpose addressing his speech to the Phariseis, fell by the way upon
the Scribes, and being admonished by one of them, as of an ouer-sight, now
auerres right down of the Scribes, what before he had but indifferently
glanced at. Neh. 8.4. Matt. 23.2. Cleric: Iudaeorum: says Jerome.
What they were, is plain by Ezraes pulpit; and Moses his chair. These and
Phariseis differed not much; they agreed in some good, but in more evil. But
the profession of Phariseis, because it is more obscure, you shall give me
leave to fetch somewhat further.

Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 4 c. 22 Era^t in circu^cisione diuersae sente^tiae qua
maxim tribui Iudae aduersabantur, etc.
There were, says old Egesippus (as Eusebius cites him) diverse opinions in the
Circumcision; which all crossed the tribe of Judah: Essens, Galileans,
Emerobaptists, Masbutheans, Samaritans, Phariseis, Sadduces. It were easy to
help him with more, Vid Ios. Scalig resp. ad Serarium.
Sebuaeans, Cannaeans, Sampsaeans; and if need were, yet more. Where are those
wauerers, that stagger in their trust to the Church, because of different
opinions, receiving that rotten argument of profane Celsus against the
Christians? Orig. lib. 5. aduers. Cells. Christian^s non habere veram
Religionem, quod in varias sectas diuisi essent.
Says the Papists, One says I am Caluins, another, I am Luthers. We
disclaim, we defy these titles, these divisions: we are one in truth: would
God we were yet more one: It is the lace and fringe of Christ's garment, that is
questioned amongst us, the cloth is sound. But what? Was the Jewish Church
before Christ, Gods true Church, or not? If it were not, which was it? If it
were: lo that here rent in more than eight parts, Domus Sa^mai and Hillel. Ar.
Mont. in Euang.
and one of them differing from it self in eighteen opinions; and yet as
Irenaeus well observes, Ante adue^tum Christi, non tot and tam blasphemae
hareses* Irem. lib. 5.
before Christ, there were neither so many heresies, nor so blasphemous.

Show me a Church on earth without these wrinkles of division, and I will never
seek for it in heaven: although to some Pharisaisme seems rather a several
order, than a sect: but S. Luke that knew it better, has ((...)) the Sect of
the Phariseis. Act. 15.5.
When the profession began, no history records. Some would feign fetch them
from Esaias 65.5. Touch me not, for I am holier than thou. But these strain too
far; for in the verse before, the same men eat swines-flesh; which to the
Phariseis is more then piacular. Hear briefly, their name, their original,
their office. Their name (tho it might admit of other probable deriuations, Jn
eam consentiunt omnes Hebraei, test Bahal Haruch, Pagnin. in (...)
yet) by consent of all Hebrew Doctors (I have a great Author for it) is
fetched from separation; tho upon what grounds, all agree not; doubtless for
the perfection of their doctrine, and austeritie of life. Their original is
more intricate; which after some scanning, I have thus learned of some great
Masters of Jewish Antiquities. Ar. Montanus. Ios. Seal. I. Drus^^, etc.
Before there was any open breach in the old Jewish Church; there were two
general, and diverse conceits about Gods service: One, that took up only with
the Law of God; and if they could keep that, thought they needed no more;
neither would they sapere supra scriptum; be wiser then their maker; These were
called ( Karraim) of which sort there are diverse at this day in Constantinople,
and other where, at deadly feode with the other Jews, which they now call
Rabbinistes.

The other, that thought it small thanks to do only what they were bidden;
Gods Law was too strait for their holiness: It was nothing, unless they did
more then content God, earne him (for these were Popish Jews) and supererogate
of him. These were therefore called ( Chasidim) Holy: above the Law: they plied
God with unbidden oblations, gave more then needed, did more then was
commanded: Yet so, as both parts pleased themselves, resisted not the other:
The more frank sort vpbraided not the other, with too much niggardliness;
neither did the straiter-handed envy the other for too much lavishness. Would
God we could do thus; They agreed tho they differed: But now, when these
voluntary services began to be drawn into Canons, (as Scaliger speaks) and
that which was before but arbitrary, was imposed as necessary, (necessary for
belief, necessary for action) questions arose, and the rent began in the Jews:
Those dogmaticall Doctors which stond for supererogation, and traditions above
Law, were called ( Peruschim) Phariseis; separate from the other in strict
judgment, in superfluous holiness: These as they were the brood of those
(Chasidim) whom we find first mentioned in the Machabees by the corrupt name
of Asideans; so from them again, 1. Mac. 2.47
in a second succession proceeded (as their more refined issue) the Essens,
both Collegiate and Eremiticall: These Phariseis then, were a fraternity or
College of extraordinary devotion; whose rule was Tradition, whose practice
voluntary austerenesse: To them the Scribes joined themselves, as the purer
Jews, Act. 26.5. Eruditius caeteris legem (...) Pher. Ios^^. ^ de bello Iud.
c. 4.
for Paul calls them [(...)] the most exquisite sect; yea, and (as Josephus) the
best expositors; willingly expounding the Law according to their Traditions:
and countenancing their Traditions by the forced senses of the Law. Both which
professions were greatly enlarged and graced, by two famous Doctors Sammai and
Hillel (whom some, though falsely, would have the founders of them) not long
before Christ's time; for old Hillel of 120. years, protracted his days by
likely computation, to ten years after Christ's birth. How Hierome fetches
their names with more wittiness, An old saying, (...). Descipuli Sammai
occidebant descipulos Hillel.
than probability, from Dissipating and Profaning the Law; and what bickerings
and deadly quarrels were even amongst themselves in those two famous houses;
and what were the four expositions of the Law which they followed, Epiphan.
(...) 4. Jn nomen Mosi^, Aciba, Anna, Filiorum Assamonai.

I list not now to discourse. Their imploiment was expounding the Law and
urging Traditions; therefore their auditors had wont to say, when they called
one another to Church (as S. Hier Algasiae de 11. quaestionib.
Hierome tells us) [(...)] The wise, that is, the Phariseis, expound to day.
Whence perhaps, that may be interpreted of S. 1. Cor. 1.20 (...).
Paul to the Corinths, Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? So did the
Scribes too; Scriba lectionarij quasi Scripturarij vel Textuarij; Pharisaei
(...) Drus.
but the difference was, that the Scribes were more Textuall; the Phariseis
more Traditionall: therefore observe, that the Scribe finds fault with the
suspicion of blasphemy; Matthew. 9.
the Pharise with unwashed hands: the Scribes (their Doctors) excelled for
learning, the Phariseis for piety. Their attire was the same, Eodem habitis cum
Scribis muliebri passio, latis crepidis, and calceamentorum ligulis
procedentes. Epiphan.
and their fashions, but the Phariseis had [(...)] more sway; and were more
strict and Cappucine-like; professed more years continency; and in a word,
took more pains to go to hell. These did so carry away the hearts of the
Jews, that there was no holy man, which was not termed a Pharise; and
therefore among the seven kinds of Phariseis in their Talmud, they make Abraham
a Pharisei of Love; Meahauah.
Job a Pharise of Fear. And if from the men you cast your eyes upon their
righteousness, you cannot but wonder at the curiosity of their zeal. Wherein
look (I beseech you) first at their devotion, then their holy carriage, lastly
their strict observation of the Law.

Such was their devotion that they prayed [(...)] as a Father says: Often and
long, Epiph.
thrice a day was ordinary: at nine, twelve, and three a clock: Chasidim.
yea their progenitors (whom they would scorn not to match) divided the day
into three parts: whereof one was bestowed on Prayer, the next on the Law, the
third on their work: See here: God had 2. parts of 3. the^selus but one:
besides at their meals what strictnes? Prac. Mosaica cum ex pos. Rabbinorum a
Munster. ed
Their very disciples were taught (to shame us Christians) if they had
forgotten to give thanks, to return from the field to the board to say grace.
For divine service; the Decalogue must be read once a day of every man; Ibid.
the Scribes say the first watch, the Phariseis, any hour of the night:
Others, twice; without moving eye, hand, foot; in a clean place, free from any
excrement, and four cubits distant from any sepulcher. For-fasting, they did
it twice a week; not Popishlie (which Wickleffe justly calls Foole-fasting)
but in earnest; (...). Epipha^.
on Monday and Thursday. Besides (to omit their alms, which were every way
proportionable to the rest) what miserable penance did they wilfully? they
beat their heads against the walls, as they went, till blood came: whence one of
their seven Phariseis is called ( Kizai) a Pharise drawblood: Hier. in Mat. 23.
Acutissimas in eis spinas ligabant, vt amb^lantes and sedentes pungerentur and
admonerentur officij. Josephus. (...). etc.
they put thorns in their skirts, to sting themselves; they lay on planks, on
stones, on thorns: and Banus that Heremiticall Pharise drencht himself often,
night and day in cold water [(...)] for chastity; or (if you read it without an
aspiration) it signifies for folly rather: what could that apish and
stigmaticall Friar have done either more or worse ^. This was their devotion.
The holiness of their carriage was such, that they avoided every thing that
might carry any doubt of pollution; they would not therefore converse with any
different religion; and this law went current amongst them: He that eats a
Samaritans bread, Qui comedit panem samariticu^ a^st ^omederet sui^^am.
P^aecept. Mos. cum expos. Rab.
be as he that eats swines-flesh: An Hebrew midwife might not help a Gentile;
not books, not wax, not incense might be sold to them. Yea no familiarity
might be suffered with their own vulgar. For whereas there were three ranks
among the Jews; the wise, (those were the Phariseis) their Disciples, and the
( populus terrae) as they called them, (...): in the new Testament, the common
people.

Vnum ex sex opprobrijs vitandis a discipulis sa^ientum, Comessatio cum populo
terrae. Ar. Mont. in Euang. Epiphan.


this was one of the six reproaches to a nouice of the Phariseis, To eat with
the vulgar sort: and lest (when they had been abroad) they should have been
touched by any, contrary to the warning of their phylacteries, they scour
themselves at their return; (...). Mar. 7.3.
and eat not unless they have washed [(...)] that is, accurately, as the
Syriac; often, as Erasmus; or with the grip't fist, as Beza following Hierome.
Prae. Mos. cum expos. Rab.
And not with every water (mark the niceness) but with that only which they
had drawn up with their own labor: and to make up the measure of their
pretended sanctimonie, they vowed continency, Epiphan. l. 1.
not perpetual (as our Romanists urge) but for eight or ten years. Thus they
did unbidden; how strictly did they perform what was enioined? no men so exact
in their tithes. (...) Epiph. Montan. in locum.
I pay tithes of all, says the boasting Pharise: Of all (as a great Doctor
notes) it was more than he needed: God would have a Sabbath kept; they
ouer-keep it. Prae. Mos. cum expos.
They would not on that day stop a running vessel, not lay an apple to the
fire, not quench a burning, not knock on a Table to still a child; what should
I note more? Vox Egypti^ca. Versus quidam ex lege Mosis in pergameno scripti.
scz. 14. priores. 13 Exodus 4.5.6.7.8.9. 6. Deuteronomy. Pag^.
not rub or scratch in public. God commands them to wear (Totaphoth)
phylacteries: they do (which our Savior reprooues) [(...)] enlarge them: and
these must be written with right lines in a whole parchment of the hide of a
clean beast* God commands to celebrate and roast the Passover, they will have
it done (in an excess of care) not with an iron but a wooden spit, Quod
ferru^ vim assandi habet. Prat. Mos. cum Expos.
and curiously choose the wood of Pomegranate: God commanded to avoid
Idolatry; they taught their Disciples, Ibid.
if an image were in the way, to fetch about some other; if they must needs go
that way to run: and if a thorn should light in their foot (near the place)
not to kneel, but sit down to pull it out, lest they should seem to give it
reverence. I weary you with these Jewish niceties. Consider then how devout,
how liberal, how continent, how true-dealing, how zealous, how scrupulous, how
austere these men were, and see if it be not a wonder, that our Savior thus
brandeth them; Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Phariseis, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: That is,
If your doctrine be not more righteous, you shall not be entered of the Church:
if your holiness be not more perfect, you shall not enter into heaven: behold,
Gods kingdom below and above is shut upon them.

The poor Jews were so besotted with the admiration of these two, that they
would have thought if but two men must go to heaven, the one should be a
Scribe, the other a Pharise. What strange news was this from hm that kept the
keys of David, that neither of them should come there? It was not the person
of these men, not their learning, not wit, not eloquence, not honor they
admired so much, but their righteousness: and lo nothing but their
righteousness is censured* Herein they seemed to exceed all men: herein all that would be saved must exceed them. Do but think how the amazed multitude
stared upon our Savior, when they heard this Paradox. Exceed the Phariseis in
righteousness? It were much for an Angel from Heaven. What shall the poor sons
of the earth do if these woorthies be turned away with a repulse? yea perhaps,
your selves all that hear me this day, receive this not without astonishment
and fear, whiles your consciences secretly comparing your holiness with theirs,
find it to come as much short of theirs, as theirs of perfection. And would to
God you could fear more, and be more amazed with this comparison; for (to set
you forward) must we exceed them or else not be saved? if we let them exceed
us, what hope, what possibility is there of our Salvation? Ere we therefore
show how far we must go before them, look back with me (I beseech you) a
little, and see how far we are behind them.

Mat. 23.3.
They taught diligently, and kept Moses his chair warm: How many are there of
us, whom the great master of the Vineyard may find loytering in this public
marketplace, and shake us by the shoulder with a Quid statis otiosi? Why
stand you here idle?

They compast sea and land (Satan's walk) to make a proselyte: we sit still
and freeze in our zeal, and lose proselytes with our dull and vvilfull
neglect. They spent one quarter of the day in prayer: How many are there of us
that would not think this an unreasonable service of God: we are so far from
this extreme devotion of the old Euchitae, Correcti a Concilio Toletan. Bellar
that we are rather worthy of a censure with those Spanish Priests for our
negligence: how many of you citizens can get leave of Mammon to bestow one
hour of the day in a set course upon God? How many of you Lawyers, are first
clients to God, ere you admit others, clients to you: how many of you have your
thoughts fixed in Heaven, ere they be in Westminster? Alas, what dullness is
this? what injustice; all thy hours are his, and thou will not lend him one of
his own for thine own good. They read, they recited the Law, (some) twice a
day; never went without some parts of it about them; Quilibet nostrum de lege
interr^gatus facilius quam nomen suum respondet. Ios. contr. App. l. 2.
But to what effect? There is not one of our people (says Josephus) but
answers to any question of the Law as readily as his own name; how shall their
diligence vpbraid yea condemn us (...) Alas how do our Bibles gather dust for
want of use, while our Chronicle, or our Statute-booke, yea perhaps our idle
and s^^rrilous play-bookes are worn with turning. Oh how happy were our
forefathers, (whose memory is blessed for ever) if they could with much cost
and more danger get but one of Paul's Epistles in their bosoms; how did they
hug it in their arms, hide it in their chest, yea in their heart! How did
they eat, walk, sleep, with that sweet companion, and in spite of all
persecution never thought themselves well, but when they conuersed with it in
secret! Lo now these shops are all open we buie them not; these books are open
we read them not, and we will be ignorant because we will. The Sun shines
and we shut our windows. It is enough for the miserable Popish laity to be
thus dark, that live in the perpetual night of Inquisition; shall this be the
only difference betwixt them and us; that they would read these holy leaves,
and may not, we may and will not? There is no ignorance to the wilful. I stand
not upon a formal and verbal knowledge, that was never more frequent, more
flourishing. But if the maine grounds of Christianity were thoroughly settled in
the hearts of the multitude, we should not have so much cause of shame and
sorrow, nor our adversaries of triumph and insultation: show less therefore for
Gods sake, and learn more; and ballace your wavering hearts with the sound
truth of godliness, that you may fly steddilie through all the tempests of
errors: Make Gods Law of your learned counsel with David, and be happy. Else
if you will needs love darkness, you shall have enough of it: you have here
inward darkness, there outward ((...). Mat. 8.12.
) This is your own darkness, Choshec Aphelah: Tenebra cal^ginis.
that his of whom the Psalmist; He sent darkness and it was dark: Dark
indeed: A thick and terrible darkness, joined with weeping and gnashing. I
urge not their awful reverence in their devotion, our sleepie or wild
carelessness; their austere and rough discipline of the body, our wanton
pampering of the flesh; tho who can abide to think of a chaste Pharise and a
filithy Christian: a temperate Pharise, and a drunken Christian? How shamefully
is this latter vice (especially) grown upon us with time? we knew it once in
our ordinary speech appropriated to beggars, now gallants fight for it. This
beastliness had wont be bashful, now it is impudent; once children were wont
to shout at a drunkard (as some soul wonder) now not to be drunk is quarrel
enough among men, among friends: Those knees that we were wont to bow to the
God of Heaven, are now bent to Bacchus in a Paganish, bestiall, devilish
devotion. To leave the title of Christians, for shame let us be either men or
beasts. My speech hastens to their holy and wise strictness of carriage;
wherein I can never complain enough of our inequality: They hated the
presence, the fire, the fashion, the books of a Gentile, In aquam se cum
vestibus ^^mergunt ^hi contigerint auquem ^xa^ia gen^e: (...) etc. Epiph.
of a Samaritane; neither was there any hatred lost on the Samaritans part; for
if he had but touched a Jew, he would have thrown himself into the water
clothes and all: both of them equally sick of a Noli me tangere: Touch me not,
for I am holier. Esaias 65.

Our Romish Samaritanes haunt our tables, our closets, our ears; we frown
not, we dislike not: We match, converse, confer, consult with them
carelessly, as if it were come to the old stay of that indifferent Appelles in
Eusebius; Sat est credere in crucifixum: but that which I most lament, and ye,
Fathers and Brethren, if my voice may reach to any whom it concerns, in the
bowels of Christ let me boldly (tho most unworthy) move your wisdoms, your
care to redress it. Our young students (the hope of posterity) newly crept out
of the shell of Philosophy, spend their first hours in the great Doctors of
Popish controversies; Bellarmine is next to Aristotle: yea our very ungrounded
Artizans, young Gentlemen, frail Women, buie, read, trauerse promiscuously the
dangerous Writings of our subtilest Jesuits. What is the issue? Many of them
have taken poison, ere they know what milk is* and when they have once tasted
this bane, they must drink and die. Oh what pity, what vexation is it to a true
heart, to see us thus ^ob'd of our hopes; them of their souls! I have heard,
yea I have seen and envied the cautelous severity of our Adversaries, which
upon tho deepest pains forbid the sale, yea the sight of those Authors, which
they term infectious; where was ever Calvin publicly bought in one of their
Churchyards? Where ever read without license, without security? I censure
not this as the peculiar fault of this place; would God this open remissness
were not a common evil, and had not spread it self vvide through all those
Churches that are gone out of Babylon. Let no man tell me of the distinction of
that old Canonist: Barthol. ^fixiensis.
Somethings (says he) we read, lest they should be neglected, as the Bible;
some lest they should be unknown, as Arts and Philosophy; some that they may
be rejected, as Heretical books. True* But let them read that can (...),
that can confute; we distrust not our cause, but their weak judgments. A
good Apothecarie (...) make a good medicine of a strong poison; must children
therefore be allowed that box? I know how unworthy I am to advise; only I
throvv down my self at your feet and beseech you; that our losses and their
examples may make us no less wise in our generation.

Mat. 23.23.
I follovv the comparison; They paid tithes of all they had, not a potherbe, but
they tithed it. Hear this ye sacrilegious patrons, the merchants of souls,
the pirates of the Church, the enemies of religion; they tithed all, you
nothing; they paid to their Levites, your Levites must pay to you: Your cures
must be purchased, your tithes abated or compounded for: O the shame of
religion! How too justly may I usurp of you that of Seneca: Petty
sacriledges are punished, while great ones ride in triumph? Never excuse it
with pretense of Ceremony; Moses never gave so strict a charge for this as
Paul; Gal. 6.6.
[(...)] Communicate all thy goods with thy teacher; All, with an emphasis.
Welfare yet the honest Phariseis, whose rule was: ( Decima vt Dives fias) Tithe
and be rich: If ever thou be the fatter for this gravel, or the richer with
that thou stealest from God, let me come to beg at thy door.

Woe to you spiritual robbers. Our blind forefathers clothed the Church, you
despoile it: their ignorant devotion shall rise in judgment against your
ravening covetousness. If robbery, simony, perjury will not carry you to
hell: hope still that you may be saved. They gave plentiful alms to the poor
we in stead of filling their bellies, grind their faces. What excellent Laws
had we lately enacted that there should be no beggar in Israel? Let our
streets, ways, hedges witness the execution. Thy liberality relieues some
poor. It is well. But has not thy oppression made more? Thy usury,
extorting, racking, enclosing, has wounded whole Villages, and now thou
befriendest two or three with the plasters of thy bounty. The mercies of the
wicked are cruel. They were precise in their Sabbath, we so loose in ours, as
if God had no day: See whether our Tauernes, streets, hy-waies descry any
great difference. These things I vowed in my self to reprove; if too bitterly,
(as you think) pardon (I beseech you) this holy impatience: and blame the
foulness of these vices, not my just vehemency. And you (Christian hearers)
than which no name can be dearer be persuaded to ransack your secure hearts;
and if there be any of you whose awaked conscience strikes him for these sins,
and places him below these Jews in this unrighteousness, if you wish or care
to be saved, think it hie time, as you would ever hope for entrance into Gods
kingdom, to strike your selves on the thigh, and with amazement and
indignation to say, What have I done? to abandon your wicked courses; to
resolve, to vow, to strive unto a Christian and conscionable reformation. Paul
a Pharise was according to the righteousness of the Law unreprovable yet if
Paul had not gone from Gamaliels feet, Phil. 3.6.
to Christ's, he had never been saved: unreprovable and yet rejected* Alas, my
brethren, what shall become of our gluttony, drunkenness, pride, oppression,
bribing, cosenages, adulteries, blasphemies, and our selves for them? God and
men reprove us for these: what shall become of us? If the ciuillie righteous
shall not be saved, where shall the notorious sinner appear? A Christian
below a Jew? For shame, where are we? where is our emulation? Heaven is our
gole, we all run* lo the Scribes and Phariseis are before thee; what safety
ca^ it be to come short of those that come short of heaven? Except your
righteousness, etc.

You have seen these Scribes and Phariseis; their righteousness and our
unrighteousness. See now with like patience, their unrighteousness that was,
and our righteousness that must be, wherein they failed, and we must exceed.
They failed then in their Traditions and Practice. May I say they failed, when
they exceeded? Their Traditions exceeded in number and prosecution, faulty in
matter.

To run well, but out of the way (according to the Greek proverb) is not
better than to stand still. Fire is an excellent thing, but if it be in the top
of the chimney, it does mischief rather. It is good to be zealous in spite of
all scoffs, Gal. 4.18.
but ((...)) In a good thing. If they had been as hot for God, as they were
for themselves, it had been happy: but now in vain they worship me (says
our Savior) teaching for doctrines the Traditions of men. Hence was that
axiom received currantly amongst their Jewish followers: Pl^^ est in verbis
sapie^tum quam in verbis legis. Galatin.
There is more in the words of the wise, than in the words of the law: More;
that is, more matter, more authority: and from this principally arises and
continues that mortal quarrel betwixt them and their ( Karraim) and ( Minim)
unto this day. Serarius.
A great Jesuit (at lest that thinks himself so) writes thus in great
earnest: Non mali comparari Pharisaeos Catholicis.
The Phariseis (says he) may not unfitly be compared to our Catholics. Some
me^ speak truth ignorantly, some unwillingly; Caiphas never spoke truer, when
he meant it not: one egg is not liker to another, than the Tridentine fathers
to these Phariseis in this point, besides that of free will, merit, full
performance of the Law, which they absolutely received from them: For mark;
With the same reverence and devotion do we receive and respect Traditions,
Pari pietatis affectu and reuerentia Traditiones vna cum libris veteris and
noui Testamenti sustipimus and veneramur: Decr. 1. Sess. 4.
that we do the books of the Old and New Testament, say those fathers in their
fourth session: Hear both of these speak and see neither, if thou can
discern whether is the Pharise, refuse me in a greater truth. Not that we did
ever say with that Arrian in Hilary: Nolo verba qu^ scripta non sunt legi
We debar all words that are not written* or would think fit with those
phanatical Anabaptists of Munster, that all books should be burnt besides the
Bible: some Traditions must have place in every Church; but their place: they
may not take wall of Scripture: Substance may not in our valuation give way to
circumstance. God forbid. If any man expect that my speech on this opportunity
should descend to the discourse of our contradicted ceremonies, let him know
that I had rather mourn for this breach than meddle with it. God knows how
willingly I would spend my self into persuasions if those would avail any
thing: but I well see that tears are fitter for this theme than words. The
name of our Mother is sacred and her peace precious. As it was a true speech
cited from that father by Bellarmine: Bellum Haeresicorum pax est Ecclesiae ex
Hilario Bellar
The war of Heretics is the peace of the Church: so would God our experience
did not inuert it upon us* The war of the Church is the peace of Heretics.
Our discord is their music; our ruin their glory: Oh what a fight is this,
Brethren strive while the enemy stands still, and laughs and triumphs. If we
desired the grief of our common mother, the languishing of the Gospel, the
extirpation of religion, the loss of posterity, the advantage of our
adversaries, which way could these be better effected than by our dissensions.
Esconedo.
That Spanish Prophet in our age (for so I find him styled) when King Philip
asked him how he might become master of the Low Countries, answered; If he
could divide them from themselves. According to that old Machiauellian
principle of our Jesuits, Divide and Rule. Concordia res parua crescunt, etc.
And indeed it is concord only (as the Posie or Mot of the united States
runs) which has vpheld them in a rich and flourishing estate against so
great and potent enemies. Our Adversaries already brag of their victories;
and what good heart can but bleed to see what they have gained since we
dissented, to foresee what they will gain? Nostra miseria tu es magnus. de
Pomp. mi^^^
They are our mutual spoils that have made them proud and rich. If you ever
therefore look to see the good days of the Gospel, the vnhorsing and confusion
of that strumpet of Rome, for Gods sake, for the Churches sake, for our own
souls sake, let us all compose our selves to peace and love: Oh pray for the
peace of Jerusalem; that peace may be within her walls, and prosperity within
her palaces.

For the matter of their Traditions our Savior has taxed them in many
particulars; about washings, oaths, offerings, retribution: whereof he has
said enough when he has termed their doctrine, the Leaven of the Phariseis,
that is, sour and swelling. Jn Mar. 23.
S. Hierome reduces them to two heads: They were Turpia, anilia; some so
shameful that they might not be spoken; others idle and dotish; both so
numerous that they cannot be reckned. Take a taste for all; and to omit their
real traditions, hear some of their interpretatiue. The Law was, that no
Leper might come into the Temple; their Tradition was, that if he were let
down through the roof, this were no irregularity. Prae. Mos. cum expos. Rab.
The Law was, a man might not carry a burden on the Sabbath; their Traditional
gloss; if he carried ought on one shoulder it was a burden; Ibid.
if on both, none. If shoes alone, no burden; if with nails, not tolerable.
Ibid.
Their stint of a Sabbaths journey was a thousand cubits; their gloss was,
That this is to be understood without the walls, but if a man should walk all
day through a city as big as Nineuie, he offends not. The Church of Rome shall
vie strange glossems and ceremonious observations with them, whether for number
or for ridiculousnesse. The day would fail me if I should either epitomize
the volume of their holy rites, or gather up those which it has omitted.
Sacraru^ C^remoniarum lib. 1. accipit de gremi^ Camerarij pecuniam, vbi nihil
tame^ est argenti; spargensque in populo d^cit: Aurum and argentu^ non est
mihi, quod antem habeo hoc tibido. Can^n. P^nitential. page 1. Number. 12 Ezec. 4.

The new elected Pope in his solemn Lateran procession must take copper money
out of his Chamberlaines lap, and scatter it among the people, and say; Gold
and silver have I none. Seven years penance is inioined to a deadly sin;
because Miriam was separated seven days for her Leprosy; and God says to
Ezekiel, I have given thee a day for a year. Christ said to Peter, Lanch
forth into the deep: Luc. 5. Otho Fristugensis in praf^^.
therefore he meant that Peter's successor should catch the great fish of
Constantines donation. But I favor your ears. That one I may not omit, how S.
Hierome, whom they fondly term their Cardinal, compares some Popish fashions
of his time with the Pharisaicall; who when he had spoken of their purple
fringes in the four corners of their ( Tallin) and the thorns which these
Rabbis tie in their skirts, for penance, and admonition of their duty: In Mat.
23.
Hoc apud nos (says he) superstitiosae mulierculae in paruulis Euangelijs, in
crucis ligno and istiusmodi rebus factitant: that is, Thus superstitious old
wives do amongst us with little Gospels of John, with the wood of the Cross,
and the like. Thus that father directly taxes this Romish use, who if he were
now alive, and should hear their Church groaning under the number of Ceremonies
more then the Jewish, would (besides holy Austens complaint) redouble that
censure of our Savior, Mat. 23.4.
Woe to you Scribes, Phariseis, hypocrites, for ye bind heavy burdens, and
grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders. I forbear to speak of
the erroneous opinions of these Jewish masters concerning that Pythagorean Vide
Drufinus de tribus sectis Jud.
transanimatio^ or passage of the soul from one body to another (a point which
the Jews had learned from them: Mat. 16.14.) concerning the not-rising up of
the wicked Astronomicall destiny, freewill, merit of works, perfection of
obedience; in every of which it were easy to lose my self and my speech. I
haste to their maine unrighteousness; which was not so much the planting of
these stocks, which God never set, as the graffing of all holiness and Gods
service upon them; Alia doctrina Pharisa^rum qua est nisi legis secundum carnem
obseruatio? Hier. in Gal. 1.
a fashionable observation of the outward letter, with neglect of the true
substance of the Law; a vainglorious ostentation of piety and perfection; and
more care to be thought tha^ to be good; a greater desire to be great, tha^
good; cruelty and oppression colored with devotion. My speech now toward the
closure shall draw it self up within these two lists; of their Hypocrisy,
their VVorldlines: Hypocrisy in Fashionablenesse and Ostentation; Worldliness
in Covetousness, Ambition. Only stir up your selves a while and suffer not
your Christian attention to fail in this last act.

Some of their Rabbis say well, that God requires two things concerning his
Law, Custody and Work. Custody in the heart; work in the execution; These
unsound and ouerly Phariseis did neither. It was enough if they kept the Law in
their hands; so they had a formal show of godliness it was enough: 2. Tim.
3.5. (...).
if the outside of the platter were clean they cared for no more. God had
charged them to bind the Law to their hand, and before their eyes, Deuteronomy. 6.
wherein, as Jerome and Theophylact well interpret it, he meant the meditation
and practice of his Law: they, like unto the foolish patient, which when the
physician bids him take that prescript, eats up the paper; if they could get
but a list of parchment upon their left arm next their heart, and another
scroll to tie upon their forehead, and four corners of fringe, Si haec
prohibea^tur, fil^^ (...) p^nent in man^. Praec. Mos. cum expos.
or (if these be denied) ^^^ved thread in their hand, thought they might* say
with Saul, Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have done the commandment of the
Lord. That Opus operatum of the Papists (for I still parallele them) is not
more false Latin than false Divinity* it is not the outside of thy obedience
that God cares for, it never so holy, never so glorious; it is enough that men
are cosened with these flourishes: the heart and the reins are those that God
looks after what cares a good market-man how good the fleece be, when the
liver is rotten. God does not regard fashion so much as stuff. Thou deceiuest
thy self if thou think those shows that blear'd the eyes of the world, can
deceive him. God shall smite thee thou whited wall, God shall smite thee. Do
thou think he sees not how smoothly thou have daubed on thine whorish
complexion? He sees thee a far off, and hates thee while thy parasites
applaud thy beauty. I speak not of this carrion-flesh which thou wantonlie
infectest with the false colors of thy pride, which God shall once wash off
with rivers of brimstone. I speak of thy painted soul, and thy counterfeit
obedience. Give me leave, (yea let me take it) to complain that we are
fallen into a cold and hollow age wherein the religion of many is but fashion,
and their piety gilded superstition; Men care only to seem Christians; If
they can get Gods livery on their backs, and his name in their mouths, they
outface all reproves. How many are there which if they can keep their
Church, give an alms, bow their knee, say their prayers, pay their tithes, and
once a year receive the Sacrament (it matters not how corrupt hearts, how
filthy tongues, how false hands they bear) can say in their hearts with Esau,
I have enough my Brother? As if God cared for this thy vain formalitie; as if
he hated thee not so much more than a Pagan, by how much thou would seem
more good. Be not deceived; If long devotions, sad looks, hard penances,
bountiful alms would have carried it (without the solid substance of
godliness) these Scribes and Phariseis had never been shut out of Heaven.
Consider this therefore (dear Brethren) none but your own eyes can look into
your hearts: we see your faces, the world sees your lives, your selves see your
souls: if your lives be not holy, your hearts sound, tho your faces were like
Angels, you shall have your portion with Devils. Tell not me thou hear,
praiest, talkest, beleeuest: how live thou? what do thou? Show me thy
faith by thy works, says James. It was an excellent answer that good Moses
gave to Lucius in the Church-story: Socrates eccl. hist.
The faith that is seen is better than the faith that is heard; and that of
Luther not inferior, that faith does pinguescere operibus? grow fat and well
liking with good works: it is a lean starued carkase of faith thou pretendest
without these. If profession be all, the Scribes and Phariseis are before thee;
ransacke thy heart, and find sound affection to God, firm resolutions to
goodness, true hatred of sin; ransacke thy life, and find the truth of
works, the life of obedience; Then alone thy righteousness exceeds the
righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, and thou shall enter into Heaven.
Their ostentation follows; wherein it is strange to consider, how those that
cared not to be good should desire yet to seem good: so did these Phariseis:
They would not fast without a smeared face; not give an alms without a trumpet;
not pray without witnesses, Scribes, Phariseis, hypocrites, they did act a
religious part, but play devotion. They were nothing beside the stage: all for
sight, nothing for substance. Would God this vice of hypocrisy had either died
with them, or had only hereditarily descended to their successors: Satan will
not let us be thus happy. I see no man's heart, but I dare boldly say the world
is full of hypocrisy. By their fruits you shall know them (says our Savior:)
By their fruits; not by the blossoms of good purposes, nor the leaves of good
profession, but by the fruits of their actions. Not to speak, how our mint and
^ummin has incroched upon judgment and justice. Search your selves (ye
Citizens:) Now, you draw near to God with your lips, with your ears, where is
your heart? Here your devour attention seems to cry, The Lord is God: how
many are there of you, that have any God at home? how many that have a false
God? God at Church: Mammon in your shops? I speak not of all; God forbid. This
famous City has in the darkest, in the wantonest times, affoorded (and so
does) many, that have done God honor, honesty to the Gospel: but how many are
there of you that under smooth faces have foul consciences? fair words, false
measures, forsworn valuations, adulterate wares, griping vsuries have filled
many of your coffers, and festered your souls: you know this, and yet like
Salomons curtizan you wipe your mouths, and it was not you: Your alms are
written in Church-windowes, your defraudings in the sand; all is good save that
which appears not; how many are there every where, that shame religion by
professing it? whose beastly life makes Gods truth suspected; for as, howsoever
the Samaritan, not the Jew, relieved the distressed traveler, yet the Jews
religion was true, not the Samaritans; so in others, truth of causes must not
be judged by acts of persons; yet, as he said, It must needs be good that
Nero persecutes; so who is not ready to say; It cannot be good that such a
mis-creant professes? Woe to thee Hypocrite; thou can not touch, not name
goodness, but thou defilest it; God will plague thee for acting so hie a part:
See what thou art, and hate thy self; or (if not that) yet see how God hates
thee; he that made the heart, says thou art no better than an handsome tomb;
the house of death. Behold here a green turfe or smooth marble, or engraven
brass, and a commending Epitaph; all sightly: but what is within? an
unsavory, rotten carcass. Tho thou were wrapped in gold and perfumed with never
so loud prayers, holy semblances, honest protestations; yet thou art but
noisome carrion to God: Of all earthly things God cannot abide thee; and if
thou would see how much lower yet his detestation reaches, know that when
he would describe the torments of hell, he calls them (as their worst title)
but the portion of Hypocrites. Wherefore cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purge your hearts ye double-minded: Iam. 4.8. (...).
For unless your righteousness exceed the hypocritical righteousness of the
Scribes and Phariseis, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

My speech must end in their Covetousness and Ambition: A pair of heinous
vices I join them together: for they are not only brethren, but twins; yet so
as the elder here also serves the younger. It is ambition that blows the fire
of Covetousness. Oppression gets wealth; that wealth may procure honor. Why
do men labor to be rich, but that they may be great? Their Covetousness was
such, that their throat (an open sepulcher) swallowed up whole houses of
Widows. Whence their goods are called by our Savior ((...)) not (...): Luc.
11.41.
as if they were already in their bowels: and which was worst of all, while
their lips seemed to pray, they were but chewing of that morsel. Their
Ambition such, that they womanishly brawled and shouldred for the best seat;
the highest piew: A title, a wall, a chair, (...). Mat. 23.6.
a cap, a knee, these were goodly cares for them that professed gravity,
humility, mortification. Let me boldly say, Jerusalem never yielded so very
Phariseis as Rome. These old disciples of Sammai and Hillel were not Phariseis
in comparison of our Jesuits. From judgment (you see) I am descended to
practice, wherein it no less easily made good that these are more kindly
Phariseis, than the ancient. A poor Widows Cottage filled the panch of an old
Pharise; How many fair Patrimonies of devout young Gentlemen A word which the
Seminaries report (in their Quodlibet) usual amongst the^, to signify
Beguiled and wiped of their inheritance; from the example of M. Henry Drury of
Law shall in Suffolk so defeated by the Jesuits.

As at Winno^-berg in Fla^ders near Dunkerk, where a rich legacy given by a
charitable Lady for the building of an Hospital, was cunningly turned to the
maintenance of Jesuits.


Druryed by them (pardon the word, it is their own; the thing I know and can
witness) have gone down the throat of these Loyolists, let their own
Quodlibet and Catechism report. What speak I of secular inheritances? these
eyes have seen no mean houses of devotion and charity swallowed up by them.
As for their ambitious insinuations, not only all their own religious enuiously
cry down, but the whole world sees and rings of. What oar of State can stir
without their rowing? What kingdom either stands or falls without their
intermedling? What noble family complains not of their proling and stealth? And
all this with a face of sad piety and stern mortification. Yea what other is
their great Master but the king of Phariseis? who under a pretense of simple
piety, challenges without shame to have devoured the whole Christian world, the
natural inheritances of secular Princes, by the foisted name of Peter's
Patrimony, and now in most infamous and shameless ambition calls great
Emperors to his stirrup, Sacr. cerem l. 1. de Conse Benedict. and Coron
Pontif. Postea imperator s^ praesaeus est stapha^ equi Papalis tenet, and dein
ducit equum per fraenum aliquantuiu^. And afterward: Dum Imperator haec officia
prastat, debet Papa modeste recusare, tandem cum aliquibus bonis verbis
recipiendo permittit, aliquantul^^^ progredi, etc. That is, while the Emperor
does these services to the Pope of holding his stirrup, and leading his horse
by the bridle the Pope ought modestly to refuse, but at last with some good
words, he suffers him to go on a while; and then at last stays himself,
etc. (...). Act. 8.9. (...).
yea to his footstool. But what wander we so far from home? Vae nobis
miseris (says S. Hierome) ad quos Pharisaeorum vitia tranfierunt; (VVo to us
wretched men to whom the Phariseis vices are derived.) The great Doctor of the
Gentiles long ago said, All seek their own, and not the things of God; and is
the world mended with age? would God we did not find it a sure rule; that (as
it is in this little world) the older it grows, the more diseased, the more
covetous: we are all too much the true sons of our great Grandmother; and have
each of us an Eues sweet tooth in our heads, we would be more than we are; and
every man would be either ((...)) or ((...):) either the man, or somebody. If
a number of your consciences were rip't, o ye that would be Christian
Gentlemen, Lawyers, Citizens, what do we think would be found in your maws?
Here the devoured patrimony of poor Orphans; there the Commons of whole
Townships: here the impropriate goods of the Church; there piles of usury:
here bribes, and unlawful fees; there the raw and indigested gobbets of
simonie: yea would God I might not say, but I must say it with fear, with
sorrow, even of our sacred and divine profession, that which our Savior of his
twelve, Ye are clean, but not all. The multitude of our unregarded charges,
and souls dying and starued, for want of spiritual provision, (while they give
us bodily) would condemn my silence for too partial. In all conditions of men
(for particulars are subject to envy and exception) the daughters of the
horse-leech had never such a fruitful generation: They cry still, Give, Give:
Not give alone, that is, the bread of sufficiency, but give, give; that is,
more than enough. But what is more than enough? What is but enough? What is not
too little for the insatiable gulf of humane desires? Every man would ingrosse
the whole world to himself, and with that ambitious conqueror fears it will
be too little: Give me not poverty nor riches. Prou. 30.8.
and how few Agurs are there, that pray against too much? From hence it is,
that ye Courtiers grate upon poor trades with hard Monopolies. Hence ye
Merchants lode them with deep and unreasonable prices, and make the^ pay dear
for days. Hence ye great men wring the poor sponges of the Commonaltie into
your private purses; for the maintenance of pride and excess. Hence ye
cormorant corne-mongers hatch up a dearth in the time of plenty. God sends
grain, but many times the Devil sends garners. The earth has been no
niggard in yielding: but you have been lavish in transporting, and close in
concealing. Never talk of our extreme frosts: we see Gods hand, and kiss the
rod; but if your hearts, your charity were not more frozen than ever the earth
was, mean housekeepers should not need to beg, nor the meanest to starve for
want of bread. Hence lastly, our loud oppressions of all sorts cry to heaven,
and are answered with threats, yea with variety of vengeances. Take this with
thee yet, o thou worldling, which have the greedy-worm under thy tongue with
Esaies dogs, and never have enough. Thou shall meet with two things as
insatiable as thy self; the Grave and Hell; and thou, whom all the world could
not satisfy, there be two things whereof thou shall have enough: Enough mold in
the grave, enough fire in hell.

I love not to end with a judgment; and as it were to let my Sun set in a
cloud. We are all Christians, we should know the World, what it is, how vain,
how transitory, how worthless. We know where there are better things, which
we profess our selves made for, and aspiring to: Let us use the world like it
self, and leave this importunate wooing of it to Heathens and Infidels, that
knew no other heaven, no other God; Or if you like that counsel better; Be
Covetous: Be Ambitious. Covet spiritual gifts. 1. Cor. 14.1. Never think you
have grace enough; desire more, seek for more: this alone is worth your
affections, worth your cares: Be still poor in this, that you may be rich; be
rich that you may be full; be full that you may be glorious. Be Ambitious, of
favor, of honor, of a kingdom; of Gods favor, of the honor of Saints, of
the Kingdom of glory. Whither, he that has bought it for us, and redeemed us
to it, in his good time, safely and happily bring us. To that blessed Savior
of ours, together with the Father, and his good Spirit: the God of all the
world, our Father, Redeemer, and Comforter, be given all praise, honor and
glory now and for ever. Amen.

THE PASSION-SERMON, PREACHED AT PAVLES-CROSSE, on Good Friday. Apr. 14. 1609.

By I. H.

AT LONDON Printed by H. I. for Eleanor Edgar, and Samuel Macham: and are to
be sold at the shops in Paules-Churchyard. ANNO 1609.

Errata.
Page 17. li: 8. Christian Read Christians Page 42. li: 1. life Read light Page
47. li: 5. in agony Read in agone. Latin. Page 50. li: 6. suffer, so long
Read suffer: so long P: 74. l: 9. forbeareth to be short Read forbeareth: To be
sho^^ Page 92 li: 18 my men. Read by men.
TO THE ONLY HONOR AND GLORY OF GOD MY DEAR AND BLESSED SAVIOVR (WHICH HAS
DONE AND SVFFERED ALL THESE THINGS FOR MY SOVLE) HIS WEAK AND UNWORTHY SERVANT
HVMBLIE DESIRES TO CONSECRATE HIMSELF AND HIS POOR LABOVRS: BESEECHING HIM TO
ACCEPT AND BLESS THEM TO THE PVBLIQVE good; and to the praise of his own
glorious NAME.

To the READER.
I Desire not to make any Apology for the edition of this my Sermon: It is
motive enough, that herein I affect a more public, and more enduring good,
Spiritual niceness is the next degree to vnfaithfullness: This point cannot be
too much urged, either by the tongue, or press. Religion and our souls depend
upon it; yet are our thoughts too much beside it. The Church of Rome so fixes
her-selfe (in her adoration) upon the cross of Christ, as if she forgot his
glory: Many of us so conceive of (...) glorious, that we neglect the
meditation of his Cross, the way to his glory, and ours. If we would proceed
aright, we must pass from his Golgotha, to the mount of Olives, and from
thence to heaven; and there seek and settle our rest. According to my weak
ability, I have led this way in my speech; beseeching my Readers to follow me
with their hearts, that we may ouer-take him which is entered into the true
sanctuary, even the highest heavens, to appear now in the sight of God for us.

JOHN. 19. verse 30. When Jesus therefore had received the Vinegar, he said; It
is finished: and bowing the head, he gave up the ghost.


THE bitter and yet victorious passion of the son of GOD (right honorable
and beloved Christians) as it was the strangest thing that ever befell the
Earth: So, is both of most sovereign use, and looks for the most frequent and
careful meditation. It is one of those things which was once done, that it
might be thought of for ever. Every day therefore must be the Good Friday of a
Christian: who, with that great Doctor of the Gentiles, must desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

There is no branch or circumstance in this wonderful business, which yieldes
not infinite matter of discourse. Acc^^ding to the solemnity of this (...) and
place, I have chosen to commend unto your Christian attention, our Saviors
Farevvell to Nature (for his reviving was above it) in his last word, in his
last act. His last word, It is finished; his last act, He gave up the ghost:
That which he said, he did. If there be any Theme that may challenge and
command our ears and hearts, this is it: for, behold; the sweetest word that
ever Christ spoke, and the most ^^^^^ious act that ever he (...) met together
in this his last breath. In the one, ye shall see him triumphing; yielding in
the other, yet so as he ouerco^^^ Imagine therefore, that (...) Christ Jesus,
in this day of his passion (who is every day here crucified before your eyes)
advanced upon the chariot of his Cross; and now, after a weary conflict,
cheerfully ouer-looking the despite and shame of men, the wrath of his
Father, the law, sin, death, hell; which all lie gasping at his foot: and then
you shall conceive with what spirit he faith Consummatumest; It is finished.
What is finished? Shortly; All the prophecies that were of (...) legal
observations, that pre^^^gured him; His own sufferings; Our salvation. The
prophecies are accomplished; The ceremonies abolisht; His sufferings ended; Our
sal^^tion wrought. These four heads shall limit this first part of my speech:
only let them find and leave you attentive.

Even this very word is prophesied of: All things that are written of me, have
an end, says Christ. What end? this, It is finished: This very end has his
end here. What therefore is finished? Not this prediction only of his last
draught; as Augustine: that were too particular. Let our Savior himself say;
All things that are written of me by the Prophets. It is a sure and conuertible
rule; Nothing was done by Christ which was not foretold; nothing was ever
foretold by the Prophets of Christ, which was not done. It would take up a
life, to compare the Prophets and Evangelists; the predictions and the history;
and largely to discourse, how the one fore-tells, and the other answers: let it
suffice to look at them, running. Of all the Evangelists, S. Matthew has bin
most studious, in making these references and correspondences: with whom, the
burden or vndersong of every event, is still (vt impleretur.) That it might be
fulfilled. Thus has he noted (if I have reckoned the^ aright) two and thirty
several prophecies concerning Christ; fulfilled in his birth, life, death:

Esaias 7.14. Mat. 1.23. Zach. 9.9. Mat. Ibid. Mic. 5.2. Mat. 2.6. Iere. 7.11.
Mat. 21.13. Esaias 11.1. Mat. 2.25. Psalm. 8.2. Mat. 21.16. Ier. 31.15. Mat.
2.18. Esaias 5.8. Mat. 21.33. Judge. 13.5. Mat. 2. vlt. Psa. 118.22. Mat. 21.44.
Esa. 40.3. Mat. 3.2. Psalm. 110.1. Mat. 22.44. Esaias 9.1. Mat. 4.15 Esaias 8.14.
Mat. 21.44. Leu. 14.4. Mat. 8.4. Psalm. 41.9. Mat. 26.31. Esaias 53.4. Mat. 8.17
Esa. 53.10 Mat. 26.54. Esaias 61.1. Mat. 11.4 Zach. 13.7. Mat. 26.31. Esaias 42.1.
Mat. 12.17. Lam. 4.20. Mat. 26.56. Iona 1.17. Mat. 12.40. Esaias. 50.6 Mat.
26.67. Esaias 6.9. Mat. 13.14 Zac. 11.13. Mat. 27.9. Psalm. 78.2. Mat. 13.35 Psalm.
22.18. Mat. 27.35. Es. 35.5.6. Mat. 15.30. Psalm. 22.2. Mat. 27.46. Es. 62.11.
Mat. 21.5. Psalm. 69.22. Mat. 27.48.

To which, S. John adds many more. Our speech must be directed to his Passion:
omitting the rest, let us insist in those. He must be apprehended: it was
fore-prophecied; The Anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets, says
Jeremy: But how? He must be sold; for what? thirty silver pieces: and what
must those do? Buy a field: all foretold; And they took thirty silver pieces,
the price of him that was valued, and gave them for the Potters field, says
Zachary (miswritten Jeremy; by one letter mistaken in the abbreuiation). By
whom? that child of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Which
was he? It is foretold; He that eats bread with me, says the Psalmist. And
what shall his disciples do? Run away; so says the prophecy: J will smite the
Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, says Zachary. What shall be
done to him? He must be scourged and spit upon: behold, not those filthy
excreme^ts could have light upon his sacred face without a prophecy; J hid not
my face from shame and spitting, says Esaias. What shall be the issue? In short;
he shall be led to death: it is the prophecy; The Messiah shall be slain,
says Daniel. What death? He must be lift up; Like as Moses lift up the Serpent
in the wilderness: so shall the son of man be lift up. Chrysostom says
well, that some actions are parables; so may I say, some actions are
prophecies: such are all types of Christ: and this with the foremost. Lift up?
Whither? To the Cross: it is the prophecy; Hanging upon a tree, (...).
says Moses. How lift up? Nailed to it: so is the prophecy; Foderunt manus,
they have pierced my hands and my feet, says the Psalmist. with what company?
two thieues; With the wicked was he nu^bred, says Esaias: Where? without the
gates, says the prophecy. What becomes of his garments? they cannot so much
as cast the dice for his coat, but it is prophesied; They divided my garments,
and on my vestures cast lots, says the Psalmist. He must die then on the
Cross: but how? voluntarily. Not a bone of him shall be broken. What hinders
it? lo, there he hangs, as it were neglected, and at mercy; yet all the raging
Jews, no, all the devils in hell, cannot stir one bone in his blessed body:
It was prophesied in the Easter-Lambe, and it must be fulfilled in him that is
the true Passover, in spite of fiends and men. How then? he must be thrust
in the side: behold, not the very spear could touch his precious side being
dead, but it must be guided by a prophecy; They shall see him whom they have
thrust-thorough, says Zachary. What shall he say the while? Not his very words
but are forespoken: his complaint, Eli Eli lamma sabactani, as the Chalde; or
(...) as the Hebrew, Psalm 22, 2. His resignation; In manus tuas, Juto thy
hands J commend my spirit; Psalm 31, 5. His request; Father, forgive them: He
prayed for the transgressors, says Esaias. And now, when he saw all these
prophecies were fulfilled; knowing that one remained, he said, J thirst.
Domine, quid satis? faith one; O LORD, what thirstest thou for? A strange
hearing; that a man, yea, that GOD and MAN, dying, should complain of thirst.

Could he endure the scorching flames of the wrath of his Father, the curse of
our sins, those tortures of body, those horrors of soul; and does he
shrink at his thirst? No, no: he could have borne his drought; he could not
bear the Scripture not fulfilled. It was not necessity of Nature, but the
necessity of his Fathers decree, that drew forth this word, I thirst. They
offered it before: he refused it. Whether it were an ordinary potion for the
condemned, to hasten death (as in the story of M. Antony) which is the most
received construction: or whether it were that Jewish potion, whereof the
Rabbines speak; whose tradition was, that the malefactor to be executed,
should after some good counsel from two of their Teachers, be taught to say;
Sit mors mea in remissionem omnium iniquitatum mearum.
Let my death be to the remission of all my sins; and then, that he should
have given him a boule of mixed wine, Vt vs^^ rationis tollatur.
with a grain of Frankincense, to bereave him both of reason and pain.

I durst be confident in this later; the rather, for that Saint Mark calls
this draught (...): Myrrhe-wine; mingled (as is like) with other ingredients.
And Montanus agrees with me in the end, ad stuporem and mentis alienationem* A
fashion which Galatine observes out of the Sanhedrim, to be grounded upon
Proverbs 31, 6. Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish. I leave it
modestly in the midst; let the learneder judge. What-soeuer it were, he would
not die till he had complained of thirst, and in his thirst tasted it: Neither
would he have thirsted for, or tasted any but this bitter draught; that the
Scripture might be fulfilled; They gave me Vinegar to drink: And lo, now,
Consummatum est; All is finished.

If there be any Jew amongst you, that like one of John's unseasonable
Disciples, shall ask, Art thou he, or shall we look for another? he has his
answer; Ye men of Israel, why stand you gazing and gaping for another
Messiah? In this alone, all the prophecies are finished; and of him alone, all
was prophesied that was finished. Paul's old rule holds still, To the Jews a
stumbling block; and that more ancient curse of David, Let their table be made
a snare; And Steuens two brands stick still in the flesh of these vvretched
men: One in their neck; (...).
stiffenecked: the other in their heart; uncircumcised: the one, (...).
Obstinacy; the other, Unbelief: stiffenecks indeed, that will not stoop
and relent with the yoke of sixteen hundred years judgment and seruilitie:
uncircumcised hearts, the filme of whose unbelief, would not be cut off with so
infinite co^uictions. Oh mad and miserable Nation! Let them show us one
prophecy that is not fulfilled; let the^ show us one other, in whom all the
prophecies can be fulfilled, and we will mix pity with our hate: If they
cannot, and yet resist; their doom is past; Those mine enemies, that would not
have me to reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. So
let thine enemies perish, O Lord.

But what go I so far? even amongst us (to our shame) this riotous age has
bred a monstrous generation; Aug. ad Hier Du^ volunt and Iudaei esse and
Christiani, nec Iudaei sunt, ne^ Christiani.
(I pray God I be not now in some of your bosoms that hear me this day)
compounded, much like to the Turkish religion; of one part, Christian; another,
Jew; a third, worldling; a fourth, Atheist: a Christian face, a Jews heart, a
worldlings life, and therefore Atheous in the whole; that acknowledge a God,
and know him not; that profess a Christ, but doubt of him; yea, believe him
not: The fool has said in his heart there is no Christ. What shall I say of
the semen? they are worse then devils* that yielding evil spirit, could say,
Jesus I know; and these miscreants are still in the old tune of that tempting
devil; Si tu es filius Dei, if thou be the Christ. Oh God, that after so clear
a Gospel, so many miraculous confirmations, so many thousand martyrdo^s, so
many glorious victories of truth, so many open confessions of Angels, men,
devils, friends; enemies; such conspirations of heaven and earth, such
universal contestations of all ages and people; there should be left any
spark of this damnable infidelity in the false hearts of men! Behold then, ye
despisers, and wonder, and vanish away: whom have all the Prophets foretold?
or what have the prophecies of so many hundreds, yea, thousands of years
foresaid, that is not with this word finished? Who could foretell these
things, but the spirit of God? Who could accomplish them, but the son of God?
He spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, says Zachary: he has spoken,
and he has done; one true GOD in both. No other spirit could fore-say these
things should be done; none other power could do these things, thus
fore-shewed: this word therefore, can fit none but the mouth of God our Savior,
It is finished. We know whom we have believed; Thou art the Christ, the son
of the living GOD. Let him that loves not the Lord Jesus, be accursed to the
death.

Thus the prophecies are finished: Of the legal Observations, with more
breuity* Christ is the end of the law: What law? Ceremonial; Moral. Of the
moral; it was kept perfectly by himself, satisfied fully for us: of the
ceremonial; it was referred to him, observed of him, fulfilled in him,
abolisht by him. There were nothing more easy then to show you how all those
Jewish ceremonies looked at Christ: how Circumcision, Passover, the Tabernacle,
both outer and inner, the Temple, the Lauer, (...).
both the Altars, the Tables of Shew-breade, the candlesticks, the Veil, the
Holy of holies, the Arc, the Propitiatory, the pot of Manna, Aarons rod, the
high Priest, his order and line, his habites, his inaugurations, his washings,
annointings, sprinklings, offerings, the sacrifices (...), and what ever Jewish
rite; had their virtue from Christ, relation to him, and their end in him. This
was then their last gasp; for, now straight they died with Christ: now the
veil of the Temple rent: Ex quo apparet, tunc scissu^ esse cum Christus emisit
spiritum.
As Austen well notes, out of Mathew's order; It tore then, when Christ's last
breath passed. That conceit of Theophylact is witty; that as the Jews were
wont to rend their garments when they heard blasphemy: so the Temple, not
enduring these execrable blasphemies against the Son of God, tore his veil
in pieces. But that is not all: the veil rent, is the obligation of the
rituall law cancelled; the way into the heavenly Sanctuary opened; the shadow
giving room to the substance: in a word, it does that which Christ says;
Consummatu^ est. Even now then the law of ceremonies died: Ceremoniae sicut
defuncta corpora a necessarioru^ officijs deducenda erant ad sepultura^, non
simulate, sed religiose, nec deserenda continuo. Augustine.
It had a long and solemn burial, as Augustine says well; perhaps figured in
Moses, who died not lingringly, but was thirty days mourned for. What means
the Church of Rome, to dig them up, now rotten in their graves? and that, not
as if they had been buried, but sown, with a plentiful increase: yea, with
the inuerted usury of too many of you Citizens; ten for one. It is a grave and
deep censure of that resolute Hierome; Ego e contrario loquar, etc. J say, Ego
e co^trario loquar, and reclama^te mu^do libera voce pro nu^cie^, ceremonias
Iudaeoru^ perniciosas esse, et mortiferas, and quicunque eas obseruauerit sieve
ex Iudaeis, sieve ex Ge^tibus, in barathru^ diaboli deuolutu^. Hier.
says he, and in spite of all the world dare maintain, that now the Jewish
ceremonies are pernicious, and deadly: and whosoever shall observe them, whether
he be Jew or Gentile, in barathru^ diaboli deuolutum; shall fry in hell for it.
Still Altars? still Priests? sacrifices still? still washings? still unctions?
sprinkling, shauing, purifying? still all, and more then all? Let them hear
but Augustines censure; Quisquis nunc ea celebrare voluerit, tanqua^ sopitos
cineres eruens, no^ erit pius etc.
Quisquis nunc, etc. Whosoever shall now use the^, as it were raking them up
out of their dust; he shall not be pius deductor corporis, sed impius
sepulturae violator: an impious and sacrilegious wretch, that ransacks the
quiet tombs of the dead.

I say not that all ceremonies are dead; but the Law of ceremonies, and of
Jewish. It is a sound distinction of them, that profound Peter Martyr has in
his Epistle, to that worthy Martyr, Father, Bishop, Hooper: Some are
typical, fore-signifying Christ to come: some, of order and decency. Those
are abrogated, not these. The Jews had a fashion of prophesying in the
Churches; so the Christians from them, as Ambrose: the Jews had an eminent
pulpit of wood; so we: they gave names at their circumcision; so we at
Baptism: they sung psalms melodiously in Churches; so do we: they paid and
received tithes; so do we: they wrapped their dead in linen, with odors; so we:
the Jews had sureties at their admissio^ into the church; so we. These
instances might be infinite, the Spouse of Christ cannot be without her laces,
and chains, and borders. Christ came not to dissolve order. But thou Lord,
how long? how long shall thy poor Church find her ornaments, her sorrows? and
see the dear sons of her womb, bleeding about these apples of strife? let
me so name them, not for their value (even small things, when they are
commanded, look for no small respect) but for their event: the enemy is at the
gates of our Syracuse; how long will we suffer our selves, taken up with angles
and circles in the dust* Yemen, brethren, fathers, help; for Gods sake put to
your hands, to the quenching of this common flame: The one side by humility,
and obedience; the other, by compassion; both by prayers and tears. Who am I,
that I should revive to you the sweet spirit of that divine Augustine? who,
when he heard and saw the bitter contentions betwixt two grave and famous
Divines, Jerome, and Ruffine; Heu mihi, says he, qui vos alicubi simul
inuenire non possum! Alas, that J shall never find you two together! how J
would fall at your feet, how J would embrace them, and weep upon them, and
beseech you; either of you for other, and each for himself; both of you for the
church of GOD; but especially, for the weak, for who^ Christ died: who, not
without their own great danger, see you two fighting in this Theater of the
world. Yet let me do, what he said he would do; beg for peace, as for life:
by your filial piety to the Church of GOD, whose ruins follow upon our
divisions; by your love of Gods truth; by the graces of that one blessed
Spirit, whereby we are all informed and quickened* by the precious blood of
that son of GOD, which this day, and this hour, was shed for our redemption,
be inclined to peace and love: and tho our brains be different, yet let our
hearts be one. It was, as I heard, the dying speech of our late reverend,
worthy, and gracious Diocesan, Modo me morie^te viuat ac floreat Ecclesia; Oh!
yet if, when J am dead, the Church may live and flourish.

What a spirit was here? what a speech? how worthy never to die? how worthy of
a soul so near to his heaven? how worthy of so happy a succession? Ye whom
God has made inheritors of this blessed care, which do no less long for the
prosperity of Sion, live you to effect, what he did but live to wish* all
peace with our selves, and war with none but Rome and Hell. And if there be
any weyward Separatist, whose soul professes to hate peace; I fear to tell
him Paul's message, yet I must: Would to God those were out off that trouble
you. How cut off? As good Theodosius said to Demophilus, a contentious Prelate;
Situ pacem fugis, etc. Si tu pace^ fugis, ego te ab Ecclesia fuger^mando.
of thou fly peace, I will make thee fly the Church. Alas! they do fly it:
that which should be their punishment, they make their co^tentment: how are
they worthy of pity? As Optatus, of his Donatists, they are brethren, might be
companions, and will not. Oh wilful men! vvhither do they run? from one
Christ to another? Is Christ divided? We have him; thanks be to our good God:
and we hear him daily; and whither shall we go from thee? thou have the
words of eternal life.

Thus the Ceremonies are finished: Now hear the end of his sufferings, with
like patience and devotion. His death is here included; it was so near, that
he spoke of it as done; and when it was done, all was done. How easy is it to
lose our selves in this discourse* how hard, not to be ouer-whelmed with
matter of wonder; and to find either beginning, or end! His sufferings found an
end; our thoughts cannot. Lo; with this word, he is happily waded out of those
deepes of sorrows, whereof our conceits can find no bottom: yet let us, with
Peter, gird our coa^e, and cast our selves a little into this sea.

All his life was but a perpetual Passion: In that he becam man, he suffered
more then we can do, either while we are men, or when we cease to be men:
(...).
he humbled, yea, he emptied himself. We, when we cease to be here, are
clothed upon. 2. Cor. 5* We both win by our being, and gain by our less;
he lost, by taking our more or less to himself, that is, manhood. For, tho
ever as God, I and my Father are one; yet as man, My Father is greater then J.
That man should be turned into a beast, into a worm, into dust, into nothing;
is not so great a disparageme^t, as that GOD should become man* and yet it is
not finished; it is but begun. But what man? If, as the absolute Monarch of the
world, he had commanded the vassalage of all Emperors and Princes, and had
trod on nothing but Crowns and Scepters, and the necks of Kings, and bidden
all the Potentates of the earth to attend his train; this had carried some port
with it, suitable to the heroical majesty of Gods Son. No such matter: here
is neither form nor beauty; unless perhaps ((...)) the form of a servant:
you have made me to serve, with your sins. Behold* he is a man to God; a
servant to man; and, be it spoken with holy reverence, a drudge to his
servants. He is despised and rejected of men; yea (as himself, of himself) a
worm, and no man, the shame of men, and contempt of the people. Who is the
King of glory? Psalm. 24, 10
the Lord of hosts he is the King of glory. Set these two together; the King
of glory; the shame of men: the more honor, the more abasement. Look back to
his cradle; there you find him rejected of the Bethlemites; borne and laid alas
how homely, how unworthily: sought for by Herod, exiled to Egypt, obscurely
brought up in the cottage of a poor fosterfather, transported and tempted by
Satan, derided of his kindred, blasphemously traduced by the Jews, pinched
with hunger, restless, harbourlesse, sorrowful, persecuted, by the Elders and
Pharisees, sold by his own servant, apprehended, arraigned, scourged,
condemned; and yet it is not finished. Let us, with that Disciple, follow him a
far off; and passing over all his contemptuous usage in the way, see him
brought to his Cross. Still the further we look, the more wonder; every
thing ads to this ignominy of suffering, and triumph of ouercomming. Where was
it? not in a corner, (...). Acts. 26.27.
as Paul says to Festus: but in Jerusalem; the eye, the heart of the world.
Obscurity abateth shame; public notice heightens it: Before all Israel, and
before this sun, says GOD to David, when he would thoroughly shame him: In
Jerusalem, which he had honored with his presence, taught with his
preachings, astonished with his miracles, bewailed with his tears; O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would J, and thou would not! O yet if in this thy day!
Cruelty and unkindness, after good desert, afflict so much more, as our merit
has been greater. VVhere-abouts? without the gates: in Caluary; among the
stinking bones of execrable malefactors. Before, the glory of the place bred
shame; now, the vileness of it. When? but in the Passover; a time of greatest
frequence, and concourse of all Jews and proselites: An holy time: when they
should receive the figure, they reject the substance: when they should kill and
eat the sacramental Lamb, in faith, in thankfulness, they kill the Lamb of
GOD, our true Passover, in cruelty and contempt. With whom? and In medio
latronu^ tanqua^ latronu^ imma^issimus. Luther.
The quality of our company, either increases or lessens shame. In the midst
of thieues (says one) as the Prince of thieues. There was no guile in his
mouth, much less in his hands: Yet behold, he that thought it no robbery to
be equal with Go^, is made equal to robbers and murderers; yea, superior in
evil. What suffered he? As all lives are not alike pleasant: so al deaths
are not equally fearful: there is not more difference betwixt some life and
death, then betwixt one death and another. See the Apostles gradation: He was
made obedient to the death, eue^ the death of the Cross. The Cross, a
lingering, tormenting, ignominious death. The Jews had four kinds of death
for malefactors; the towell, the sword, fire, stones; each of these above other
in extreamitie. Strangling with the towell, they accounted easiest: the sword
worse then the towel: the fire worse then the sword: stoning worse then the
fire: but this Roman death was worst of all. Cursed is every one that hangs
on tree. Yet (as Jerome well) he is not therefore accursed, because he
hangs; but therefore he hangs, because he is accursed. He was made ((...)) a
curse for us. The curse was more then the shame: yet the shame is unspeakable;
and yet not more then the pain. Yet all that die the same death, are not
equally miserable: the very Thieues fared better in their death, then he. I
hear of no irrision, no inscription, no taunts, no insultation on the^: they
had nothing but pain to encounter; he, pain and scorn. An ingenuous and
noble nature, can worse brook this the^ the other; any thing rather then
disdainfulness, and derision: especially, from a base enemy. I remember, that
learned Father begins Isreal's affliction, with Ismaels persecuting laughter.
The Jews, the soldiers, yea, the very thieues flouted him, and triumphed over
his misery: his blood cannot satisfy the^, without his reproach. Which of his
senses now was not a window to let in sorrow? His eyes saw the tears of his
Mother and friends, the unthankful demeanure of mankind, the cruel despite of
his enemies: his ears heard the reuilings and blasphemies of the multitude:
and (whether the place were noisome to his sent) his touch felt the nails; his
taste, the gall. Look up, O all ye beholders, look upon this precious body,
and see what part ye can find free? Caput angelicis spiritibus tremebu^du^
spinis coronatur. etc. Bernard.
That head which is adored, and trembled at by the Angelical spirits, is all
raked, and harrowed with thorns: that face, of whom is said, Thou art fa^rer
then the children of men, is all besmeared with the filthy spettle of the
Jews, and furrowed with his tears: those eyes, clearer then the sun, are
darkened with the shadow of death: those ears, that hear the heavenly consorts
of Angels, now are filled with the cursed speakings and scoffs of wretched
men: those lips that spoke as never man spoke, that command the spirits both
of life and darkness, are scornfully wet with vinegar and gall: those feet
that trample on all the powers of hell ( his enemies are made his footstool)
are now nailed to the footstool of the Cross: those hands that freely sway
the scepter of the Heavens, now carry the reed of reproach, and are nailed to
the tree of reproach: that whole body, which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
was all scourged, wounded, mangled: This is the outside of his sufferings. Was
his heart free? Oh no: the inner part, or soul of this pain, which was unseen,
is as far beyond these outward and sensible, as the soul is beyond the body;
Gods wrath beyond the malice of me^: these were but love ^ticks to what his
soul endured! O all ye that pass by the way, behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like to my sorrow: Alas! Lord, what can we see of thy sorrows? we
cannot conceive so much as the ^ainousnesse and desert of one of those sins
which thou barest: we can no more see thy pain, then we could undergo it,
only this we see, that what the infinite sins of almost infinite men,
committed against an infinite Majesty, deserved in infinite continuance; all
this thou in the short time of thy Passion have sustained. We may behold and
see; but all the glorious spirits in heaven cannot look into the depth of this
suffering. Do but look yet a little into the passions of this his Passion:
for, by the manner of his sufferings, we shall best see what he suffered. Wise
and resolute men, do not complain of a little: holy Martyrs have bin racked,
and would not be loosed; what shall we say if the Author of their strength, God
and man, be wray passions? what would have overwhelmed men, would not have made
him shrink; and what made him complain, could never have been sustained by
men. What shall we then think, if he were affrighted with terrors, perplexed
with sorrows, and distracted with both these? And lo, he was all these: for,
first, here was an amazed fear; for millions of men to despair, was not so
much as for him to fear: and yet it was no slight fear; he began (...) to be
astonished with terrour^ Which in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers,
and supplications, with strong cries and tears, to him that was able to help
him; and was heard in that he feared. Never man was so afraid of the torments
of hell, as Christ (standing in our room) of his Fathers wrath. Fear is
still suitable to apprehension: Never man could so perfectly apprehende this
cause of fear. He felt the chastisements of our peace: yea, the curse of our
sins; and therefore might well say with David; J suffer thy terrors with a
troubled mind: yea, with Job, The arrows of God are in me; and the terrors of
God fight against me. With fear; there was a deiecting sorrow (...)* My soul
is on all sides heavy to the death. His strong cries, (...).
his many tears, are witnesses of this Passion. He had formerly shed tears of
pity, and tears of love; but now of anguish: he had before sent forth cries
of mercy; never of complaint till now. When the son of God weeps and cries,
what shall we say or think? yet further, betwixt both these and his love, what
a conflict was there? It is not amiss distinguished, that he was always in
agony; but now in (...), in a struggling passion of mixed grief. Behold: this
field was not without sweat and blood; yea, a sweat of blood* O what man or
Angel, can conceive the taking of that heart, that without all outward
violence, merely, out of the extremity of his own Passion, bled (thorough
the flesh and skin) not some faint deaw, but solid drops of blood? No thorns,
no nails fetched blood from him, with so much pain as his own thoughts. He saw
the fierce wrath of his Father, and therefore feared* he saw the heavy burden
of our sins to be undertaken; and thereupon, besides fear, justly grieved:
he saw the necessity of our eternal damnation, if he suffered not; if he did
suffer, of our redemption: and therefore his love incountred both grief and
fear. In it self, he would not drink of that cup: in respect of our good,
and his decree, he would and did; and while he thus strives, he sweats and
bleedes. There was never such a combatte, never such a bloodshed; and yet it is
not finished. I dare not say with some Schoolmen* that the sorrow of his
Passion, was not so great as the sorrow of his compassion: yet that was surely
exceeding great. To see the ungracious carelessness of mankind, the slender
fruit of his sufferings, the sorrows of his mother, disciples, friends; to
foresee from this watch-towre of his Cross, the future temptations of his
children, desolations of his Church; all these must needs strike deep into a
tender heart. These he still sees and pitties, but without passion; then, he
suffered, in seeing them.

Can we yet say any more? Lo, all these sufferings are aggrauated by his
fulness of knowledge, and want of comfort: for, he did not shut his eyes, as one
says, when he drunk this cup he saw how dreggish, and knew how bitter it was.
Sudden evils afflict, if not less, shorter. He foresaw and foresaid every
particular he should suffer, so long as he foresaw he suffered: the
expectation of evil, is not less then the sense* to look long for good, is a
punishment; but for evil, is a torment. No passion works upon an unknown
object: as no love, so no fear is of what we know not* Hence men fear not hell,
because they foresee it not: if we could see that pit open before we come at
it, it would make us tremble at our sins, and our knees to knock together, as
Baltasars; and perhaps, without faith, to run mad at the horror of judgment.
He saw the burden of all particular sins to be laid upon him: every dram of his
fathers wrath, was measured out to him, ere he touch^ this potion: this cup was
full; and he knew that it must be wringd, not a drop left: it must be finished.
O yet, if as he foresaw all his sorrows, so he could have seen some mixture
of refreshing! But J found none to comfort me; no, none to pity me. And yet,
it is a poor comfort that arises from pity. Even so, O Lord, thou treadest
this wine press alone; none to accompany, none to assist thee. I remember,
Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical story reports, that one Theodorus, a Martyr,
told him, that when he was hanging ten hours upon the rack, for religion,
under Iulians persecution, his joints distended and distorted, his body
exquisitelie tortured with change of executioners; so as never age, says he,
Vt nulla vnquam aetas similem memi^erit.
could remember the like: he felt no pain at all, but continued indeed all the
while in the sight of all men, singing and smiling. For, there stood a comlie
young man by him on his Iibbet (an Angel rather, in form of a man) which with
a clean towel, still wiped off his sweat, and poured cool water upon his
racked limbs: wherewith he was so refreshed, that it grieved him to be let
down. Even the greatest torments are easy, when they ^^ue aunswerable
co^forts: but a wounded and comfortless spirit, who can bear? If yet but the
same messenger of GOD, might have attended his Cross, that appeared in his
agony; and might have given ease to their Lord, as he did to his servant! And
yet, what can the Angels help, where God will smite? Against the violence of
men, against the fury of Satan, they have prevailed in the Cause of GOD, for
men: they dare not, they cannot comfort where God will afflict. When our
Savior had been wrestling with Satan, in the end of his Lent, then they
appeared to him, and served* but now, while about the same time, he is
wrestling with the wrath of his Father for us, not an Angel dare be seen, to
look out of the windows of heaven to relieve him: for men; much less could
they if they would; but what did they? Miserable comforters are ye all; the
soldiers; they stripped him, scorned him with his purple, crown, reed; spat on
him, smote him: the passengers; they reviled him; and insulting, wagg'd their
heads and hands at him; Hey, thou that destroiest the temple, come down, etc.
The Elders and Scribes alas! they have bought his blood, suborned witnesses,
incensed Pilate, preferred Barabbas, undertook the guilt of his death, cried
out, Crucify, crucify; Ho! thou that sauedst others. His disciples; alas!
they forsook him: one of them forsweares him; another runs away naked, rather
then he will stay and confess him. His mother, and other friends: they look
on indeed, and sorrovv with him; but, to his discomfort. Where the grief is
extreme, and respects near, partnership does but increase sorrovv. Paul
chides this love: What do you weeping, and breaking my heart? The tears of
those we love, do either slacken our hearts, or wound them. Who then shall
comfort him? Himself? Sometimes our own thoughts find a way to succor us,
unknown to others: no, not himself. Doubtless (as Aquinas) the influence of
the higher part of the soul, was restrained from the aid of the inferior; My
soul is filled with evils. Psalm. 87, 4. Who then? his Father? Here, here
was his hope: Jf the Lord had not helped me, Psalm 94.17.
my soul had almost dwelt in silence* J and my Father are one. But now (alas!)
he, even he, delivers him into the hands of his enemies; when he has done,
turns his back upon him as a stranger; yea, he wounds him as an enemy. The
Lord would break him. Esaias, 53, 10. Yet any thing is light to the soul, whiles
the comforts of God sustain it: who can dismay, where God will relieve? But
here, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What a word was here, to
come from the mouth of the Son of GOD? My disciples are men, weak and
fearful; no marvel if they forsake me. The Jews are themselves, cruel and
obstinate. Men are men, graceless, and unthankful. Devils are, according to
their nature, spightful and malicious. All these do but their kind, and let
them do it: but thou, O Father, thou that have said; This is my wel-beloued
son, in whom J am well pleased: thou of who^ I have said, It is my Father that
glorifies me: what? forsaken me? Not only brought me to this shame, smitten
me, unregarded me; but, as it were, forgotten, yea, forsaken me? What, even
me, my Father? How many of thy constant servant have suffered heavy things!
yet in the multitudes of the sorrows of their hearts, thy presence and comforts
have refreshed their soul. Have thou relieved them, and do thou forsake
me* me, thine only, dear, natural, eternal son! O ye heavens and
earth, how could you stand, whiles the Maker of you thus complained! Ye stood;
but, partaking after a sort of his Passion: the earth trembled and shook, her
rocks tore, her graves opened, the heavens withdrew their light; as not daring
to behold this sad and fearful spectacle.

Oh dear Christians! how should these earthen and rocky hearts of ours shake,
and re^d in pieces at this meditation? how should our faces be covered with
darkness, and our joy be turned into heauiness? Al these voices, and tears,
and sweats, and pangs, are for us; yea, from us. Shall the Son of God thus
smart for our sins, yea, with our sins; and shall not we grieve for our
own? shall ^ee weep to us in this Marketplace, and shall not we mourn? Nay,
shall he sweat and bleed for us, and shall not we weep for our selves? Shall
he thus lamentably shrieke-out, under his Fathers wrath, and shall not we
tremble? Shall the heavens and earth suffer with him, and we suffer nothing? I
call you not to a weak and idle pity of our glorious Savior: to what purpose?
His injury, was our glory. No, no; Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me: but weep for your selves: For our sins, that have done this; not for
his sorrow that suffered it: not for his pangs, that were; but for our own
that should have been, and (if we repent not) shall be. Oh how grievous, how
deadly are our sins, that cost the son of God (besides blood) so much
torment? How far are our souls gone, that could not be ransomed with any
easier price? That that took so much of this infinite Redeemer of men, God and
man, how can it choose but swallow up and confound thy soul, which is but
finite and sinful? If thy soul had been in his souls stead, what had become
of it: it shall be, if his were not in stead of thine. This weight, that lies
thus heavy on the Son of God, and wrung from him these tears, sweat, blood,
and these inconceivable groans of his afflicted spirit, how shall it choose but
press down thy soul to the bottom of hell? and so it will do: if he have
not suffered it for thee, thou must and shall suffer it for thy self. Go now
thou lewd man, and make thy self merry with thy sins; laugh at the
vncleanenesses, or bloodinesse of thy youth: thou little know the price of a
sin: thy soul shall do; thy Savior did, when he cried out, to the amazement
of Angels, and horror of men; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. But
now no more of this; It is finished: the greater conflict, the more happy
victory. Well does he find and feel of his Father, what his type said before,
He will not chide always, nor keep his anger for ever. It is fearful; but
in him, short: eternal to sinners; short to his Son, in whom the Godhead
dwelt bodily. Behold: this storm, wherewith all the powers of the world were
shaken, is now over. The Elders, Pharisees, Judas, the soldiers, priests,
witnesses, Judges, thieues, executioners, devils, have al tired themselves in
vain, with their own malice; and he triumphs over them all, upon this throne
of his Cross: His enemies are vanquished, his Father satisfied, his soul with
this word, at rest and glory; It is finished. Now there is no more betraying,
agonies, arraignme^ts, scourgings, scoffing, crucifying, conflicts, terrors,
all is finished. Alas beloved, and will we not yet let the Son of God be at
rest? do we now again go about to fetch him out of his glory, to scorn
and crucify him? I fear to say it: Gods spirit dare, and does; They crucify
again to themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him. To themselves; not
in himself: that they cannot, it is no thank to them; they would do it. See
and consider: the notoriously-sinfull conuersations of those that should be
Christians, offer violence unto our glorified Savior: they stretch their hands
to heaven, and pull him down from his Throne, to his Cross: they tear him
with thorns, pearce him with nails, load him with reproaches. Thou hate
the Jews, spettest at the name of Judas, railest on Pilate, condemnest the
cruel butchers of Christ: yet, thou can blaspheme, and swear him quite over;
curse, swagger, lie, oppress, boil with lust, scoff, riot, and live like a
debauched man; yea, like an humane beast; yea, like an unclean devil. Cry
Hosanna as long as thou vvilt; thou art a Pilate, a Jew, a Judas, an
executioner of the Lord of life: and so much greater shall thy judgment be, by
how much thy light, and his glory, is more. Oh, beloved, is it not enough that
he died once for us? Were those pains so light, that we should every day
redouble the^? Is this the entertainment, that so gracious a Savior has
deserved of us by dying? Is this the recompense of that infinite love of his,
that thou should thus cruelly vex and vvound him with thy sins? Every of
our sins is a thorn, and nail, and spear to him. While thou pourest down thy
drunken carowses, thou give thy Savior a potion of gall: while thou
despisest his poor servants, thou spett'st in his face: while thou put on
thy proud dresses, and liftest up thy vain heart with high conceits, thou
set a Crown of thorns on his head: while thou wringest and oppressest his
poor children, thou whippest him, and drawest blood of his hands and feet.
Thou hypocrite, how dare thou offer to receive the Sacrament of God, with
that hand, which is thus imbrued with the blood of him who^ thou receiuest? In
every Ordinary, thy profane tongue walks, in the disgrace of the religious and
co^scionable. Thou make no scruple of thine own sins, and scornest those
that do: Not to be wicked, is crime enough. Hear him that says, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Saul strikes, at Damascus: Christ suffers in heaven.
Thou strikest: Christ Jesus smarteth, and will revenge. These are the ((...))
af^erings of Christ's sufferings: in himself it is finished; in his members it
is not, till the world be finished. We must toil, and groan, and bleed; that
we may reign: if he had not done so, It had not been finished. This is our
warfare: this is the region of our sorrow and death. Now are we set upon the
sandy pauement of our Theater, and are matched with all sorts of evils; evil
men, evil spirits, evil accide^ts; and (which are worst) our own evil
hearts: tentations, crosses, persecutions, sicknesses, wants, infamies; death;
all these must, in our courses, be incou^tred by the law of our profession.
What should we do but strive and suffer, as our General has done, that we
may reign as he does, and once triumph in our Consummatu^ est? God and his
Angels sit upon the Scaffolds of Heaven, and behold us: our Crown is ready;
our day of deliverance shall come; yea, our redemption is near* when all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes; and we that have sown in tears, shall
reap in joy. In the mean time, let us possess our souls, not in patience
only, but in comfort: let us adore and magnify our Savior in his sufferings,
and imitate him in our own* our sorrows shall have an end; our joys shall
not: our pains shall soon be finished; our glory shall be finished, but never
ended.

Thus his sufferings are finished; now together with them, Man's salvation. Who
knows not, that man had made himself a deep debtor, a bankrupt, an outlaw to
GOD? Our sins are our debts; and by sins, death. Now, in this word and act, our
sins are discharged, death endured, and therefore we cleared. The debt is
paid, the score is crossed, the Creditor satisfied, the Debtors acquitted; and,
since there was no other quarrel, saved. We are all sick, and that mortally:
Sin is the disease of the soul. Quot vitia, tot febres, faith Chrysostom; so
many sins, so many Feauers, and those pestilent. What wonder is it that we
have so much plague, while we have so much sin? Our Savior is the Physician;
The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. Wherein? He heals all our
infirmities: he heals the^ after a miraculous manner; not by giving us
receipts, but by taking our receipts for us. A wonderful Physician; a wonderful
course of cure. One while he would cure us by abstinence; our superfluity, by
his forty days emptiness: according to that old rule* Hunger cures the
diseases of Gluttony. Another while, by exercise: He went up and down from
City to City; and in the day was preaching in the Temple; in the night,
praying in the Mount. Then, by diet; Take, eat, this is my body: and, Let this
cup pass. After that yet, by sweat: such a sweat as never was a bloody one:
yet more by incision; they pierced his hands, feet, side: and yet again by
potion; a bitter potion, of vinegar and gall. And lastly, which is both the
strangest and strongest receipt of all, by dying; Which died for us; that
whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. 1. These. 5.10.
We need no more, we can go no further; there can be no more physic of this
kind: there are cordialls after these, of his Resurrection and Ascension; no
more penal receipts. By this blood we have Redemption, Ephesians. 1, 7.
Justification, Romans 3, 24. Reconciliation, Colos. 1, 20. Sanctification, 1.
Pet. 1, 2. Entrance into glory, Hebr. 10, 19. Is it not now finished^ Woe were
us, if he had left but one mite of satisfaction upon our score, to be
discharged by our souls: and woe be to them that derogate from Christ, that
they may charge themselves; that botch up these alsufficiently meritorious
sufferings of Christ, as imperfect, with the superfluities of flesh and blood.
Maledictus homo, qui spem ponit in homine* We may not with patience see Christ
wronged by his false friends: As that heroical Luther said in the like*
Maledictu^ silentium, quod hic conniuet.
Cursed be the silence that here forbeareth to be free and short. Here be two
injuries intolerable; both give Christ the lie upon his Cross: It is finished.
No; somewhat remains: the fault is discharged, not the punishment. Of
punishments, the eternal is quit, not the temporal* It is finished by Christ:
No, there wants yet much; the satisfactions of Saints applied by his Vicar:
add men's sufferings to Christ's, the^ the treasure is full; till then it is not
finished.

Two qualities strive for the first place in these two opinions; Impiety, and
Absurdity: I know not whether to prefer. For Impiety; here is GOD taxed of
injustice, unmercifulness, insufficiency, falsehood. Of injustice; that he
forgiues a sin, and yet punishes for that which he has forgiven:
unmercifulness; that he forgiues not while he forgiues, but does it by
halues: insufficiency; that his ransom must be supplied by men: falsehood; in
that he says, It is finished, when it is not. For Absurdity; how gross and
monstrous are these Positions? that at once the same sin should be remitted
and retained; that there should be a punishment, where there is no fault; that
what could strike off our eternal punishment, did not wipe off the temporal;
that he which paid our pounds, sticks at our far things; that GOD will retain
what man may discharge; that it is, and is not finished.

If there be any opinions whose mention confutes them, these are they. None
can be more vain; none had more need of soliditie: for, this proppe
beares-vp alone, the weight of all those millions of Indulgences which Rome
creates and sells to the world. That Strumpet would well-neere go naked, if
this were not. These spiritual treasures, fetch in the temporal: which yet
our reverend and learned Fulke, justly calls a most blasphemous and beggarly
principle: it brings in whole Chests, yea Mines of Gold (like the Popes
Indies); and has not so much as a ragge of proof to cover it; whether of
Antiquity, of Reason, of Scripture. Not of Antiquity; for, these Jubilee
Proclamations began but about three hundred years ago. Not of Reason: how
should one mere man pay for another, dispe^se with another, to another, by
another? Not of Scripture: which has flatly said; The blood of Jesus Christ,
his son, purges us from all sin: and yet I remember, that acute Sadeel has
taught me, that this practice is according to Scripture: What Scripture? He
cast the money changers out of the Temple, and said; Negotiatores terrae sunt
ipsi Sacerdotes, qui vendunt orationes and missas pro denarijs: ^acientes domu^
orationis, apothecam negotiationis. In Revel. l. 10. p. 5.
Ye have made my house a den of thieues. Which also Ioachim, their
prophetical Abbot, well applies to this purpose. Some modest Doctors of Louan,
would feign have minced this Antichristian blasphemy: who began to teach, that
the passions of the Saints are not so by Indulgences applied, that they become
true satisfactions; but that they only serve to move God, by the sight of
them, to apply unto us Christ's satisfaction. But these meal-mouthed Divines,
were soon charmed; four several Popes (as their Cardinal confesses) fell
upon the neck of them, Bellar. l. 1. d^ Indulgent.
and their opinion; Leo the tenth, Pius the fifth, Gregory the thirteenth, and
Clemens the sixth: and with their furious Bulls, bellow out threats against
them, and toss them in the air for heretics; and teach them, upon pain of a
curse, to speak home with Bellarmine; Passionibus sanctorum expiari delicta:
and straight, Applicari nobis sanctorum passiones ad redimendas poenas, quas
pro peccatis Deo debemus: that by the sufferings of Saints, our sins are
expiate; and that, by them applied, we are redeemed from those punishments
which we yet owe to GOD. Blasphemy, vvorthie the tearing of garments: how is it
finished by Christ, if men must supply? Oh blessed Savior! was every drop of
thy blood enough to redeem a world, and do we yet need the help of men? How
art thou a perfect Savior, if our brethren also must be our redeemers? Oh ye
blessed Saints, how would you abhor this sacrilegious glory! and with those
holy Apostles, yea, that glorious Angel, say; Vide ne seceris; and with those
wise Virgins; Least there will not be enough for us and you got to them that
sell, and buy for your selves. For us, w^ enu^e not their multitude; Let them
have as many Sauiors as Saints, and as many Saints us men^ we kno^e with
Ambrose; Christ^ press^^ ^tore non eguit; Christ's passion needs no helper: and
therefore, with that worthy Martyr, dare say; None but Christ; ^one but Christ^
Let our Toules die, if he cannot save them; let them not fear their (...) or
(...), if he have finished* He^ (...), thou languishing and afflicted so^^e to
There is (...) one of thy sinne^ but it is paid for; not one o^^ thy debt^ in
the (...) of God but it had ^ffect; not one farthing of all thine infinite
ra^some is vnpaid^ Alas! thy sins (thou sai'st) are ever before thee, and
Gods indignation goes still over thee; and thou go mourning all the day
long* and with that pattern of distress, criest out in the bitterness of thy
soul, I have sinned, what shall J do to thee^ O* thou preserver of men? What
should thou do? Turn, and believe. Now thou art stung in thy conscience
with this fiery serpent, look up with the eyes of (...) to this b^azen
serpent, Christ Jesus, and behealed. Behold, his head is humbly bowed down in
a gracious respect to thee, his a^ms are stretched out lovingly to embrace
thee* yea, o^ precious side is open to receiue^ thee, and his tongue interpre^^
all these to thee for thine endless comfort; It is finished. There is no more
accusation, judgment, death, hell for thee: all these are no more to thee,
then if they were not. Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is de^d. I know,
how ready every man is to reach forth his hand to this d^le of grace, and how
angry to ^e beaten from this doo^ of mercy. We are all easily persu^ded to hope
well, because we love our selves well* Which of all us in this gr^^t
congregation taken exceptions to himself, and think^* I know there (...) want
in my Savior, there is want in me* He has finished; but I believe not, I
repent not. Every presumptuous and hard (...), so (...) at Christ, as if he had
finish for (...), as if he had broken down the gates of hell, and loosed the
bands of death, and had made forgiveness as (...) as life; Prosper^^^ (...)
says wise Solomon, East (...) the foolish, and the prosperity, of fools
(...) them, you, (...) prosperity. Thou sa^'st, God (...) merciful, thy (...)
b^ous, (...) Passion absolute* All these, and ye^ thou may be condemned.
Merciful, not ^ni^s^; bountiful, not lavish, absolutely sufficient for all,
not effe^^^all to all. Whatsoever God is, what are (...) i He (...) i^ the
doubts (...) fa^st-well; Christ is (...) good Shepherd; Wherein* H^^ gives his
l^fe; but for whom? (...) his sheep. What is this to (...) while thou ar^
secure, profane, impe^itent* the a^ (...) a (...) My sheep he^re my voice; What
is his voice but his p^ecep^^^ where is thine obedience to his commandments*
If t^ wilt not heard his Law, n^ not ^arken ^o his Gospel (...) no more mercy
for thee, ^he^ i^ there were no Savior. He ha^^ finished; for those in (...)
has begun. If thou have to beginnings of gra^^ as yet, hope not for ever
finishing of salvation; Come to me, all ye that are he^uie lade^^, says
Christ ^hou shall get nothing, if thou come when he calls thee not. Thou art
not called, and can not be refreshed, unless thou be laden: not with sin
(this alone keeps thee away from God) but with conscience of sins* A broken
and a co^^rite hear^, O God, thou will not despise. Is thy heart wounded with
thy sin* does grief and hatred strive within thee, whether shall be more?
are the desires of thy soul with God? do thou long for holiness, complain
of thy imperfections, struggle against thy corruptions* Thou art the man, fear
not. It is finished. That law which thou would have kept, and could not;
thy Savior could, and did keep for thee: that salvation which thou could
never work-out alone (alas poor impotent creatures* what can we do toward
heaven without him, which cannot move on earth but in him?) he alone for
thee has finished. Look up therefore boldly to the throne of GOD; and, upon
the truth of thy repentance and faith, knows, that there is no quarrel against
thee in heaven* nothing but peace and joy; All is finished. He would be spetted
on, that he might wash thee; he would be covered with scornful robes, that
thy sins might be covered; he would be whipped, that thy soul might not be
scourged eternally; he would thirst, that thy soul might be satisfied; he
would bear all his Fathers wrath, that thou might beat none; he would
yield to death, that thou might never taste of it; he would be in sense for
a time as forsaken of his Father, that thou might be received for ever.

Now bid thy soul return to her rest; and inioyne it* David's task; Praise
the Lord, O my soule^, and, What shall J render to the Lord for all his
benefits? J will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord. And, as rauishe from thy self with the sweet apprehension of this mercy,
call all the other creatures to the fellowship of this joy, with that divine
Esaias; Rejoice, O ye^ heavens, for the Lord has done it; shout yea lower (...)
of the earth, (...) into praises ye^ mountains, for the Lord has (...) Jacob,
and will be glorified in Jsraell. And, even now begin that heavenly song,
which shall never e^d, with those glorified Saints; Praise, and (...), and
glory, and power, Revel. 5.
be to him that s^^eth upon the throne, (...) the Lamb for evermore.

Thus, our speech of Christ's last words, is finished. His last act accompanied
his words; our speech must follow it: let it not want your devout and careful
attention; He bowed, and gave up the Ghost.

The Cross was a slow death, and had more pain the^ speed; whence, a second
violence must dispatch the crucified; their bones must be broken, that their
hearts might break. Our Savior stays not Deaths leisure, but willingly and
courageously meets him in the way: and like a Champion that scorns to be
overcome, yea, knows he cannot be, yields in the midst of his strength, that
he might by dying va^quish death. He bowed, and gave up* Not bowing, because
he had given up, but because he would. He cried with a loud voice, says
Matthew. Nature was strong, he might have lived; but he gave up the Ghost, and
would die, to show himself. Lord of Life and Death. Oh wondrous example! he
that gave life to his enemies, gave up his own: he gives them to live, that
persecute and hate him; and himself will die the whiles, for those that hate
him. He bowed, and gave up: not they. They might crown his head; they could
not bow it: they might vex his spirit; not take it away: they could not do
that without leave; this they could not do, because they had no lea^e. He
alone would bow his head, and give up his Ghost; (...) have power to lay down
my life: Man gave him not his life, man could not bereave it: No man takes it
from me. Alas who could? The Highpriests forces, when they came against him
armed; he said but I am he^; they st^* fall backward* How easy (...) breath
dispersed his enemies! whom he might as easily have bidden the earth, yea, hell
to swallow, or fire from heaven to devour. Who commanded the devils, and they
obei'd; could not have bin attached my men. He must give not only leave, but
power to apprehend himself; else they had not lived to take him. He is laid
hold of; Peter ^ight St Pu^^^; says Christ, Think thou that J cannot pray
to my Father, and he will give me more then 12 legions of Angels? What an
Army were here? more the^ threescore and twelve thousand Angels; and every
Angel able to subdue a world of men. He could, but would not be rescued, he
is led by his own power, not by his enemies: and stands now before Pilate,
like the scorn of men, crowned, robbed, scourged, with an Ec^e Homo: Yet thou
could have no power against me, (...) i^ were given thee from above.

Behold; he himself must give Pilate power against himself; else he could
not be condemned. He will be condemned, lifted up, nailed; yet no death
without himself. He shall give his soul an offering for sinne^ Esaias* Quod
emitti^ur voluntariu^ est: quod amit^itur necessarium. Ambro.
53, 10. No action, that favors of constraint, can be meritorious: he would
deserve, therefore he would suffer and die. He bowed his head, and gave up the
Ghost, O gracious and bountiful Savior! he might have kept his soul within
his ^eeth, in spite of all the world; the weakeness of God, is stronger then
men: and if he had but spoken the word, the heavens and earth should have
vanished away before him; but, he would not. Behold; when he saw, that impotent
man could not take away his soul, he gave it up, (...) would die, that we
might live. See here a Savior, that can contemn his own life for ours, and
cares not to be dissolved in himself* that we might be united to his Father.
Ski^^e for ski^^e, says the devil, (...) all that he has, a man will give
for his life. Lo, here, to prove Satan a liar, skin, and life* and all, has
Christ Jesus given for us. We are besotted with the earth. and make base shifts
to live; one with a mai^ed body, another with a perfu^^d soul, a third with
a rotten name: and how many had (...) neglect their soul^ then their life and
(...) and (...)* then die^* It is a shame it^ tells many of us Christians (...)
op^n life, and ^^^^^ble and ^a^h* and she (...) solue so (...) in (...) excess
of love, ^o^ard^ (...) (...) as Peter denies Christ ^i^, and forsweares him
(...) grains of incense unto the Idols ^ire E^ius, (...) thrice; Spir^ (...),
a^ despa^^es; ^de^ me live ^aith the (...) Whith^^ d^st thou (...) ^hy self
(...) and ^do^ us (...) w^ld'st thou (...) with thy self (...)* Thou have not
thus learned Christ^ (...) voluntarily for thee, thou will not be forced to
die for him: he gave up the Ghost for thee; thou will not let others take it
from thee for him: thou will not let him take it for himself.

When I look back to the first Christians, and compare their zealous contempt
of death, with our backwardness; I am at once amazed and ashamed: I see there
even women (the feebler sex) running with their little ones in their arms, for
the preferment of martyrdom; and ambitiouslie striving for the next blow. I
see holy and tender virgins, choosing rather a sore and shameful death, then
honorable espousalls. I hear the blessed Martyrs, entreating their Tyrants and
tormentors for the honor of dying: Quod si venire noluerint, ego vim faciam vt
deuorer.
Ignatius, amongst the rest, fearing least the beasts will not devour him, and
vowing the first violence to them, that he might be dispatched. And, what less
courage was there, in our memorable and glorious forefathers of the last, of
this age? and do we, their cold and feeble offspring, look pale at the face
of a fair and natural death; abhor the violent, tho for Christ? Alas! how
have we gathered rust with our long peace? Our unwillingness, is from
inconsideration, from distrust. Look but up to Christ Jesus upon his Cross,
and see him bowing his head, and breathing out his soul; and these fears
shall vanish. He died, and would thou live? He gave up the ghost, and
would thou keep it? Whom would thou follow, if not thy Redeemer* If thou
die not, if not willingly, thou go contrary to him, Si per singulos dies
pro eo moreremur qui nos dilexit, non sic debitum exolueremus. Chrysostom.
and shall never meet him. Tho thou should every day die a death for him,
thou could never requite his one death: and do thou stick at one? Every
word has his force, both to him and thee. He died, which is Lord of Life, and
co^maunder of Death; thou art but a tenant of life, a subject of death. And yet
it was not a dying, but a giving up; not of a vanishing and aerie breath, but of
a spiritual soul, which after separation, has an entire life in it self. He
gave up the Ghost. He died, that has both overcome and sanctified, and
sweetened death. What fear thou? he has pulled out the sting and malignity of
death (...) thou be a Christian, carry it in thy bosom, it hurts thee not
Dare thou not trust thy Redeemer? If he had not died, death had been a
Tyrant; now he is a slave. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy
victory? Yet the Spirit of God says not he died, but gave up the Ghost. The
very heathen Poet says; He durst not say that a good man dies. It is worth the
noting (me thinks) that when S. Luke would describe to us the death of Ananias
and Sapphira, Acts. 5.5.
he says ((...)) he expired: but when S. John would describe Christ's death,
he says ((...)) he gave up the Ghost. How gave he it up and whither? How? so
as after a sort he retained it: his soul parted from his body; his Godhead was
never distracted, either from soul or body. This union is not in nature; but
in person. If the natures of Christ could be divided each would have his
subsistence; so there should be more persons. God forbid: one of the natures
therefore, may have a separation in it self; the soul from the body: one
nature cannot be separate from other, or either nature from the person. If you
cannot conceive, wonder: the Son of GOD has wedded unto himself our
humanity, without all possibility of divorce; the body hangs on the Cross,
the soul is yielded; the Godhead is euiternally united to them both;
acknowledges, sustaines them both. The soul in his agony feels not the
presence of the Godhead* the body, upon the Cross, feels not the presence of
the soul. Yet, as the Fathers of Chalcedon say truly ((...)) indiuisibly,
inseparably is the Godhead, with both of these, still and ever, one and the
same person. The Passion of Christ (as Augustine) was the sleep of his
Divinity: so, I may say; The death of Christ, was the sleep of his Humanity.
Jf he sleep, he shall do well; said that disciple, of Lazarus. Death was
too weak to dissolve the eternal bonds of this heavenly conjunction. Let not
us Christians go too much by sense; we may be firmly knit to God, and not
feel it. Thou can not hope to be so near to thy God as Christ was, united
personally: Quantu^cu^qute deieceris, humilior non eris Christ. Hieron.
thou can not fear, that God should seem more absent from thee, then he did
from his own Son; yet was he still one with both body and soul, when they
were divided from themselves. When he was absent to sense, he was present to
faith* when absent in vision, yet in union one and the same: so will he be to
thy soul when it is at worst. He is thine, and thou art his: if thy hold
seem loosened, his is not* When temptations will not let thee see him, he
sees thee, and possesses thee; only believe thou against sense, above hope:
and tho he kill thee, yet trust in him. Whither gave he it up? Himself
expresses; Father, into thy hands: and, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. It is justice to restore whence we receive; Jnto thy hands. He knew
where it should be both safe and happy: true; he might be bold (thou say) as
the Son with the Father. The servants have done so; David before him, Steven
after him. And least we should not think it our common right, Father, says
he, J will that those thou have given me, may be with me, even where I am:
he wills it; therefore it must be. It is not presumption, but faith to charge
God with thy spirit, neither can there ever be any believing soul so mean,
that he should refuse it: all the fear is in thy self; how can thou trust
thy jewel with a stranger? What sudden familiarity is this? God has been
with thee, and gone by thee; thou have not saluted him: and now in all the have
thou bequeathest thy soul to him. On what acquaintance? How desperate is this
carelessness*

If thou have but a little money, whether thou keep it, thou lay'st it up in
the Temple of Trust; or whether thou let it; thou art sure of good assurance,
sound bonds. If but a little land, how carefully do thou make firm
conueyances to thy desired heirs? If goods, thy will has taken secure order
who shall enjoy them; we need not teach you Citizens to make sure work for
your estates* If children, thou disposest of them in trades, with portions:
only of thy soul (which is thy self) thou know not what shall become. The
world must have it no more; thy self would keep it, but thou know thou
can not: Satan would have it; and thou know not whether he shall: thou
would have God have it; and thou know not whether he will: yea, thy heart
is now ready with Pharaoh, to say; Who is the Lord? O the fearful and
miserable estate of that man, that must part with his soul, he knows not
whither! Which, if thou would avoid (as this very warning shall judge thee
if thou do not) be acquainted with GOD in thy life, that thou may make him
the Guardian of thy soul, in thy death. Given up it must needs be; but to him
that has governed it if thou have given it to Satan in thy life; how can
thou hope God will in thy death entertain it? Did you not hate me, and expel
me out of my fathers house; how then come ye to me now in this time of your
tribulation; said Ieptha, to the men of Gilead. No, no: either give up thy
soul to God while he calls for it in his word, in the prouocations of his
love, in his afflictions, in the holy motions of his spirit to thine: or else
when thou would give it, he will none of it, but as a Judge, to deliver it
to the Tormentor.

What should God do, with an unclean, drunken, profane, proud, covetous soul?
Without holiness, it is no seeing of GOD: Depart from me, ye wicked; J know
ye not; go to the Gods you have served. See how GOD is even with men: they
had in the time of the Gospel, said to the holy one of Israel; Depart from
us: now in the time of judgment, he says to them; Depart from me. They would
not know God when they might; now God will not know them when they would.
Now therefore (beloved) if thou would not have GOD scorn the offer of thy
deathbed, fit thy soul for him in thy health; furnish it with grace; inure it
to a sweet conversation with the God of heaven: then may thou boldly give it
up; and he shall as graciously receive it, yea, fetch it by his Angels to his
glory.

He gave up the Ghost. We must do as he did; not all with the same
success. Giving up, supposes a receiving, a returning. This in-mate that we
have in our bosom, is sent to lodge here for a time; may not dwell here
always. The right of this tenure, is the Lords, not ours. As he said of the
hatchet; It is but lent, it must be restored: It is ours to keep; his to
dispose and require. See and consider both our privilege and charge; It is not
with us as with brute Creatures: we have a living Ghost to inform us,
which yet is not ours, (and, alas, what is ours, if our souls be not?) but
must be given up; to him that gave it.

Why do we live, as those that took no keep of so glorious a guest? as
those that should never part with it; as those that think it given them to
spend; not to return with a reckoning?

If thou had no soul, if a mortal one, if thine own, if never to be
required, how could thou live but sensuallie? Oh remember but who thou
art, what thou have, and whither thou must; and thou shall live like thy self
while thou art, and give up thy Ghost confidently when thou shall cease to
be* Neither is there here more certainty of our departure then comfort.
Carry this with thee to thy deathbed; and see if it can refresh thee, when all
the world cannot give thee one dram of comfort. Our spirit is our dearest
riches: if we should lose it, here were just cause of grief. Howl and
lament, if thou think thy soul perishes: it is not forfeited, but
surrendered. How safely does our soul pass through the gates of death, without
any impeachment, while it is in the hands of the Almighty? Woe were us, if he
did not keep it while we have it; much more when we restore it. We give it up
to the same hands that created, infused, redeemed, renewed, that do protect,
preserve, establish, and will crown it: J know whom J have believed; and J
am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which J have committed to him
against that day. O secure and happy estate of the godly! O blessed exchange of
our condition: while our soul dwells in our breast, how is it subject to
infinite miseries? distempred with passions, charged with sins, vexed with
tentations; above, none of these: how should it be otherwise? This is our
pilgrimage, that our home: this our wilderness, that our land of promise: this
our bondage, that our kingdom. Our impotency causes this our sorrow.

When our soul is once given up, what evil shall reach unto heaven, and
wrestle with the Almighty? Our loathnesse to give up, comes from our ignorance
and infidelity. No man goes unwillingly to a certain preferment; J defute to
be dissolved, says Paul: J have served thee, J have believed thee, and now: J
come to thee, says Luther: The voices of Saints, not of men. If thine heart
can say thus, thou shall not need to entreat with old Hilarion, Egredere me^
anima, egredere; quid ^i^as? Go thy ways forth my soul, go forth: what
fear thou* but it shall fly up alone cheerfully from thee; and give up it
self, into the arms of GOD, as a faithful Creator and Redeemer. This earth
is not the element of thy soul; it is not where it should be: It shall be no
less thine, when it is more the owners. Think now seriously of this point;
Gods Angel is abroad, and strikes on all sides, we know not which of
^urtur^^es shall be the next: we are sure we carry deaths en^v^* within us.
If we be ready, our day cannot come too soon. Stir up thy soul to an
heavenly cheerfulness, like thy Savior: Know but whither thou art going; and
thou can not but with divine Paul, say from our Saviors mouth, even in this
sense; It is a more blessed thing to give, Vt contra: Nullam anima^ recipio,
quae (...) nolente separatur a corpore. Hieron.
then to receive. GOD cannot abide an unwilling guest. Give up that spirit to
him, which he has given thee; and he will both receive what thou give, and
give it thee again, with that glory and happiness which can never be
conceived, and shall never be ended. Even so, Lord JESUS, Come quickly.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.

