HEAVEN upon Earth, Or Of true Peace, and Tranquillity of Mind.

By Ios. Hall.

LONDON. Printed by John Windet for John Porter 1606.

TO THE Right Honorable Henry Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastings, Hungerford,
Botreaux Molines and Moiles, his Majesty's Lieu-tenant in the Counties of
Leicester and Rutland my singular good Lord all increase of true honor* and
Heaven begun upon Earth.
RIGHT Honorable I have undertaken a great task to teach men how to be happy
in this life: I have undertaken and performed it: Wherein I have followed
Seneca and gone beyond him; followed him as a Philosopher, gone beyond him as a
Christian, as a Divine. Finding it a true ce^sure of the best Moralist, that
they were like to goodly ships, graced with great titles the Saue-gard, the
Triumph, the Good-speed, and such like, when yet they have been both
extremely Sea-beaten and at last wracked. The volume is little, perhaps the
use more; I have ever thought according to the Greek Proverb (...). What it
is, even justice challenges it to him, to whom the Author has devoted
himself: The children of the bondsman are the goods of the parents Master. I
humbly betake it to your Honors protection, and your Honor to the protection of
the highest.

Your Honors most humbly devoted in all duty and service. Ios. Hall.

HEAVEN upon earth or of true peace of mind.
Sect. 1.
WHen I had studiously red over the moral writings of some wise Heathen,
Censure of Philosophers.
especially those of the Stoicall profession, I must confess I found a little
envy and pity striving together within me: I envied nature in them, to see
her so witty in devising such plausible refuges for doubting and troubled
minds: I pitied them to see that their careful disquisition of true rest, led
them in the end but to mere unquietness: Wherein me thought, they were as
hounds swift of foot, but not exquisite in sent, which in an hasty pursuit
take a wrong way, spending their mouths, and courses in vain. Their praise
of gessing wittily they shall not leese, their hopes both they lost, and
whosoever follows them. If Seneca could have had grace to his wit, what
wonders would he have done in this kind? what Divine might not have yielded him
the chair for precepts of Tra^quillitie without any disparagement? As he was,
this he has gained. Never any Heathen wrote more divinely, never any
Philosopher more probably. Neither would I ever desire better Master if to this
purpose I needed no other mistres then nature. But this in truth is a task,
which nature has never without presumption undertaken, and never performed
without much imperfection. Like to those vain and wandering Empiricks which in
Tables and pictures make great oste^tatio^ of cures, never approouing their
skill to their credulous patients. And if she could have truly effected it
alone. I know not what employment in this life she should have left for grace
to busy her self about, nor what privilege it should have been here below
to be a Christian, since this that we seek is the noblest work of the soul,
and in which alone consists the only Heaven of this world; this is the sum of
all humane desires, which when we have attained, then only we begin to live,
and are sure we cannot thence forth live miserably. No marvel then if all the
heathen have diligently sought after it, many wrote of it, none attained it. Not
Athens must teach this lesson, but Jerusalem.

Sect. 2.
YET something Grace scorneth not to learn of Nature, What Tranquillity is,
and wherein it consists.
as Moses may take good counsel of a Midianite. Nature has ever had more
skill in the end, then in the way to it, and whether she have discoursed of the
good estate of the mind, which we call Tranquillity or the best which is
happiness has more happily gessed at the general definition of them then of
the means to compass them. She teaches us therefore without controlement,
that the Tranquillity of the mind is, as of the Sea and weather, when no wind
stirs, when the waves do not tumultuously rise and fall upon each other,
but when the face both of the Heaven and waters is still, fair, and equable.
That it is such an even disposition of the heart, wherein the scoales of the
mind neither rise up toward the boame, through their own lightness, or the
ouer-weening opinion of prosperity, nor are too much depressed with any load
of sorrow; but hanging equal and unmoved betwixt both; give a man liberty in
all occurrences to enjoy himself. Not that the most temperate mind can be so
the master of his Passions, as not sometimes to ouer-ioy his grief, or
ouer-grieue his joy, according to the contrary occasions of both, for not the
euenest weights, but at their first putting into the balance somewhat sway both
parts thereof, not without some show of inequality, which yet after some
little motion, settle themselves in a meet poyse. It is enough that after some
sudden agitation, it can return to it self, and rest it self at last in a
resolved peace. And this due composedness of mind we require unto our
Tra^quillitie, not for some short fits of good mood, which soon after end in
coffeehouse, but with the condition of perpetuity. For there is no heart
makes so rough weather, as not sometimes to admit of a calm, and whether for
that he knows no present cause of his trouble, or for that he knows that
cause of trouble is countervayled with as great an occasion of private joy, or
for that the multitude of evils has bred carelessenesse, the man that is most
disordered finds some respits of quietness. The balances that are most ill
matched in their vnsteddie motions come to an equality, but stay not at it.
The frantic man cannot avoid the imputatio^ of madness, though he be sober
for many moons, if he rage in one. So then the calm mind must be settled in
an habitual rest, not then firm when there is nothing to shake it, but then
least shaken when it is most assailed.

Sect. 3.
WHence easily appears how vainly it has been sought either in such a
constant estate of outward things, Insufficiency of humane precepts.
as should give no distaste unto the mind, whiles all earthly things vary
with the weather, and have no stay but in uncertainty, or in the natural
temper of the soul, so ordered by human wisdom, as that it should not be
affected with any casual euentes to either part; since that cannot ever by
natural power be held like to it self; but one while is cherefull, stirri^g,
and ready to undertake; anotherwhile drousie, dull, comfortless, prone to rest,
weary of it self, loathing his own purposes, his own resolutions. In both
which, since the wisest philosophers have grounded all the rules of their
tranquillity, it is plain that they saw it a far off, as they did heaven it
self with a desire and admiration, but knew not the way to it: Whereupon alas,
how slight and impotent are the remedies they prescribe for unquietness. For
what is it that for the inconstancy and laziness of the mind still
displeasing it self in what it does, Senecaes rules of Tranquillity abridged
and for that distemper thereof which arises from the fearful, vnthriuing,
and restless desires of it, we should ever be employing our selves in some
public affairs, choosing our business according to our inclination, and
prosecuting what we have chosen? wherewith being at last cloied we should
retire our selves and we are the rest of our time in private studies; that we
should make due comparatiue trials of our own ability; nature of our
businesses; disposition of our chose^ friends? that in respect of Patrimony we
should be but carelessly affected, so drawing it in as it may be least for show,
most for use; removing all pomp, bridling our hopes, cutting off superfluities
for crosses, to consider that custom will abate and mitigate them that the
best things are but chains and burdens to those that have them to those that
use the^, that the worst things have some mixture of comfort to those that
groan under them. Or leaving these lower rudimentes that are given to weak and
simple nouices to examine those golden rules of mortality, which are commended
to the most wise and able practitioners, what is it to account himself as a
tenant at will? To fore-imagine the worst in all casual matters? To avoid all
idle and impertinent businesses all pragmaticall meddling with affairs of state?
not so to fix our selves upon any one estate as to be impatie^t of a change, to
call back the mind from outward things, and draw it home into it self? to
laugh at and esteem lightly of others misdemeanors? Not to depend upon
others opinions but to stand on our own bottoms? to carry our selves in an
honest and simple truth, free from a curious hypocrisy, and affectation of
seeming other then we are, and yet as free from a base kind of carelesnes? to
intermeddle retyrednes, with society, so as one may give sweetness to the
other and both to us. So slackening the mind that we may not loosen it, and so
be^ding as we may not break it? to make most of our selves, chearing up our
spirits with variety of recreations with satiety of meals, and all other bodily
indulgence, saving that kennes (me thinks) can neither beseem a wise
philosopher to prescribe nor a virtuous man to practice. Allowed ^et by Seneca
^n his last chapter of tranquillity
Al these in their kinds please well, profit much, and are as sovereign for
both these, as they are unable to effect that for which they are propounded.
Nature teaches thee all these should be done, she cannot teach thee to do the^
and yet do all these and no more, Senecas rules rejected as insufficient.
let me never have rest, if thou have it. For neither are here the greatest
enemies of our peace so much as descryed a fair off, nor those that are noted
are hereby so prevented that upon most diligent practice we ca^ promise our
selves any security: wherewith who so instructed dare co^fidently give challenge
to all sinister euentes, is like to some sk^^^^ fencer who stands upon his
usual wards, and plays well; but if there come a strange fetch of an unwonted
blow, is put besides the rules of his art, and with much shame overtaken. And
for those that are known, believe me, the mind of man is too weak to bear out
it self hereby against all onsets: There are light crosses that will take an
easy repulse, others yet stronger, that shake the house side, but break not
in upon us; others vehement, which by force make way to the heart where they
find none breaking open the door of the soul that denies entia^ce: Others
violent that lift the mind of the hendges, or rend the bars of it in pieces,
others furious that tear up the very foundations from the bottom, leaving no
monument behind the^, but ruin. The wisest and most resolute Moralist that
ever was, looked pale when he should taste of his Hemlock; and by his
timorousness made sport to those that envied his speculations. The best of the
heathen Emperors (that was honored with the title of piety) justly magnified
that courage of Christians which made the^ insult over their torme^tors and by
their fearelessenesse of earthquakes, Antonius Pius.
and deaths argued the truth of their religion. An epistle to the Asians
concerning the persecuted christians.
It must be, it can be none but a divine power, that can uphold the mind
against the rage of maine afflictions and yet the greatest crosses are not the
greatest enemies to inward peace. Let us therefore look up above our selves,
and from the rules of an hyer air, supply the efects of natural wisdom,
giving such infallible directions for tra^quillity that whosoever shall-follow,
cannot but live sweetly and with c^ntinuall delight applauding himself at home
when all the world besides him sh^lbee miserable. To which purpose it shall be
requisite, (...) work.
first to remove all causes of unquietness, and then to set down the grounds of
our happy ^est.

Sect. 4.
I Find on the one two universal enemies of Tr^nquillity, (...)
Conscience of evil done, Sense or fear of evil suffered. The former in one
word we call Sins, the latter Crosses. The 1. of these must be quite taken
away, the second duly tempered ere the heart can be at rest. For first, how
can that man be at peace, that is at varia^ce with God and himself? How
should peace be gods gift, if it could be without him, if it could be against
him? It is the profession of sin although fair spoken at the first closing, to
be a perpetual makebate betwixt God and man, betwixt a man and himself. And
this enmity, tho it do not continually show it self, (as the mortallest
enemies are not always in pitched fields one against the other) for that the
conscience is not ever clamorous, but somwhile is sile^t, otherwhiles with still
murmurings bewrais his mislikes yet does ever more work secret vnquientnes to
the heart. The guilty man may have a seeming truce, a true peace he cannot have.
The torment of an evil conscience.
Look upon the face of the guilty heart, and thou shall see it pale and ghastly;
the smiles and laughters fainte and hartles, the speeches doubtful, and full of
abrupt stops and unseasonable turni^gs, the purposes and motions unsteady, and
sauori^g of much distractio^, arguing plainly that sin is not so smooth at her
first motions, as turbulent afterward: hence are those vain wearyi^gs of
places and companies together with our selves, that the galled soul does after
the wo^t of sick patients, seek refreshing in variety, and after many to^l^d
and turned sides complains of remediless and vnabated torment. Nero, after so
much innocent blood may change his bed chamber, but his friends ever attend
him, ever are within him, and are as parts of himself. Alas what auailes it to
seek outward releefes, when thou have thine executioner within thee? If thou
could shift from thy self thou might have some hope of ease; now thou
shall never want furies so long as thou have thy self. Yea, what if thou
would run from thy self? Thy soul may fly from thy body, thy conscience
will not fly from thy soul, nor thy sin from thy conscience. Some men indeed
in the bitterness of these pangs of sin, like unto those fondly impatient
fishes, that leap out of the pan into the flame, have leapt out of this
private hell that is in themselves, into the common pit, choosing rather to
adventure upon the future pains that they have feared, rather then to endure
the present horrors they have felt: wherein what have they gained, but to that
hell which was within them, a second hell without. The conscience leaves not
where the feends begin, but both join together in torture. But there are some
firm and obdurate forheads, whose resolution can laugh their sins out of
countenance. There are so large and able gorges as that they can swallow and
digest bloody murders, without complaint, who with the same hands which they
have since their last meal embrued in blood can freely carue to themselves
large mor sels at the next sitting. The joy and peace of the gilty but
dissembled.
Beleeuest thou that such a man's heart laughs with his face? will not he dare
to be an hypocrite that durst be a villain? These glow-wormes when a night of
sorrow compasses them, make a lightsome and fiery show of joy, when if thou
press the^ thou find nothing but a cold and crude moisture. Know thou
not that there are those, which count it no shame to sin, yet count it a shame
to be checked with remorse especially so as others eyes may descry? to whom
repentance seems base-mindednesse, unworthy of him that professes wisdom and
valor. Such a man can grieve when none sees it but himself ca^ laugh when
others see it himself feels not. Assure thy self that man's heart bleedeth
when his face counterfaites a smile, he wears out many waking hours when thou
think he rests, yea as his thoughts affoorde him not sleep, so his very
sleep affordes him not rest: but while his senses are tied up, his sin is
loose, representing it self to him in his vgliest shape and frighting him with
horrible and hellish dreams. And if perhaps custom has bred a carelessness
in him, (as we see that usual whipping makes the child not care for the rod)
yet an unwonted extremity of the blow shall fetch blood of the soul, and make
the back that is most hardened, (...) of smart: and the further the blow is
fetched through intermission of remorse, the harder it must needs alight.
Therefore I may confidently tell the careless sinner as that bold Tragedia^
said to his great Pompey. the time shall come wherein thou shall fetch deep
sighs, and therefore shall sorrow desperately, because thou sorrowedst not
sooner. The fire of the conscience may ly for a time smothered with a pile of
green wood, that it cannot be discerned, whose moisture when once it has
maistred, it sends up so much greater flame by how much it had greater
resistance. Hope not the^ to stop the mouth of thy Conscience from exclaiming
whiles thy sin co^tinues, that endeavor is both vain and hurtful; so I have
seen them that have stopped the nosthrill for bleeding in hope to stay the issue
when the blood hindered in his former course has broken out of the mouth, or
found way down into the stomach. The conscience is not pacifiable while sin
is within to vex it. no more then an angry swelling can cease throbbing and
aching whiles the thorn or the corrupted matter lies rotting underneath. Time
that remedies all other evils of the mind increases this, which like to bodily
diseases pr^oues worse with continuance, and grows upon us with our age.

Sect. 5.
THere can be therefore no peace without reconciliatio^, The remedy (...)
Conscience
thou can not be friends with thy self, till wi^h God* for thy conscience
(which is thy best friend while thou sinnest not) like an honest servant takes
his Masters part against thee when thou have sinned; and will not look
straight upon thee, till thou upon God; not daring to be so kind to thee, as
to be unfaithful to his maker: There can be no reco^ciliation without
remission. God can neither forget the injury of sin, nor dissemble hatred.
It is for men, and those of hollow hearts, to make pretenses contrary to their
affections: soothings, and smiles, and imbracements where we mean not love,
are from weakness. Either for that we fear our insufficiency of present
revenge, or hope for a fitter opportunity afterward, or for that we desire to
make our further advantage of him to whom we mean evil. These courses are
not incident into an almighty power, who having the command of all ve^gea^ce
can smite where he list without all doubtings or delays. There can be no
remission without satisfaction, neither deals God with us as we men with
some desperate debtors, whom after long dilation of paiments and many days
broken we altogether let go for disability, or at least dismiss them upon an
easy co^positio^. Al sins are debts; all Gods debts must be discharg^d. It is
b^lde word but a true. God should not be just if any of his debts should
pass vn^. The conceit of the profane vulgar makes God all of mercies, and
thereupon hopes for pardon without payment. Fo^d and ignorant presumption to
disioyne mercy and justice in him to who^ they are both essential to make
mercy exceed justice in him, in whom both are infinite. Dare thou hope God
can be so kind to thee as to be unjust to himself? God will be just go thou on
to p^esume and perish. There can be no satisfaction by any recompense of ours,
an infinite justice is off^nded, an infinite punishment is deserved by every
sin, and every ma^s sins are as near to infinite as number can make them. Our
best endeavor is worse then finite, imperfect, and faulty. If it could be
perfect we owe it al in present, what we are bound to do in present cannot
make amends for what we have not done in time past, which while we offer to God
as good payment, we do with the profane traveler think to please him with
empty dateshelles in lieu of preservation Where shall we then find a payment of
infinite value but in him which is only and all infinite. The dignity of whose
person being infinite gave such worth to his satisfaction that what he suffered
in short time was proportionable to what we should have suffered beyond all
times. He did all, suffered all, paid all, he did it for us, we in him. Where
shall I begin to wonder at thee O thou divine and eternal peacemaker, the
savior of men, the a^nointed of God, mediator between God and man, in whom
there is nothing which does not exceed not only the conceit, but the very
wonder of Angels, who saw thee in thine humiliatio^ with silence, and adore
thee in thy glory with perpetual praises and reioysinges. Thou wast for ever
of thy self as God, of the father as the son; the eternal Son of an eternal
Father, not later in being, not less in dignity, not other in substance.
Begotten without diminotion of him that begot thee while he communicated that
wholly to thee, which he retained wholly in himself, because both were infinite
without inequality of nature, without division of essence when being in this
estate thine infinite love and mercy to deperate mankind caused thee O Savior
to empty thy self of thy glory, that thou might put on our shame and misery.
Wherefore not ceasing to be God as thou were, thou beganst to be what thou
were not, man; to the end that thou might be a perfect mediator betwixt God
and man, which were both in one person; God that thou might satisfy, man
that thou might suffer, that since man had sinned God was offended, thou
which were God and man, might satissy God for man. None but thy self which
art the eternal word, can expres the depth of this mystery that God should be
clothed with flesh, come down to men, and become man, that man might be
exalted into the highest heavens; and that our nature might be taken into the
fellowship of the deity. That he to whom all powers in heaven bowed, and
thought it their honor to be serviceable, should come down to be a servant to
his slaves, a ransom for his enemies; together with our nature taking up our
very infirmities, our shame, our torments, and bearing our sins without sin.
That thou whom the heavens were too strait to contain, should lay thy self
in an obscure cratch, thou which were attended of Angels, should be derided
of men, rejected of thine own, persecuted by Tyrants, tempted with Devils,
betrayed of thy servant, crucified among thieves, and (which was worse then all
these) in thine own apprehe^sion for the time as forsaken of thy father; That
thou who^ our sins had pierced should for our sins both sweat drops of blood
in the Garden, and power out streams of blood upon the Cross. O the
inualuable purchase of our peace. O ransom enough for mo worlds! Thou which
were in the counsel of thy Father the Lamb slain from the beginning of time,
camst now in fulness of time to be slain by man, for man; Being at once the
sacrifice offered, the priest that did offer; and the God to whom it was
offered. How graciously did thou both proclaim our peace as a prophet in the
time of thy life upon earth, and purchase it by thy blood as a priest at thy
death, and now confirmest and applvest it as a King in heaven? By thee only it
was procured, by thee it is proffered. O mercy without example, without measure!
God offers peace to man, the holy seeks to the unjust, the potter to the clay,
the King to the traitor. We are unworthy that we should be received to peace
tho we desired it; what are we then that we should have peace offered for the
receiving? An easy condition of so great a benefit, he requires us not to
earne it, but to accept it of him, what could he give more? what could he
require less of us?

Sect. 6.
THE purchase therefore of our peace was paid at once, The receipt of our peace
offered by Faith.
yet must be seue rally reckoned to every soul, whom it shall benefit. If we
have not an hand to take what Christ's hand does either hold, or offer, what is
sufficient in him, cannot be effectual to us. The spiritual hand whereby we
apprehend the sweet offers of our savior is faith, which in short is no other
then an affia^ce in the mediator receive peace and be happy believe and thou
have received. From hence it is that we are interessed in all that either God
has promised, or Christ has performed. Hence have we from God both
forgiveness and love the ground of all either peace or glory. Hence of enemies
we become more then friends sons, and as sons may both expect and challenge
not only careful provision and safe protection on earth, but an everlasting
patrimony above. This field is so spacious, that it were easy for a man to
leese himself in it, and if I should spend all my pilgrimage in this walk, my
time would sooner end then my way, wherein I would have measured more paces,
were it not that our scope is not so much to magnify the benefit of our peace,
as to seek how to obtain it.

Behold now, A corollary of the benefit of this receite.
after we have sought heaven and earth where only the wearied Dove may find an
Olive of Peace. The apprehending of this alsufficie^t satisfaction makes it
ours, upon our satisfaction we have remission; upon remission follows
reconciliation; upon our reco^ciliatio^, peace. When therefore thy Conscience
like a stern Sergea^t shall catch thee by the throat, and arrest thee upon
Gods debt, let thy only plea be that thou have already paid it; Bring forth
that bloody acquittance sealed to thee from heaven upon thy true Faith,
straight way thou shall see the fierce and terrible look of thy conscience
changed into friendly smiles, and that rough and violent hand that was reddy to
drag thee to prison, shall now lovingly embrace thee, and fight for thee
against all the wrongful attempts of any spiritual adversary. O heavenly
Peace and more then peace, Friendship, whereby alone we are leagued with our
selves and God with us, which who ever wants shall find a sad remembrance in
the midst of his dissembled iollity, and after all vain strifes shall fall
into many secret dumps, from which his guilty heart shall deny to be cheared,
tho all the world were his minstrell. Oh pleasure worthy to be pitied, and
laughter worthy of tears, that is without this! The vain shifts of the guilty
Go then foolish man, and when thou feel any check of thy sin, seek after
thy iocondest companions, deceive the time and thy self with merry purposes,
with busy games, feast away thy cares, bury them and thy self in wine and
sleep, after all these frivolous differings, it will return upon thee, when
thou wakest, perhaps ere thou wakest, nor will be repelled till it have showed
thee thy hell, nor when it has showed thee, will yet be repelled; So the
stricken Dear having received a deadly arrowe, whose shaft shaken out has left
the head behind it, runes from one thicket to another, not able to change his
pain with his places, but finding his wounds still the worse with
continuance. Ah fool, thy soul festereth within, and is affected so much more
da^gerously by how much less it appears. Thou may while thy self with
variety, thou can not ease thee. Sin owes thee a spite, and will pay it
thee, perhaps when thou art in worst case to sustain it. This flitting does
but provide for a further violence at last. I have seen a little stream of no
noise which upon his stoppage has swelled up, and with a loud gushing has
borne over the heap of turues wherewith it was resisted. Thy deathbed shall
smart for these wilful adiournings of repentance; whereon how many have we
heard rauing of their oulde neglected sins, and fearfully despairing when they
have had most need of comfort? In sum there is no way but this. Thy
conscience must have either satisfaction or torment. Discharge thy sin
betymes and be at peace. He never breaks his sleep for debt, that pays
when he takes up.

Sect. 7.
NEither can it suffice for peace, Solicitation of sin remedied.
to have crossed the old scrole of our sins if we prevent not the future, yea
the present; very importunity of te^tation breeds unquietness. Sin where it has
got an haunt looks for more, as humors that fall toward their old issue,
and if it be not strongly repelled does near as much vex us with soliciting as
with yielding. Let others e^uy their happiness I shall never think their life so
much quiet, whose doors are continual beaten, and their morning sleep broken
with early clients, whose entries are daily thro^ged with suitors pressing near
for the next audience; much less that through the remiss answers are daily
haunted with traitors or other instruments of villainy, offering their
mischievous service and inciting them to some pestilent enterprise. Such are
tentations to the soul. Whereof it cannot be rid so long as it holds them in
any hope of entertainment and so long they will hope to prevail, while we
give them but a cold and timorous denial; Suitors are drawn on with an easy
repulse; counting that as half granted which is but faintly gainsaid:
Peremptory answers can only put sin out of heart for any second attempts. It
is ever impudent when it meets not with a bold heart; hoping to prevail by
wearying us, and wearying us by entreaties. Let all suggestions therefore find
thee resolute so shall thy soul find it self at rest for as the Devil, so
sin his natural brood flies away with resistance. To which purpose all our
heddy and disordered affections, The ordering of affections.
which are the secret factors of sin and Satan, must be restrained by a
strong and yet temperate command of reason and Religion; these, if they find
the reins loose in their necks (like to the wild horses of that chaste hunter,
in the Tragedy) carry us over hills and rocks, and never leave us till we be
disincombred, and they breathless; but contrarily if they be pulled in with
the sudden violence of a strait hand, they fall to plunging, and careering,
and never leave till their saddle be empty, and even then daungerously strike
at their prostrate rider. If there be any exercise of Christian wisdom, it is
in the menaging of these unruly affections, which are not more necessary in
their best use, then pernicious in their mis-gouernance. Reason has always
been busy in undertaking this so necessary a moderation, wherein although she
have prevailed with some of colder temper, yet those which have been of more
stub borne metal, like unto grown scholars, which scorn the ferula that
ruled their minority, have still despised her weak endeavors. Only
christianity has this power which with our second birth gives us a new nature,
so that now, if excess of passions be natural to us as men, the order of them
is natural to us as Christians. Reason bids the angry man lay over his
Alphabet ere he give his answer; hoping by this intermission of time to gain
the mitigation of his rage. He was never thoroughly angry that can endure the
recital of so many idle letters. Christianity gives not rules, but power to
avoid this short madness. It was a wise speech that is reported of our best
and last Cardinal I hope, that this Island either did or shall see, who when a
skillful Astrologer upon the calculation of his nativity had fortold him some
specialities, concerning his future estate, answered: such perhaps I was borne,
but since that time I have been borne again and my second nativity has
crossed my first. The power of nature is a good plea for those that acknowledge
nothing above nature. But for a Christian to excuse his intemperatenes by his
natural inclination, and to say I am borne choleric, sullen, amorous, is an
Apology worse then the fault. Wherefore serves religion but to subdue or
govern nature? We are so much Christians as we ca^ rule our selves, the rest
is but form, and speculation. Yea the very thought of our profession is so
powerful that (like unto that precious stone) being cast into this sea it
asswayeth those inward tempests, that were raised by the affections. The
unregenerate mind is not capable of this power, and therefore through the
continual mutinyes of his passions cannot but be subject to perpetual
unquietness. There is neither remedy nor hope in this estate: But the
christian soul that has inured it self to the awe of God, and the exercises
of true mortification, by the only looking up at his holy profession cures
the burning venom of these fiery serpents that lurk within him. Have thou
nothing but nature? resolve to look for no peace. God is not prodigal to cast
away his best blessings on so unworthy subjects. Art thou a christian? Do but
remember thou art so: and then if thou dare if thou can, yield to the
excess of Passions.

Sect. 8.
HItherto the most inward and dangerous enemy of our Peace which if we have
once maistred, The second pain enemy to peace Crosses.
the other field shall be fought and won with less blood. Crosses disquiet us
either in their present feeling, or their expectation. Both of them when they
meet with weak minds, so extremely distempering them, that the Patient for the
time is not himself: How many have we known which through a lingering
disease, weary of their pain, weary of their lives have made their own hands
their executioners? How many meeting with an hedstrong grief which they could
not menage, have by the violence of it been carried quite from their wits? How
many millio^s what for incurable maladies, what forlosses, what for
defamatio^s, what for sad accide^ts to their children rub out their lives in
perpetual disco^te^tment, therefore living because they cannot yet dye, not for
that they like to live. If there could be any humane receipt prescribed to avoid
evils, it would be purchased at an hie rate; But both it is impossible that
earth should redres that which is sent from heaven and if it cold be do^e, eue^
the want of miseries would prove miserable; For the mind cloied with co^tinu
alfelicity would grow aburde^ to it self, lothing that at last which
intermission would have made pleasant Give a free horse the full rains and he
will soon tire. Su^mer is the sweetest season by all consents, where in the
earth is both most rich with increase, and most gorgeous for ornament, yet if
it were not received with entercha^ges of cold frosts and peircing winds, who
could live. Summer would be no summer, if winter did not both lead it in and
follow it we may not therefore either hope or strive to escape al crosses, some
we may, what thou can, fly from; what thou can not, allay and mitigat; in
crosses universally let this be thy rule, make thy self none, escape some bear
the rest, sweeten al.

Sect. 9.
APprehe^sio^ gives life to crosses, Of crosses that arise from conceit.
and if some be simply most are as they are taken. I have seen many which when
God has meant the^ no hurt have framed themselves crosses out of imagination
and have found that insupportable for weight, which in truth never was, neither
had ever any but a fancied being. Others again laughing out heavy afflictions,
for which they were bemoned of the beholders. One receives a dedly wou^d; and
looks not so much as pale at the smart another hears of maine losses, and
like Zeno after news of his shipwreck, (as altogether passio^-lesse goes to
his rest, not breaking an hours sleep for that, which would break the heart
of some others. Greenham that S. of ours (whom it cannot disparage that he was
reserved for our so loose an age) can lie spread quietly upon the form looking
for the Chirurgians knife, binding himself as fast with a resolved patience,
as others with strongest cords, abiding his flesh carved and his bowels rifled,
and not stirring more then if he felt not, while others tremble to expect, and
shrink to feel but the pricking of a vain. There can be no remedy for
imaginary crosses but wisdom, which shall teach us to esteem of all euentes
as they are, like a true glass representing all things to our minds in their
due proportion. So as Crosses may not seem that are not, nor little and gentle
ones seem great and intolerable. Give thy body Elsebore, thy mind good
Counsel, thine ear to thy friend, and these fantastical evils shall vanish
away like themselves.

Sect. 10.
IT were idle advise to bid men avoid evils. Of true and r^all cros^es.
Nature has by a secret instinct taught brute creatures so much, whether wit
or sagacitie: and our self love making the best advantage of reason will
easily make us so wise and careful; it is more worth our labor, since our life
is so open to calamities, and nature to impatience, to teach men to bear what
evils they cannot avoid, and how by a well-disposednesse of mind, we may
correct the iniquity of all hard events. Wherein it is hardly credible how
much good art, and precepts of resolution may avail us. I have seen one man
by the help of a little engine lift up that weight alone which forty helping
hands by their clear strength might have endeavored in vain We live here in
an Ocean of troubles, wherein we can see no firm land. One wave falling upon
another ere the former have wrought all his spite. Mischiefs strive for
places, as if they feared to loose their room if they hasted not: so many good
things as we have, so many euilles arise from their privation; besides no
fewer real and positive evils that afflict us; To prescribe and apply receyts
to every particular cross were to write a Salmeron-like commentary upon
Petrarchs remedies, and I doubt whether so the work would be perfect, a life
would be too little to write it, and but enough to read it.

Sect. 11.
THe same medicines cannot help all diseases of the body, The first remedy of
Crosses.
of the soul they may. Before they come.
We see fencers give their scholars the same common rules of position of
warding and weilding their weapon for offense for defense against all comers:
such universal precepts there are for Crosses. In the first whereof, I would
prescribe Expectation, that either kills or abateth evils. For Crosses after
the nature of the Cockatrice, dye if they be foreseen: Whether this providence
makes us more strong to resist or by some secret power makes them more unable
to assault us. It is not credible what a fore-resolued mind can do, can suffer.
Could our english Milo, of whom Spain yet speaks since their last peace,
have ouerthrown that furious beast, made now more violent through the rage of
his bayting, if he had not settled himself in his station, and expected? The
frighted multitude ran away from that ouer-earnest sport, which begun in
pleasure, ended in terror, if he had turned his back with the rest, where had
been his safety, where his glory, and reward? Now he stood still, expected,
overcame, by one fact he at once preserved, honored, enriched himself. Evils
will come never the sooner for that thou look for them, they will come the
easier; it is a labor well lost if they come not, and well bestowed if they do
come. We are sure the worst may come, why should we be secure that it will not?
Suddenness finds weak minds secure makes them miserable, leaves them
desperate. The best way therefore is to make things present in conceit before
they come, that they may be half past in their violence when they do come:
Even with woode^ wasters we learn at the sharp. As therefore good soldiers
exercise the^selus long at the pale, and there use those actiuities which
afterward they shall practice upon a true adversary so must we present to
ourselves imaginary crosses and menage the^ in our mind before god se^ds them
in eue^t. Now I eat, sleep, digest, all soundly without complaint; what if a
la^quishing disease should bereave me of my appetite and rest? that I should see
dainties and loath the^, surfeiting of the very smell, of the thought of the
best dishes? that I should count the lingering hours and think Ezechias long day
returned wearying my self with changing sides, and wishing any thing but what
I am. How could I take this distemper? Now I have (if not what I would) yet
what I need, as not abou^ding with idle superfluities, so not straightened with
penury of necessary things. What if poverty should rush upon me as an armed
man, spoiling me of all my little, that I had, and send me to the fountain for
my best cellar? to the ground for my bed, for my bread to another cup-bord,
for my clothes to the brokers shop, or my friends wardrop? How could I
brook this want, I am now at home walking in my own grounds, looking on my
young plants the hope of posterity, considering the nature, advantages or
fears of my soil, inioying the patrimony of my fathers; What if for my
religion, or the malicious sentence of so^e great one, I should be exiled from
my country, wandering amongst those whose habit, language, fashion my ignorance
shall make me wonder at; where the solitude of places, and strangenes of persons
shall make my life uncomfortable. How could I abide the smell of foreign smoke?
how should I take the contempt and hard usage that waits upon strangers? Thy
prosperity is Idle, and il spent if it be not meddled with such forecasting and
wisely suspicious thoughts, if it be wholly bestowed in enjoying, no whit in
preventing: Like unto a foolish City which notwithstanding a dangerous
situatio^, spends al her wealth in rich furniturs of chambers, and
state-houses; While they bestow not one shouel-full of earth on outward
Bulwarks to their defense: this is but to make our enemies the happier and our
selves the more redily miserable: If thou will not therefore be oppressed with
evils; Expect, and Exercise; Exercise thy self with conceit of evils; Expect
the evils themselves; Yea exercise thy self in expectation; so while the
mind pleasetth it self in thinking, yet I am not thus, it prepares it self
against it may be so: And if some that have been good at the foyles, have
proved cowardly at the sharp, yet on the contrary who ever durst point a
single combat in the field, that has not been somewhat trained in the sense
school?

Sect. 12.
NEither does it a little blunt the edge of evils to consider that they come
from a divine hand, The next remedy of crosses when they are come.
Whose almighty power is guided by a most wise providence and te^pered with a
fatherly love. From their Author;
Ever the sauadge creatures will be smitten of their keeper, and repine not; if
of a stranger, they tear him in pieces. He strikes me that made me, that
moderats the world, Why struggle, I with him, why with my self? Am I a fool,
or a rebel? A fool if I be ignorant whence my crosses come; A rebel if I know
it, and be impatient? My sufferinges are from a God, from my God, he has
destined me every dram of sorrow that I feel: Thus much thou shall abide,
and here shall thy miseries be stinted: Al worldly helps cannot abate them; all
powers of hell cannot ad one scruple to their weight, that he has allotted
me: I must therefore either blaspheame God in my heart, detracting from his
infinite justice, wisdom, power, mercy which al shall stand inviolable, when
millio^s of such worms as I am are gone to dust. Or else co^fes that I ought to
be patient And if I profes I should be that I will not, I befoole my self and
bewray miserable impotency. But, (as impatience is full of excuses) it was
thine own rash improuide^ce, or the spite of thine enemy that impouerisht,
that defamed thee, it was the malignity of some vnholesomedish, or some gross
corrupted air that has distempered thee? Ah foolish curte, why do thou
bite at the stone, which could never have hurt thee but from the hand that
threw it? If I wound thee what matters it whether with mine own sword, or
thine, or another. God strikes some immediately from heaven with his own
arm, or with the arm of Angels: Others be buffetes with their own hands,
some by the revenging sword of an enemy, others with the sist of his dumb
creatures God strikes in all; His hand moves theirs. If thou see it not, blame
thy carnal eyes: why do thou fault the instrument while thou know the
agent? Ever the dying thief pardons the executioner, exclaimes on his unjust
Judge or his malicious accusers. Either then blame the first mouer, or
discharge the means, which as they could not have touched thee but as from
him; so from him they have afflicted thee justly, wrongfully perhaps as in
themselves.

Sect. 13.
BUT neither seems it enough to be patient in crosses if we be not thankful
also: The third antidote of crosses.
Good things challenge more then bare contentment. Crosses (unjustly termed
evils) as they are sent of him that is all goodness so they are sent for good
and his end cannot be frustrate. What greater good can be to the diseased man
then fit and proper Physic to recure him? Crosses are the only medicines of
sick minds. Thy sound body carries within it a sick soul; thou feel it
not perhaps so much more art thou sick and so much more daungerously:
Perhaps thou labourest of some plethorie of pride, or of some dropsy of
Covetousness, or the Staggers of inconstancy, or some fever of luxury, or
consumption of envy, or perhaps of the lethargy of idleness, or of the
frenzy of anger: It is a rare soul that has not some notable disease: Only
crosses are thy remedies: What if they be unpleasant? They are Physic It is
enough if they be wholesome; Not pleasant taste, but the secret virtue commends
medicines; If they cure thee, they shall please thee even in displeasing, or else
thou love thy palate above thy soul. What madness is this? when thou
complainest of a bodily disease, thou sendest to the Phisician, that he may
send thee not sauorie but wholesome potions; Thou receiuest them in spite of
thine abhorring stomach, and withal both thankest and rewardest the
Phisician. Thy soul is sick; Thy heavenly Phisician sees it, and pitties thee
ere thou thy self, and unsent to, sends thee not a plausible but a sovereign
remedy, thou loathest the savor, and rather wilt hazard thy life, then offend
thy palate; and in steed of thanks repinest at, reuilest the Phisician. How
comes it that we love our selves so little (if at least we count our souls
the best or any part) as that we had rather undergo death then pain; choosing
rather wilful sickness then an harsh remedy? surely we men are mere fools in
the estimation of our own good like children our choice is led altogether by
show no whit by substance. We cry after every well-seeming toy, and put from us
solid profers of good things: The wise arbitrator of all things sees our
folly and corrects it, with holding our idle desires and forcing upon us the
sound good we refuse: It is second folly in us if we thank him not: The
foolish babe cries for his fathers bright knife or gilded pills; The wiser
father knows that they can but hurt him; and therfore-holdes them after al his
tears; the child thinks he is used but unkindly: Every wise man, and himself
at more years can say it was but childish folly, in desiring it, in
co^plaining that he missed it. The loss of wealth, friends, health is
sometimes gain to us, thy body, thy estate, is worse thy soul is better, why
complainest thou?

Sect. 14.
NAy, The 4. and last part from their issue
it shall not be enough (me thinks) if only we be but contented and thankful,
if not also cheerful in afflictions; If that as we feel their pain, so we
look to their end; although indeed this is not more requisite then rarely
found, as being proper only to the good heart; Every bird can sing in a clear
heaven in a temperat spring, that one as most familiar so is most co^me^ded
that sings merry notes in the midst of a shower, or the dead of winter; Every
Epicure can enlarge his heart to mirth in the midst of his cups, and daliance;
Only the three children can sing in the furnace, Paul and Silas in the stocks,
Martyrs at the stake: It is from heaven, that this joy comes so contrary to
all earthly occasions, bred in the faithful heart through a serious and
feeling respect to the issue of what he feels; the quiet and untroubled fruit
of his righteousness, glory, the crown after his fight after his minute of
pain eternity of joy He never looked over the threshold of heaven that cannot
more re^oyce that he shall be glorious, then mour^e in present that he is
miserable.

Sect. 15.
YEa this consideration is so powerful, Of the importunity and terror of Death.
that it alone is able to make apart against the fear or sense of the last and
greatest of all terribles, Death it self; which in the Conscience of his own
dreadfulnesse, justly laughes at all the vain humane precepts of
Tranquillity, appalling the most resolute and vexing the most cheerful
minds. Neither profane Lucretius, with all his Epicurean rules of confidence,
nor drunken Anacreon, with all his wanto^ Odes, can shift of the importunate,
and violent horror of this adversary. See thou the Chaldean Tyrant beset
with the sacred boules of Jerusalem, the late spoils of Gods Temple, and in
contempt of their owner^ carousing healthes to his Queens, Concubines, Peires;
singing amids his cups triumphant carols of praise to his molten and carved
Gods? Would thou ever suspect that this hie courage could be abated, or that
this sumptuous and presumptuous banquet after so royal and rocond continuance
should have any other conclusion but pleasure? Stay but one hour longer, and
thou shall see that face, that now shines with a ruddy gloss according to the
color of his liquor, look pale and ghastly, stained with the colors of fear
and death, and that proud hand, which now lifts up his Ma^sie Gobl^ts in
defiance of God, tremble like a leaf in a storm; and those strong knees which
never stooped to the burden of their laden body, now notable to bear up
themselves: but loosened with a sudden palsy of fear, one knocking against
the other. And all this, for that death writes him a letter of summons to
appear that night before him; and accordingly ere the next Sun, sent two
Eunuchs for his honorable conueyance into an other world; where now are those
delicate morselles, those deep draughts, those merry ditties, wherewith the
palate and ear so pleased themselves? What is now become of al those cheerful
looks, loose laughters, stately port, reuelles, triumphs of the feasting
court? Why does none of his gallant nobles revive the faynted courage of their
Lord with a new cup? or with some stirring jest shake him out of this
unseasonable Melancholy? O death how imperious art thou to carnal minds?
aggravating their misery not only by expectation of future pain, but by the
remembrance of the wonted causes of their joy? and not suffering them to see
ought but what may torment them? Even that monster of Cesars, that had been so
well acquainted with blood and never had found better sport them in cutting of
throats when no wit came to his own ru^ne how effeminate, how desperately
cowardous did he show himself? to the wonder of al readers, that he which was
ever so valiant in killing should be so womanishly hartelesse in dying.

Sect. 16.
THere are that fear not so much to be dead, The grounds of the fear of Death.
as to dye; the very act of dissolutio^ frighting them with a tormenting
expectation of a short, but intolerable painfulnes, which let, if the wisdom
of God had not interposed to timorous nature, there would have been many more
Lucreces, Cleopatraes, Achitophles; and good laws should have found little
opportunity of execution, through the wilful funeralles of malefactors For the
soul that comes into the body without any (at least sensible) pleasure departs
not from it without an extreamitie of pain; which varying according to the
manner and means of separation yet in all violent deaths especially,
retayneth a violence not to be avoided, hard to be endured and if diseases,
which are destined toward death as their end, be so painful, what must the
end and perfection of diseases be? Since as deseases are the maladies of the
body, so death is the malady of diseases: There are that fear not so much to
dye as to be dead. If the pang be bitter, yet it is but short; the
comfortless state of the dead strikes some that could well resolve for the act
of their passage. HADRIAN Animula Vagula Blandula.
Not the worste of the heathen Emperors, made that monefull ditty on his
deathbed, wherein he be wrayeth to all memory, much feeling pity of his
soul, for her doubtful and impotent condition after her parture. How does
Platoes worldling bewail the misery of the grave, (...). etc.
besides all respect of pain? Woe is me that I shall lie alone rotting in the
silent earth, amongst the crawlinge worms not seeing ought above, not seen.
Very not being is sufficiently abhorred of nature, if death had no more to make
it fearful: But those that have lived under light enough, to show them the
gates of hell, after their passage through the gates of death, and have learned
that death is not only horrible for our not being here, but for being
infinitely, eternally miserable in a future world, nor so much for the
dissolution of life, as the beginning of torment those cannot without the
certain hope of their immunity, but carnally fear to die, and hellishly fear
to be dead: For if it be such pain to dye, what is it to be ever dying? and
if the strayning or luxation of one joint, can so afflict us, what shall the
racking of the whole body and the torturing of the soul, whose animation alone
makes the body to feel and complain of smart? and if men have devised such
exquisite torments, what can spirits, more subtle more malicious? and if our
momentany sufferinge seem long, how long shall that be that is eternal? and
if the sorrows i^ differently incide^t to Gods dear ones upon earth be so
extreme as sometimes to drive them within sight of despayring, what shall those
be that are reserved only for those that hate him, and that he hates? None
but those who have heard the desperate complaints of some guilty Spyra, or
whose souls have been a little scorched with these flames, can enough
conceive of the horror of this estate; it being the policy of our common
enemy to conceal it so long, that we may see and feel it at once: least we
should fear it, before it be too late to be avoided.

Sect. 17.
NOw when this great adversary, Remedy of the last and greatest breach of
peace, arising from Death.
^ike a proud Giant comes stalking out in his fearful shape, and insults over
our frail mortality, daring the world to match him with an equal champion,
whiles a whole host of worldlings show him their backs for fear, the true
Christian armed only with confidence and resolution of his future happiness
dares boldly en counter him, and can wound him in the forehead (the wonted
seat of terror) and trampling upon him can cut off his head with his own sword
and victoriously returning, can sing in Triumph Oh death where is thy s^ing! An
happy victory! we die and are not foiled: yea we are conquerors in dying: we
could not over come death, if we dyed not: That dissolution is well bestowed,
that parts the soul from the body that it may unite both to God: All our life
here (as that heavenly Doctor well terms it) is but a vital death how
aduantageous is that death that determines this false and dying life, Augustine.
and begins a true one, above all the titles of happiness? The Epicure or
Saducee, dare not dye for fear of not being; The guiltye and loose worldling
dare not dye for fear of being miserable; The distrustful and doubting
semi-christian dare not dye, because he knows not, whether he shall be, or
be miserable, or not be at all; The resolved Christian dare and would dye,
because he knows he shall be happy, and looking merrily toward heaven the
place of his rest can unfeignedly say, I desire to be dissolved: I see thee, my
home, I see thee; A sweet and glorious home, after a weary pilgrimage; I see
thee and now after many lingering hopes, I aspire to thee: How often have I
looked up at thee with admiration and rauishment of soul; and by the goodly
beams that I have seen gessed at the glory that is above them? How often have I
scorned these dead and unpleasant pleasures of earth, in comparison of thine? I
come now my joys, I come to possess you: I come through pain and death; Yea,
if hell it self were in the way betwixt you and me, I would paste through
hell it self to enjoy you. Tull. Tuscul. Cal^imach. Epigram.
And in truth if that heathen Cleombrotus a follower of the ancient Academy,
but upon only reading of his Master Platoes discourses of the immortality of
the soul, could cast down himself hedlong from an hye rock, and wilfully
break his neck, that he might be possessed of that immortality which he
believed to follow upon death, how contented should they be to dye that know
they shall be more then immortal glorious? August. de Here Is.
He went, not in an hate of the flesh as the Patrician heretics of old, but
in a blind love to his soul out of bare opinion: We upon an holy love
grounded upon assured knowledge: He upon an opinion of future life, we on
knowledge of future glory. He went unsent for, we called for by our maker: Why
should his courage exceed ours, since our ground, our estate so far exceedes
his; Even this age, within the reach of our memory, bred that peremptory*
Italian which in imitation of the old Roman courage (least in that degenerated
nation, there should be no step left of the qualities of their Ancestors)
entering upon his torment for killing a Tyrant, cheared himself with this
co^fide^ce. More acerba, Fama perpetua.
My death is sharp my fame shall be everlasting: The voice of a Roman, not of
a christian; My fame shall be eternal; An idle comfort: My fame shall live, not
my soul live to see it: What shall it avail thee to be talked of while thou
art not: Then fame only is precious when a man lives to enjoy it; The fame that
suruiues the soul, is bootles; Yet eue^ this hope cheared him against the
violence of his death; what should it do us that not our fame but our life, our
glory after death cannot die? He that has Stephens eyes to look into heaven
cannot but have the tongue of the Saints Come Lord. How long? That man seeing
the glory of the end, cannot but contemn the hardness of the way; But who
wants those eyes, if he say and swear that he fears not death, believe him
not If he protest his Tranquillity, and yet fear death, believe him not;
Believe him not if he say he is not miserable.

Sect. 18.
THese are enemies on the left hand. The second ra^ke of the enemies of Peace.
There want not some on the right; Which with less profession of hostilitye,
hurt no less; Not so easily perceived, because they distemper the mind not
without some kind of pleasure. Surfeit killes more then famine. These are the
ouer-desiring and ouer-ioying of these earthly things. Hippocr. Aphons.
All immoderations are enemies, as to health so to peace. He that desires,
wants as much, as he that has nothing. The drunken man is as thirsty, as the
sweating traveler: Hence are the studies, cares, fears, ielousies, hopes
griefs, enuies, wishes, platforms of atchiuing, alterations of purposes, and a
thousand like, whereof each one is enough to make the life troublesome. One is
sick of his neighbor field, whose misshapen angels disfigure his, and hinder
his Lordship of entirenes: what he has is not regarded, for the want of what
he cannot have. Another feeds on crusts to purchase what he must leave perhaps
to a fool, or (which is not much better) to a prodigal heir. Another, in the
extremity of covetous folly, chooses to die an unpitied death, hanging
himself for the fall of the market, while the commons laugh at that loss, and
in their speeches Epitaph upon him, as on that Pope. He lived as a wolf, and
died as a dog. One cares not what atte^dance he daunces at all hours, on whose
stairs he sits, what vices he sooths, deformities he imitates, what servile
offices he does, in an hope to rise. Another stomachs the covered head, and
stiff knee of his inferior; angry that other men think him not so good as he
thinks himself. Another eats his own heart with envy at the richer
furniture, and better estate, or more honor of his neighbor thinking his own
not good, because another has better: Another vexes himself with a word of
disgrace, past from the mouth of an enemy, which he neither can digest nor
cast up, resolving because another will be his enemy, to be his own, These
humors are as manifold, The first remedy of an over prosperous estate.
as there are men that seem prosperous: For the avoiding of all which
ridiculous and yet spightful inconveniences; The vanity and unprofitableness of
Riches.
the mind must be settled in a persuasion of the worthlessenesse of these
outward things; Let it know, The first enemy on the right hand.
that these riches have made many prouder, none better; That as never man was,
so never wise man thought himself better for enjoying them. Socrates.
Would that wise Philosopher, have cast his gold into the sea, if he had not
known he should live more happily without it? A proof that with Christians
deserves no credit, but with heathens commands it.
If he knew not the use of riches he was no wise man; if he knew not the best
way to quietness, he was no philosopher; now even by the voice of their oracle
he was confessed to be both, yet cast away his gold that he might be happy.
Would that wise prophet have prayed as well against riches, as poverty? Would so
many great me^ (whereof our little Ila^d has yielded 9. crowned kings, while it
was held of old by the Saxons) after they had continued their life in the
throne, have ended it in the cell, and changed their scepter for a book, if
they could have found as much felicity in the highest estate, as security in the
lowest? I hear Peter and John, the eldest and dearest Apostles, say Gold and
silver have I none, I hear the Devil say All these will I give thee, and they
are mine to give; Whether shall I desire to be in the state of these saints,
or that devil? He was therefore a better husband, then a philosopher, that first
termed riches, Goods, and he mended the title well, that adding a fit epithet,
called them goods of Fortune, False goods, ascribed to a false Patron, there is
no fortune to give or guide riches; there is no true goodness in riches to be
guided; His meaning then was (as I can interpret it) to teach us in this title;
that it is a chance if ever riches were good to any. In sum, who would
account those as riches, or those riches as goods, which hurt the owner,
disquiet others which the worst have, which the best have not, which those that
have, not, want not; which those want that have them, which are lost in a night
and a man is not worse when he has lost them? It is true of them that we say
of Fire and water, they are good servants, ill masters. Make them thy slave,
they shall be goods indeed, in use if not in nature; good to thy self, good
to others by thee: But if they be thy masters, thou have condemned thy self
to thine own Gallyes; If a servant rule, he proves a Tyrant; What madness is
this, thou have made thy self at once, a slave and a fool? What if thy
chains be of gold, or if with Heliogabalus thou have made thee silken
haliers? thy servitude may be more glorious, it is no less miserable.

Sect. 19.
Honor perhaps is yet better; The second enemy on the right hand Honor.
such is the confused opinion of those that know little; but a distinct and
curious head shall find an hard task to define in what point the goodness
thereof consists: Is it in hye descent of blood? I would think so, if nature
were tied by any law to produce children like qualited to their parents: But
although in the brute creatures she be ever thus regular, that ye shall never
find a young pigeo^ hatched in an eagles nest, neither can I think that true
(or if true it was monsterous) that Nicippus his sheep should yeane a Lion, yet
in the best creature (which has his form and her attending qualities from
above) with a likeness of face and features, is commonly found an unlikeness of
disposition: Only the earthly part follows the seed, wisdom, valor;
virtue are of another beginning: Shall I bow to a molten calfe because it was
made of golden eare-rings? Shall I condemn all honor of the first head (tho
upon never so noble deserving) because it can show nothing before it self but
a white shield? If Caesar or Agathocles be a Potters son shall I contemn him?
Or if wise Bion be the son of an infamous Curtizan, Olympia. Diog. Lae^^.
shall the censorious lawyer race him of the Catalogue with partus sequitur
ventrem? Lastly shall I account that good which is incident to the worst?
Either therefore greatness must show some charter wherein it is priueledged with
succession of virtue, or else the goodness of honor cannot consist in blood: Is
it then in the admiration and hye opinion that others have conceived of thee,
which draws all dutiful respect and humble offices from the^ to thee? Ofickle
good that is ever in the keeping of others especially of the unstable vulgar,
that beast of many heads, whose divided tongues, as they never agree with each
other, so seldo^e when ever agree long with the^selus. Do we not see the
superstitious Listrians, that ere-while would needs make Paul a God against his
will, and in devout zeal drew crowned Bulls to the altars, of their new Jupiter,
and Mercury? violence can scarce hold the^ from sacrificing unto him: Now not
many hours after gather up sto^s against him; having in their co^ceits turned
him from a God into a malefactor; and are ready to kill him in steed of killing
a sacrifice to him: Such is the multitude and such the steddines of their
honor: there the^ only is true honor where blood and virtue meet together, the
greatness whereof is from blood, the goodness from virtue; Rejoice ye great
men; that your blood is ennobled with the virtues and deserts of your
Ancestors? this only is yours, this only challenges all unfeigned respect of
your inferiors, count it praiseworthy not that you have, but that you deserve
honor. Blood may be tainted, the opinion of the vulgar cannot be constant
only virtue is ever like it self; and only wins reverence even of those that
has it; without which, greatness is as a Beacon of vice, to draw men's eyes the
more to behold it; and those that see it, dare loath it; tho they dare not
censure it: so while the knee bends, the mind abhors, and tells the
body it honors an unworthy subject, within it self secretly comparing that
vicious great man, on whom his submisse courtesy is cast away, to some goodly
fair bound Seneca^s Tragedies, Lucian
that is curiously gilded without; which if a man open he shall find Thyestes
the toomb of his own children; or Oedipus the husband of his own mother or
some such monstrous part, which he at once reads and hates.

Sect. 20.
LET him think that not only these outward things are not in themselves
good, The second remedy of ouer-ioyed prosperity.
but that they expose their owners to misery, for besides that God usually
punishes our ouer-louing them with their loss (because he thinks the^
unworthy riualls to himself, who challenges all height of love as his only
right) so that the way to loose is to love much, the largenes moreover either
of affection, or estate, maks an open way to ruin; while a man walks on plain
ground he falls not, or if he fall he does but measure his length on the
ground, and rise again with out harm, but he that climbeth hye is in danger
of falling, and if he fall of killing. All the sails hoised give vantage to a
tempest which by the mariners foresight giving timely room thereto by their
fall deliver the vessel from the danger of that gust whose rage now passes
over with only beating her with waves, for anger that he was prevented; So
the larger our estate is, the fayrer mark has mischief given to it; and
which is worse, that which makes us so easy to hit, makes our wound more deep
and greiuous: Inuen. sat. 4.
If poor Codrus his house burn, he stands by, and warms him with the flame,
because he knows it is but the loss of an outside, which by gathering some
few sticks, straw, and clay, may with little labor, and no cost be repaired: But
when the many lostes of the rich man do one give fire to another, be cries out
one while of his Countinghouse, another while of his wardrop, then of some
noted chest, and straight of some rich Cabinet, and lamenting both the frame
and the furniture, is therefore impatient because he had something.

Sect. 21.
But if there be any sorceresse upon earth, The vanity of Pleasure the third
enemy on the right hand.
it is pleasure, which so incha^teth the minds of men, and works the
disturbance of our Peace, with such secret delight, that foolish men think
this want of Tranquillity, happiness. She turns men into swine, with such
sweet charms, that they would not change their brutish nature for their
former reason. It is a good unquietness (say they) that contenteth it is a
good enemy that profits; Is it any wonder that men should be sortish, when
their reason is maistred with sensuality? Thou fool, thy pleasure contents
thee: How much? How long? If she have not more befriended thee then ever she
did any earthly favorite, yea if she have not given thee more then she has
her self thy best delight has had some mixture of coffeehouse; for either
some circu^sta^ce crosses thy desire, or the inward distaste of thy conscience
checking thine appetite, permits thee not any entire fruition of thy joy. Even
the sweetest of all flowers has his thorns; and who can determine whether the
sent be more delectable, or the pricks more yrksome? It is enough for heaven
to have absolute pleasures; which if they could be found here below, certainly
that heaven which is now not enough desired, would then be feared: God will
have our pleasures here, according to the fashion of our selves, compounded So
as the best delights, may still savor of their earth. See how that great King
which never had any match for wisdom, searce ever any superior forwealth,
trauersed over all this inferior world with diligent inquiry, and observation,
and all to find out that goodness of the children of men which they enjoy
under the Sun; abridging himself of nothing, that either his eyes, or his
heart could suggest to him; (as what is it, that he could not either know or
purchase?) and now coming home to himself, after the disquisition of all
natural and humane things, co^plaines, that Behold, all is not only vanity,
but vexation. Go then thou wise scholar of experience, and make a more
acurate search for that which he sought and missed. Perhaps somewhere betwixt
the tallest Cedar in Lebanon, and the shrubbie Hissop upon the wall? Pleasure
shrouded her self that she could not be descryed of him, whether through
ignorance or negligence; Thine insight may be more peircing, thy means more
commodious, thy success happier; If it were possible for any man to intertaine
such hopes, his vain experience could not make him a greater fool; it could
but teach him what he is, and knows not And yet so imperfect as our
pleasures are, they have their satietie: and as their continuance is not good,
so their conclusion is worse. Look to their end, and see how sudden, how
bitter it is. Their only courtesy is to salute us with a farewell, and such a
one as makes their salutation uncomfortable. This Dalila shows and speaks
fair but in the end she will bereave thee of thy strength, of thy sight, yea
of thy self. These gnats fly about thine ears, and make thee Music awhile
but evermore they sting ere they part: Sorrow and repentance is the best end of
pleasure, pain is yet worse, but the worst is despa^re. (...) of the ^^rst of
these, one of the latter shall (...) thee, perhaps both. How much better is it
for thee to want a little honey the^ to be swollen up with a venomous sting?

Thus then the mind resolved that these earthly things, Honors, wealth
Pleasures are casual, unstable, deceitful, imperfect dangerous must learn to
use them without trust and to want them without grief; thinking still if I
have them I have some benefit with a great charge, if I have the^ not with
little respect of others I have much security and ease in my self, which once
obtained we cannot fare amiss in either estate, and without-which we cannot
but miscarry in both.

Sect. 22.
ALL the enemies of our inward peace are thus descried and discomfited which
done, Positive rules of our peace.
we have enough to preserve us from misery, but since we moreover seek how
to be well and happily, there yet remain those positive rules whereby our
Tranquillity may be both had continued and confirmed: VVherin I fear not
least I should seem ouer-diuine, in casting the anchor of Quietness so deep as
heaven, the only seat of constancy, whiles it can find no hold at all upon
earth: All earthly things are full of variablenes, and therefore having no
stay in themselves, can give none to us. He that will have and hold right
Tranquillity must find in himself a sweet fruition of God and a (...)
apprehension of his presence. That when he finds manifold occasions of
vexation in these earthly things he ouer-looking them all, and having recourse
his comforter may find in him such matter of contentment, that he may pass
over al these petrye grieuances with contempt; which whose ever wants, may be
secure, cannot be quiet. The mind of man cannot want some refuge* and (as we
say of the Elephant) cannot rest unless it have something toleane upon: The
covetous man, whose heaven is his chest, when he hears him self rated and
cursed for oppression, comes home and seeing his bags safe, applaudes himself
against all censures: The glutto^ when he loses friends or good name; yet
joys in his full furnished table, and the laughter of his wine; more pleasing
himself in some one dish; then he can be grieved with all the worlds
mis-carriage: The needy scholar whose wealth lies al in his brain, chears
himself against iniquity of times, with the conceit of his knowledge. These
starting holes the mind cannot want when it is hard driven: Now when as, like
to some chased Sisera it shrowdes it self under the harbor of these Iaels
although they give it house-roome, and milk for a time, yet at last either they
entertain it with a nail in the temples, or being guilty to their own
impotency, send it out of themselves; for safety and peace. For if the Cross
light in that which it made his refuge as if the covetous man be crossed in
his riches what earthly thing can stay him from a desperate phrensy? Or if the
cross fall in a degree above the height of his stay, as if the rich man be
sick or dying (wherein all wealth is either contemned; or remembered with
anguish) how do all his comforts (like vermin from an house on fire) run
away from him, and leave him over to his ruin? VVhiles the soul, that has
placed his refuge above, is sure that the ground of his comfort cannot be
matched with an earthly sorrow, cannot be made variable by the change of any
eue^t but is infinitely above all casualtyes, and without all uncertainties.
What state is there wherein this heavenly stay shall not aforde me not only
peace but joy? Am I in prison? or in the hell of prisons, in some dark, low,
and desolate dungeon? Lo there, Pompon. Alger. Fox. Martyr.
Algerius that sweet Martyr finds more light then above, and pitties the
darkness of our liberty we have but a Sun to enlighten our world, which
every cloud dimmeth, and hides from our eyes, but the father of lights (in
respect of whom all the bright stars of heaven, are but as the snaffe of a
dim candle) shines into his pit, and the presence of his glorious Angels make
that an heaven to him, which the world purposed as an hell of discomfort. What
walls can keep out that infinite spirit, that filles al things? What
darkness can be where the God of this sun dwells? what sorrow where he
comfort? Am I wandering in banishment? Can I go whither God is not? what sea
can divide betwixt him and me? then would I fear exile if I could be driven
away as well from God, as my country. Now he is as much in all earthes; His
title is alike to all places, and mine in him: His sun shines to me, his sea
or earth bears me up, his presence cheareth me, whethersoeuer I go. He
cannot be said to flitte that never changes his host. He alone is a
thousand companions, he alone is a world of friends; that man never knew what
it was to be familiar with God that complains of the want of home; of friends
of companions while God is with him. Am I contemned of the world It is enough
for me that I am honored of God, of both I cannot: The world love me more, if I
were less friends with God: It cannot hate me so much as God hates it: what
care I to be hated of the^, whom God hates. He is unworthy of Gods favor that
cannot think it happiness enough with out the worlds? How easy is it for such a
man* whiles the world disgraces him at once to scorn and pity it, that it
cannot think nothing more contemptible then it self? I am empouerished with
losses: That was never thoroughly good, that may be lost: My riches will not
leese me yea, tho I forgo all to my skin, yet have I not lost any part of my
wealth For if he be rich that has something, how rich is he that has the
maker and owner of al things? I am weak and diseased in body; He cannot
miscarry that has his maker for his Physician: Yet my soul, the better part
is sound, for that cannot be weak, whose strength God is: How many are sick
in that and complain not: I can be content to be let blood in the arm or
foot, for the curing of the head or heart; The health of the principal part is
more joy to me then it is trouble to be distempered in the inferior. Let me
know that God favors me, the^ I have liberty in prison, home in banishment,
honor in contempt, in losses wealth, health in infirmity, life in death, and in
all these happiness: And surely if our perfect fruition of God be our complete
heaven, it must needs be, that our inchoate co^uersing with him is our heaven
imperfectly; and the entrance into the other* which (me thinks) differs from
this, not in the kind of it, but in degree: For the co^tinuatio^ of which happy
society (since stra^genes leeseth acquaintance, and breeds neglect) on our
part must be a daily renewing of heavenly familiarity, by seeking him up, even
with the co^te^pt of al inferior distractio^; by talking with him in our secret
inuocatio^s, by hearing his co^fere^ce with us; and by mutual intertainment of
each other in the sweet discourses of our daily meditatio^s; He is a sulle^ and
unsociable friend that wants words: God shall take no pleasur in us if we be
sile^t: The heart that is full of love cannot but have a busy tongue: Al our talk
with God is either Suites or Thanks: In them the christian heart pours out it
self to his maker, and would not change this privilege for a world: All his
annoiances, al his wants, all his dislikes are poured into the bosom of his
invisible friend who likes us still so much more as we ask more, as we
complain more; Oh the easy and happy recourse* that the poor soul has to
the hye throne of heaven* We stay not for the holding out of a golden scepter,
to warn our admissio^, before which our presence should be presumption and
death; No hour is unseasonable, no person too base, no words too homely, no
fact too hard, no importunity too great: we speak familiarly we are heard,
answered, comforted: Another-while God interchangeably speaks unto us by the
secret voice or his spirit; or by the audible sound of his word, we hear,
adore, answer him; By both which the mind so communicates it self to God,
and has God so plentifully communicated unto it, that hereby it grows to such
an habit of heauenlinesse, as that now it wants nothing but dissolution of full
glory.

Sect. 23.
OVt of this main ground once settled in the heart (like as so many rivers from
one common sea) flow those subordinate resolutions, The subordinate rules of
Tranquillity.
which we require as necessary to our peace, whether in respect of our
actions, or our estate. 1. For actions.
For our actions there must be a secret vow passed in the soul both of co^sta^t
refraining from what soever may offend that majesty we rest upon; and above
this, of true and Canonical obedience to God, without all care of difficulty,
and in spite of all contradictions of nature: Not out of the confidence of our
own power: Impotent men, who are we, that we should either vow or perform?
But as he said; Give what thou bid'st, and bid what thou will: Hence the
courage of Moses durst venture his hand to take up the crawling and hissing
Serpent; Hence Peter durst walk upon the Pauement of the waves; Hence that
Heroical spirit of Luther (a man made of metal fit for so great a work)
durst resolve and profess to enter into that forewarned cittye, tho there had
been as many devils in their streets as tiles on their houses: Both these
vows as we once solemnly made by others, so for our peace must we renew in
our selves. Thus the experienced mind both knowing that it has met with a good
friend, and withal what the price of a friend is; cannot but be careful to
retain him, and wary of displeasing and therefore to cut off all dangers of
variance, voluntarily takes a double oath of allegiance of it self to God;
which neither benefit shall induce us to break, if we might gain a world, nor
fear urge us thereto, tho we must leese our selves: The wavering heart that
finds continual combats in it self betwixt Pleasure and Conscience* so
equally matched that neither gets the day, is not yet capable of peace; and
whether ever over comes, is troubled both with resistance and victory. Barren
Rebecca found more ease, then when her twins struggled in her womb: If Jacob
had been there alone, she had not complained of that painful contention: One
while Pleasure holds the fort, and Conscience assaults it, which when it has
entered at last by strong hand, after many batteries of judgments denounced,
ere long pleasure either corruptes the watch, or by some cuning stratagem,
finds way to recover her first hold; so our part is ever atempting, and ever
resisting, betwixt both, the heart cannot have peace, because it resolves not;
For while the soul is held in suspense, it cannot enjoy the pleasure it uses,
because it is half taken up with fear; Only a strong and resolute repulse of
pleasure is truly pleasant; For therein the Conscience filling us with heavenly
delight, makes sweet Triumphs in it self; as being now the Lord of his
own dominions and knowing what to trust to No man knows the pleasure of this
thought, I have do^e well, but he that has felt it: and he that has felt it,
contemnes all pleasure to it. It is a false slander raised on Christianity,
that it makes men du^pish and melancholicke; for therefore are we heavy, because
we are not enough Christians. We have religion enough to mislike pleasures,
not enough to overcome the^; But if we be once conquerours over our selves
and have devoted our selves wholly to God, there can be nothing but heavenly
mirth in the soul. Lo here ye philosophers, the true Music of heaven, which
the good heart continually hears, and answeares it in the just measurs of joy
Others may talk of mirth as a thing they have hard of, or vainly fancied; Only
the Christian feels it; and in comparison thereof scorneth the idle ribaldish,
and scurrilous mirth of the profane.

Sect. 24.
AND this resolution which we call for, 2. Rule for our actions.
must not only exclude manifestly evil actions, but also doubting and
suspension of mind in actions suspected, and questionable; wherein the
judgment must ever give confident determination one way: For this Tranquillity
consists in a steddines of the mind; and how can that vessel which is beaten
upon, by contrary waves and winds, and tottereth to either part, be said to
keep a steady course? Resolution is the only mother of security. For
instance; I see that Usury, which was wont to be condemned for no better then
a Legal theft, has now obtained with many, the the reputation of an honest
trade: and is both used by many, and by some defended. It is pity that a bad
practice should find any learned or religious Patron: The sum of my
patrimony lies dead by me, sealed up in the bag of my father; my thriftier
friends advise me to this easy and sure improueme^t; Their counsel and my gain
prevail; my yearly sums come in with no cost, but of time, wax, parchme^t; My
estate likes it well: better then my conscience; which tells me still he doubts
my trade is too easy to be honest; Yet I continue my illiberall course not
without some scruple and contradiction; so as my fear of offense hinders the
joy of my profit, and the pleasure of my game, hartens me against the fear of:
injustice; I would be rich with case, and yet I would not be uncharitable, I
would not be unjust All the while I live in unquiet doubts, and distraction;
Others are not so much entangled in my bonds, as I in my own. At last that I
may be both just and quiet, I conclude to refer this case wholly to the
sentence of my inward judge, the Conscience, the Advocates, Gain and Justice
plead on either part at this bar with doubtful success. Gain informs the
Judge of a new and nice distinction of toothlesse and biting interest, and
brings presidents of particular cases of usury so far from any breach of
charity or justice, that both parts therein confess themselves aduantaged:
Justice pleades even the most toothlesse usury to have sharp gummes; and finds
in the most harmless and profitable, practice of it and insensible wrong to
the common body; besides the infinite wracks of private estates; The weak
judge suspends in such probable allegatio^s, and demurreth; as being overcome
of both, and of neither part: and leaves me yet no whit more quiet, no whit
less uncertain: I suspend my practice accordingly, being sure it is good not
to do, what I am not sure is good to be done; and now Gain* solicites me as
much as justice did before* Betwixt both I live troublesomely: Nor ever shall
do other, till in a resolute detestation I have whipped this evil merchant out
of the Temple of my heart: This rigor is my peace; Before I could not be
well, either full or fasting: Uncertainty is much pain, even in a more
tolerable action: Neither is it (I think) easy to determine, whether it be
worse to do a lawful act with doubting, or an evil with resolution: since
that within it self is good, is made evil to me by my doubt, and! what is in
nature evil, is in this one point not evil to me, that I do it upon a
verdict of a Conscience, so now my judgment offends in not following the truth
I offend not in that I follow my judgment: Wherein if the most wise God had
left us to roue only according to the aim of our own conjectures, it should
have been less faulty to be Skeptics in our actions, and either not to
judge at all, or to judge amiss: but how that he has given his a perfect rule
of eternal equity, and truth: whereby to direct the sentences of our judgment,
that uncertainty which allows no peace to us, will aforde us no excuse before
the tribunal of heaven: wherefore, then only is the heart quiet, when our
actions are grounded* upon judgment and our judgment upon Truth.

Sect. 25.
FOR his estate the quiet mind must first roll itself upon the providence of
the highest: Rules for estate.
For whosoever so casts himself upon these outward things that in their
prosperous estate here ioyceth* 1. Reliance upon the providence of God.
and co^trarily is cast down in their miscarriage, I know not whether he
shall find more vncertaintye of rest, or more certaintye of unquietness:
since he must needs be like a light vnballanced vessel, that rises and
falls with every wave, and depends only on the mercy of wind and water: But
who relyes on the inevitable decree, and all-seeing providence of God, which
can neither be crossed with second thoughts, nor with eue^ts unlooked for,
lays a sure ground of Tranquillity, Let the world toss how it list, and vary
it self (as it ever does) in storms and calms, his rest is pitched alo^t,
above the sphere of changeable mortality. To begin is harder then to prosecute*
What counsel had God in the first molding of thee in the womb of thy mother?
what aid shall he have in repairing thee from the womb of the earth? and if
he could make, and shall restore thee without thee why shall he not much more
(not without thy in deuor) dispose of thee? Is God wise enough to guide the
heavens and to produce all creatures in their kinds: and seasons and shall he
not be able to order thee alon? Thou say I have friends, and (which is my
best friend I have wealth, to make both them, and me; and wit to put both to
best use. O the broken reeds of human confidence! Who ever trusted on
friends that could trust to himself? Who ever was so wise, as not sometimes
to be a fool in his own conceit, often times in the conceit of others? Who was
ever more disco^tent then the wealthy? Friends may be false, wealth cannot but
be deceitful, wit has made many fools; Trust thou to that, which if thou
would cannot fail thee. Not that thou desire shall come to pass; but that
which God has decreed: Neither thy fears nor thy hopes, nor vows shall either
for slow or alter it. The unexperienced passenger when he sees the vessel go
amiss or too far, lays fast hold on the contrary part, or on the mast for
remedy, the Pilot laughs at his folly, knowing that (what ever ^e labors) the
bark will go which way the wind and his stern directs it. Thy goods are
embarked; Now thou wishest a direct Northwinde to drive thee to the Straytes*
and then a West to run in; and now, when thou have emptyed and laded again,
thou callst as earnestly for the South, and Southeast to return; and lowrest
if all these answer thee not: As if heaven and earth had nothing else to do
but to wait upon thy pleasure, and served only to be commanded service by
thee: Another that has contrary occasions asks for winds quite opposite to
thine: He that sits in heaven, neither fits thy fancy nor his, but bids his
winds spit sometimes in thy face, sometimes to favor thee with a sideblast,
sometimes to be boisterous otherwhiles to be sile^t at his own pleasure.
Whether the mariner sing or curse, it shall go whither it is sent; Strive or
lie still, thy destiny shall run on, and what must be, shall be; Not that we
should hence exclude benefit of means (which are always necessarily included
in this wise preordination of all things) but perplexity of cares, and
wrestling with providence. Oh the idle and ill spent cares of curious men, that
consult with stars, and spirits for their destinies, under color of
preuentio^; if it be not thy destiny, why would thou know it, what needs
thou resist it? If it be thy destiny, why would thou know that thou can not
prevent? That which God has decreede is already done in heaven, and must be
done on earth. This kind of expectation does but hasten slow evils, and
prolong them in their continuance; hasten them not in their event but in our
conceit: Shortly then if thou swimmest against the stream of this providence,
thou can not escape drowning, every wave turns thee over like a Porckpose
before a tempest; but if thou swim'st with the stream, do but cast thine arms
abroad thou passest with safetye, and with ease; it both bears thee up, and
carries thee on to the haue^, whither God has determined thine arrival in
peace.

Sect. 26.
NExt to this the mind of the Quiet man must be to wrought by these former
resolutions, The second rule for estate.
that it be throughlye persuaded the estate wherein he is, A persuasion of
the goodness and fitness of it for us.
is best of all; if not in it self, yet to him: Not out of pride, but out of
contentment: Which who ever wants, cannot but be continually vexed with envy*
and racked with ambition: Yea if it were possible to be in heaven without
this, he could not be happy: For it is as impossible to the mind at once to
long after, and enjoy, as for a man to feed and sleep at once. And this is the
more to be striuen for, because we are al naturally prone to afflict our selves
with our own frowardnes, ingratefully contemning al we have, for what we
would have Even the best of the Patriarks could say, O Lord what will thou give
me, since I go childlesse: The bond man desires now and control nature. Ovaine
fools whither does our restless ambition climb? What shall be at length, the
period of our wishes? I could not blame these desires, if contentment
consisted in having much, but now that he only has much that has contentment,
and that is as easily obtained in a low estate; I can account of these
thoughts no better then proudely foolish. Thou art poor? What difference is
there betwixt a greater man and thee save that he does his businesses by
others, thou do them thy self? He has Caters, Cooks, Bayliues, stewardes,
Secretaries, and all other offices for his several services, thou prouidest,
dressest, gatherest, receiuest, expendest, writest for thy self: His
patrimony is large, thine earnings small. If Briareus feed fifty bellies with
his hundredth hands, what is he the better, then he that with two hands feeds
one: He is served in silver, thou in vessel of the same color, of lesser
price; as good for use, tho nothing but liberty, that alone would make him
happy: Once free forgetting his former thought, he wishes some wealth to make
use of his freedom, and says it were as good be straited in place as in
ability; Once rich, he longs after nobility, thinking it no praise to be a
welthy peasa^t. Once noble he begins to deem it a base matter to be subject*
nothing can now content him but a croshn Then it is a small matter to rule, so
long as he has but little dominions, and greater neighbors; he would
therefore be an universal Monarch; Whither then? surely it vexes him as much,
that the earth is so small a globe, so little a molehill; and that there are no
more worlds to conquer; and now that he has attained the highest dignitye among
men, he would needs be a God, conceits his immortalitye, erects temples to
his own name commaundes his dead statues to be adored: And not thus
contented, is angry that he cannot command heaven in to solace himself; The
weight whereof varies according to our estimation of them: One has much
wealth, but no child to inherit it, he enuyes at the poor man's fruitfulness,
which has many heirs and no lands and could be content with all his
abundance to purchase a successor of his own loins. Another has many
children, little maintenance he comme^deth the careless quietness of the barren
and thinks fewer mouths and more meat would do better; The laboring man
has the blessing of a strong body fit to digest any fare, to endure any labor;
yet he wishes himself weaker, on condition he might be wealthier; The man of
nice education has a feeble stomach, and rasping since his last meal, doubts
whether he should eat of his best dish, or nothing; this man repines at
nothing more the^ to se his hu^gry plowman feed on a crust; and wishes to
change estates on condition he might change bodies with him: Say that God
should give thee thy wish, what not for value: His dishes are more dainty,
thine as well relished to thee, and no less wholesome: He eats olives, thou
garlic, he mislikes not more the smell of thy sauce, then thou do the taste
of his, Thou want somewhat that he has, he wishes something which thou
have, and regardest not: Thou could be content to have the rich man's purse,
but his gout thou woldst not have; He would have thy health, but not thy fare:
If we might pick out of all men's estates that which is laudable, omitting the
inconveniences we would make our selves complete; but if we must take
altogether, we should perhaps little advantage our selves with the change.
For the most wise God has so proportioned out every man's condition, that he
has some just cause of sorrow inseperably mixed with other co^tentme^ts; and
has allotted to no man living, an absolute happiness without some grieuances;
nor to any man such an exquisite misery, as that he finds not somewhat wherein
would thou desire? Let me (thou say) be wise helthfull, rich, honorable,
strong, learned, beautiful immortal: I know thou love thy self so well,
that thou can wish all these, and more; But say that God has so shared out
all these gifts by a most wise and just distribution, that thou can have but
some of these, perhaps but one; Which would thou single out for thy self?
Any thing beside what thou have: If learned, thou would be strong, if strong
honorable, if honorable long-liued; Some of these thou art already. Thou fool;
Cannot God choose better for thee, then thou for thy self? In other matches
thou trustest the choice of a skillfuller chapman; when thou see a goodly
horse in the fair (tho his shape please thine eye well) yet thou dare not
buy him, if a cunning horsemaister shall tell thee he is faulty and art
willing to take a playner and sou^der, on his co^me^datio^ against thy fa^cy:
How much more should we in this case allow his choice that cannot deceive us;
that cannot be deceived? But thou know that other thou desire, better
then what thou have; Better perhaps for him that has it, not better for thee:
Liberty is sweet and profitable to those that can use it; But fetters are
better for the frantic man: Wine is good nourishment for the healthful,
poison to the aguish; It is good for a sound body to sleep in a whole skin, but
he that complains of swelling sores cannot sleep till it be broken: Hemlock to
the goat, and spiders to the monky turn to good sustenance, which to other
creatures are accounted deadly; As in diets so in estimation of good and evil,
of greater and lesser good; there is much variety: All palats commend not one
dish, and what one commends for most delicate, another reiects for unsavory.
And if thou know what dish is most pleasant to thee, thy Physician knows best
which is wholesome: Thou would follow thine appetite too much and (as the
French have in their proverb) woldst dig thy own grave with thy teeth; thy
wise physician ouersees and ouerrules thee: He sees if thou were more esteemed,
thou would be proud, if more strong, licentious, if richer, covetous, if
health fuller, more secure; But thou think not thus hardly of thy self Fond
man, what know thou futur things? believe thou him that only knows what
would be, what will be; Thou would willingly go to heaven, what better
guide can thou have, then him that dwells there? If he lead thee thorough
deep sloughes, and brackie thickets, know that he knows this the nearer way
though more cumbersome: can there be in him any want of wisdom not to foresee
the best? Can there be any want of power not to effect the best? Any want of
love not to give thee what he knows is best? How can thou then fail of the
best? Since what his power can do, and what his wisdom sees should be done,
his love has done, because all are infinite: He wills not things because
they are good, but they are good because he wills them: Yea if ought had been
better, this had not been; God wills what he does, and if thy will accord
not with his, whether will thou condemn of imperfection?

Sect. vlt.
I Have chalked out the way of peace; The conclusion of the whole
what remains* but that we walk along in it. I have co^ducted my reader to the
mine, yea to the mint of happiness, and showed him those glorious heaps, which
may eternally enrich him. If now he shall go away with his hands and skirt
empty; how is he but worthy of a miserable want? who shall pity us while we
have no mercy on our selves? wilful distress has neither remedy nor
compassion: And to speak freely, I have often wondered at this painful folly of
us men, which in the open view of our peace, as if we were condemned to a
necessary and fatal unquietness, live upon our own rack, finding no more joy
then if we were under no other hands, but our executioners. One droupeth
under a fained evil, another augments a small sorrow through impatience,
another draws upon himself an uncertain evil through fear; one seeks true
contentment, but not enough; another has just cause of joy, and perceiues it
not: One is vexed for that his grounds of joy are matched with equal
grieuances; another cannot complain of any present occasion of sorrow, yet
lives sullenly, because he finds not any present cause of comfort; One is
haunted with his sin, another distracted with his passion: Amongst all which,
he is a miracle of men, that lives not some way discontented. So we live not
while we do live, only for that we want either wisdom, or will, to
husband our lives to our own best advantage. O the inequalitye of our cares!
Let riches or honor be in question; we sue to them, we seek for them with
importunitye, with servile ambition: Our pains need no solicitor; Yea there
is no way wrong that leads to this end: We abhor the patience to stay till
they inquire for us. And if ever (as it rarely happens) our desert and
worthiness winnes us the favor of this profer, we meet it with both hands,
not daring with our modest denyalles to whet the instancy, and double the
entreaties of so welcome suitors; Yet lo, here the only true and precious
riches, the highest advancement of the soul, peace and happiness, seeks for us,
sues to us for acceptance; our aunswers are coy and ouerly, such as we give to
those clients that look to gain by our favors. If our want were through the
scarcity of good, we might yet hope for pittye to ease us, but now that it is
through negligence, and that we perish with our hands in our bosom, we are
rather worthy of stripes for the wrong we do our selves, then of pity for
what we suffer. That we may and will not, in opportunity of hurting others* is
noble and Christian but in our own benefit sluggish, and savoring of the
worst kind of unthriftiness.

Say thou then this peace is good to have, but hard to get? It were a
shameful neglect that has no pretense: Is difficulty sufficient excuse to
hinder thee from the pursuit of riches, of preferment, of learning, of bodily
pleasures? Art thou content to sit shrugging in a base cottage, ragged,
affamished, because house, clothes, and food will neither be had without money,
nor money without labor, nor labor without trouble and painfulness? Who is
so merciful, as not to say that a whip is the best alms for so lazy and
wilful need? Peace should not be good, if it were not hard: Go, and by
this excuse shut thy self out of heaven at thy death and live miserabely til
thy death, because the good of both worlds is hard to compass. There is
nothing but miserye on earth and hell below, that thou can come to without
labor; And if we can be content to cast away such immoderate and
unseasonable pains upon these earthly trifles, as to wear our bodies with
violence, and to incroach upon the night for tim^ to get them; what madness
shall it seem in us not to afforde a less labor to that which is infinitely
be^ter, and which only gives worth and goodness unto the other? Wherefor if we
have not vowed enmity with our selves if we be not in love with misery and
vexation, if we be not obstinatly careless of our own good; let us shake off
this unthrifty, dangerous and desperate negligence, and quicken these dull
hearts to a lively and effectual search of what only can yield them sweet
and abiding contentment; which once attained; How shall we insult over evils,
and bid them do their worst? How shall we under this calm and quiet bay laugh
at the rough weather and vnsted dye motions of the world? How shall heaven and
earth smile upon us, and we on them; comma^ding the one; aspiring to the other?
How pleasant shall our life be, while neither ioies nor sorrows can distemper
it with excess? yea while the matter of joy that is within us, turns all the
most sad occurrences into pleasure? How dear and welcome shall our death be
that shall but lead us from one heaven to another, from peace to glory? Go
now ye vaye and idle worldlinges, and please your selves in the large extent
of your rich Manors, or in the homage of those whom baseness of mind has
made slaves to your greatness, or in the price and fashions of your full
wardrop; or in the wanton varietyes of your delicate gardens; or in your cofers
full of red and white earth, or if there be any other earthly thing more
alluring, more precious, enjoy it, possess it, and let it possess you: Let
me have only my peace and let me never want it, till I envy you.

FINIS.
The Errata.
Read Moralists page, 2, of the epist. Morality p. 15 l. pen. Antoninus p. 21.
margent. on the one hand p. 2^. l. 8. feends p. 26. l. 10. Remembra^cer. p. 52.
l. 17. differrings p. 53. l. pen. their remiss p. 58, l. 9, dismembered p. 60.
l. pen. ferule. p. 62 l, 8. say ou^^ p. 62, l. vlt. asswageth. p. 65. l. 10,
la^guishing, p. 83, l, 14. even p. 87. l. 5. even p. 90. l. 18. now it p. 106.
l. ^. hate it p. 139. l. 1. lofts p. 143. l. 5 wall pleasure p. 148. l. 18.
world would love me p. 161. l. 10. one part. p. 172. l. pen. my gain p. 178. l.
7. an insensible p. 180 l. 2. which in it self p. 181. l. vlt. kinds and
seasons p. 186. l. 15.


