THE Best Bargain. A SERMON preached to the Court at Theobalds, on Sunday,
Sept. 21, 1623.

By Ios. HALL D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Haviland for Nath. Butter. 1623.



TO THE RIGHT Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke, Lord High Chamberlain;
CHANCELLOVR of the University of Oxford; One of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable
Privy Counsel.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
LEt it please you to receive from the Press what you vouchsafed to require
from my pen: Unworthy I confess either of the public light, or the beams of
your Honors judicious eyes; yet such as (besides the motive of common
importunity) I easily apprehended might be not a little us full for the times;
which, if ever, require quickening: Neither is it to no purpose that the world
should see in what style we speak to the Court, not without acceptance.
This, and what ever service I may be capable of, are justly devoted to your
Lordship, whom all good hearts follow with true Honor, as the great Patron of
learning, the sincere friend of Religion, and rich purchaser of Truth. The God
of Heaven add to the number of such Peers, and to the measure of your Lo:
graces and happiness.

Your Honors in all humble and faithful observance, Ios: Hall.


THE BEST Bargain.
PROVE. 23.23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not.
THe subject of my Text is a Bargain, and Sale. A bargain enjoined, a sale
forbidden: and the subject of both bargain and sale, is Truth; A bargain able
to make us all rich; a sale able to make any of us miserable; Buy the Truth,
and sell it not; A sentence of short sound, but large extent; the words are but
seven syllables, an easy load for our memories, the matter is a world of
work; a long task for our lives. And first, let me call you to this Mart,
which holds both now, and ever; If ye love your selves be ye customers at this
shop of heaven; Buy the Truth.

In every bargain there is merx, and mercatura; the commodity, and the match;
The commodity to be bought is the Truth; the match made for this commodity,
is Buying, Buy the Truth. An ill Judge may put a good Interrogatorie; yet it
was a question too good for the mouth of a Pilate, What is Truth? The schools
have wearied themselves in the solution; To what purpose should I read a
Metaphysicall Lecture to Courtiers? Truth is as Time, one in all; yet, as Time,
though but one, is distinguished into past, present, future, and every thing
has a Time of it own; so is Truth variously distinguished, according to the
subjects wherein it is; This is Anselmes, cited by Aquinas; I had rather say,
Truth is as light: ( Send forth thy Truth, and thy light, says the Psalmist)
which (though but one in all) yet there is one light of the Sun, another of
the Moon, another of the Stars, another of this lower air: There is an
essential, and causall Truth in the Divine understanding, which the schools
call Primo-primam; This will not be sold, cannot be bought; God will not part
with it, the world is not worth it; This Truth is as the Light in the body of
the Sun. There is an intrinsecall or formal truth in things truly existing;
For, Being and True are conuertible; and Saint Austen rightly defines Verum est
illud quod est; All this created Truth in things, is derived exemplarily, and
causally, from that increated Truth of God; this the schools call
Secundo-primam; and it is as the light of the Sunbeams, cast upon the Moon,
and Stars. There is an extrinsecall, or secondary truth of propositions
following upon, and conformable to the truth of the things expressed: thus,
Verum is no other than Esse declaratiuum, as Hilarie; And this Truth, being in
the thing it self subiectiuely, in words expressiuely, in the mind of man
terminatiuely, presupposes a double conformity or adequation; Both of the
understanding to the matter conceived; and of the words to the understanding;
so as Truth is when we speak as we think, and think as it is; And this Truth
is as the light diffused from those heavenly bodies, to the Region of this
lower air; This is the Truth we are called to Buy: But this deriuatiue and
relative Truth, whether in the mind, or in the mouth, has much multiplicitie,
according to the matter either conceived, or uttered; There is a Theological
Truth, there is a natural, there is a moral, there is a civil; All these
must be dear bought; but the best at the highest rate, which is Theological,
or divine; whether in the principles, or necessary conclusions; The principles
of divine Truth are Scriptura veritatis, Dan. 10. The Law of Truth, Mal. 2. The
word of Truth, 2. Cor. 6. The necessary conclusions are they, which upon
irrefragable inferences are deduced from those holy grounds: Shortly then,
every parcel of Divine Truth, whether laid down in Scripture, or drawn
necessarily from Scripture, is this Mercimonium sacrum, which we are bidden to
Buy; Buy the Truth.

This is the commodity; The match is, Buy; that is, Beat the price, and pay
it. Buy it; Of whom? For what? Of whom, but of the owner, of the Maker?

The owner; It is Veritas Domini, Gods Truth, Psalm. 117. His style is, the Lord
God of Truth, Psalm. 31. The Maker; The works of his hand are truth, and
judgment, Psalm. 111. And if any usurping spirit of error shall have made a
free-bootie of Truth, and shall withold it in unrighteousness, we must
redeem it out of his hands with the highest ransom.

What is the price? That is the maine thing in buying; For, Buying is no other
than pactio pretij: Elsewhere God proclaims; Hoe, every one that thirsts,
come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price, Esa. 55. This is a
Donation, in form of sale: But, here must be a price in the hand; God will
give mercy, and not sell it; He will sell Truth, and not give it: For what will
he sell it? First, for Labor; The Heathen Poet could say, his gods sold
learning for sweat; The original word here used is ((...)) Compara; Get it any
way, either labor, or precio; yea labor, vt precio. This great foreman of
Gods shop tells us we cannot have it, under. Prou. 2.4. We must seek for her
as silver, and search for her, as for hid Treasures; The vein of Truth lies
low, it must be dug, and delued for to the very center. If Truth could be
bought with ease and pleasure, many a lazy Christian would bid fair for it,
who now resolve rather upon want, than toil. The slothful worldling will
rather take up a falsehood for Truth, than beat his brain to discern Truth
from falsehood; an error of free-cost is better than an high-rated Verity;
Labor for Truth is turned over for the task of Churchmen; no life savors to
these flegmaticke Spirits, but that of the Lillies, Neque laborant, neque nent;
They neither labor nor spin; This dull resolution is unworthy of a Christian,
yea of a reasonable soul; and if we should take up no other for the body, we
should be fed with hunger, and clothed with nakedness, the earth should be
our fether-bed, and the sky our Canopy, we should abound with want, live
sauagely, and die miserably. It was the just Canon of the Apostle, He that
labors not, let him not eat; Certainly, he can never eat of the heavenly Manna
of Truth, that will not step forth to gather it: Hear this ye delicate
Courtiers, that would hear a Sermon if ye could rise out of your beds; that
would lend God an hour, if ye could spare it from your pleasures; the God of
heaven scorns to have his precious Truth so basely undervalued; if ye bid God
less than labor for Truth, I can give you no comfort, but that ye may go to
hell with ease.

The markets of Truth as of all other commodities vary: It is the rule of
Casuists, Iustitia pretij non consistit in indiuiduo; The Justice of the Price
does not pitch ever upon a point; Sometimes the price of Truth has risen, it
would not be bought but for danger, sometimes, not under loss, not under
disgrace, not under imprisonment, not under exile, sometimes yet dearer, not
under pain, yea sometimes it has not gone for less than blood. It did cost
Elias danger, Michaiah disgrace, Jeremy imprisonment, the Disciples loss,
John and Athanasius exile, the holy Confessors pain, the holy Martyrs death;
Even the highest of these is pretium legitimum, if God call for it, how ever
nature may tax it as rigorous, yea such as the frank hearts of faithful
Christians have bidden at the first word for Truth; What do ye weeping, and
breaking my heart; For I am ready not to be bound only, but to die for the name
of the Lord Jesus, says S. Paul, Act. 21. Skin for skin, yea all that a man
has will he give for his life, says Satan; but skin, and life, and all must a
man give for Truth, and not think it an hard pennyworth; Neither count I my
life dear unto me that I may finish my course with joy, says the chosen
vessel, to his Ephesians. Oh the heroical spirits of our blessed forefathers,
that stuck not to give their dearest heart-bloud for but some corollaries of
sacred Truth; whose burning zeal to Truth consumed them before those fires of
Martyrdom, and sent up their pure and glorious souls, like Manoah's Angel,
to heaven, in the flame. Blessed be God; Blessed be his Anointed, under whose
gracious Scepter we have inioyed days as much more happy than theirs, as their
hearts were more fervent than ours: We may now buy Truth at a better hand;
stake but our labor, we carry it with thanks; I fear there want not those
that would be glad to mar the market; It can be only known to heaven what
treacheries the malice of hell may be a brewing. Had but that powder once
taken, nothing had been abated of the highest price of our predecessors; We
had paid for every dram of Truth, as many ounces of blood, as ever it cost the
frankest Martyr; should the Devil have been suffered to do his worst, we
might not have grudged at this price of Truth, Non est delicata in Deum, and
secura confessio; qui in me credit, debet suum sanguinem fundere, says Jerome.
Christian profession is no secure or delicate matter, he that believes must be
no niggard of his blood. But why thus dear? Not without good reason:
Monopolies use to enhaunce the price: Ye can buy Truth at no shop but one, In
coelo praeparata est Veritas tua, Psalm. 89.2. Thy truth is prepared in heaven.
And it is a just Rule of Law, Quisque in rebus suis est moderator, and arbiter:
Every man may rate his own: Neither is this only the sole commodity of God,
but besides, dear to the owner. Dilexisti veritatem; Thou have loved Truth,
says the Psalmist. And it is a true rule in the Cases of Commerce, Affectus
aestimari potest, Our love may be valued in the price. Yea, O God, thy love to
Truth cannot be valued; It is thy self, Thou that art Truth it self have said
so, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; we cannot therefore know how much
thou love thy Truth, because as thy self is infinite, so is thy love to thy
self: What should we hunt for comparisons? If all the earth were gold, what
were it? when even very heaven it self is trash to thee in respect of Truth:
No marvel if thou set it at an high rate; It is not more precious to thee,
than beneficial to us. It frees us, Ioh. 8.32. It renues us, Iam. 1.18. It
confirms us, Prove. 12.19. It sanctifies us, Ioh. 17.17. It defends us, Psalm.
91.4. Shortly, it does all for us that God does, for God works by his Almighty
word, and his word is Truth, Ioh. 17. Therefore buy the Truth. And if Truth be
thus precious, thus beneficial; how comes it to pass that it is neglected,
contemned? Some pass by it, and do not so much as cheapen it; Others cheapen
it, but bid nothing; Others bid something, but under foot; Others bid well, but
stake it not; Others lastly stake down, but revoke it. The first that pass by
and cheapen it not, are careless unbelievers; The next that cheapen it, and
bid nothing, are formal Christians; The third that bid something but not
enough, are worldly semi-Christians; The fourth that bid well and stake it nor,
are glorious hypocrites; The last that stake down and revoke it, are damnable
Apostats. Take all these out of the society of men; and how many customers has
God that care to buy the Truth? If Truth were some rich chattell, it would be
bought; If Truth were some goodly Lordship, or the reuersion of some good
Office, it would be bought; If Truth were some Benefice; or spiritual
promotion (Oh times!) it would be bought; Yea, how dear are we content to pay
for our filthy lusts; we will needs purchase them (too often) with shame,
beggary, disease, damnation; Only the saving Truth of God will not off hand.
What is the reason of this? First of all; It is but bare, simple, plain,
honest, homely Truth, without welt, without guard; It will abide none but
native colors, it scorneth to woo favor with farding, and licking, and
counterfaisance; it hates either bought, or borrowed beauty; and therefore,
like some native face among the painted, looks course, and rusty. There are
two shops that get away all the custom from Truth, The shop of Vanity, the
shop of Error; The one sels knacks and gew-gawes, the other false wares, and
adulterate; both of their commodities are so gilded, and gaudy, and glittering,
that all fools throng thither, and complain to want elbow-roome, and strive
who shall be first served; whereas the secret work of artlesse, and unpolished
Truth can win no eye to view it, no tongue to ask so much, as, What will it
cost me? Oh ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity, and seek after
lies?

Secondly, though Truth in it self be always excellent, yet the issue of it
is not seldom distasteful; Veritas odium: There is one Michaiah whom I hate:
Am I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? And this is the cause
that Friar Menot alleges, why Truth in this Time was so unwelcome to the
Court. But if Truth be the mother of Hatred, she is the daughter of Time, and
Truth has learned this of Time, to devour her own brood; So that, in Time,
Truth shall consume hatred; and at the last, a galling Truth shall have more
thanks, than a smoothing supparisitation. In the mean time, Veritas nihil
erubescit praeterquam abscondi; Truth blusheth at nothing but secrecy, as
Tertullian.

How ever then fond, or false hearts value the Truth, let us, that should be
wise Christians, esteem it as the pearl hid in the field, which the man sold
all that ever he had to purchase. Would it not set any heart on fire with an
holy anger, to see what the enemies of Truth bid, and give for falsehood, for
faction? Their liberty, their country, the life of their Sovereign, the
eternal state of their souls has not seemed too dear to cast away upon an
ill bargain of mis-religion; and shall not we bid so much as our zealous
well-wishes, our effectual endeavors, our careful obseruances for the
undoubted Truth of our Maker and Redeemer? What shall I say to the miserable
and stupid carelessness of these thriftlesse and godless times; wherein every
thing is apprised, every thing is bought, save that which is most precious,
most beneficial, Truth. Ye great ones are made for precedents to the inferior
world; your example is able to bring either good or evil into fashion; For
Gods sake, for your souls sake, what ever transactions ye make for the world,
lay your plots for the blessed purchase of Truth; Oh let not your fickle
honors, your vnsatisfying pleasures, your worthless profits, yea your
momentanie lives seem dear to you in comparison of heavenly Truth. It is no
shame in other parts for great Peers to be Merchants; Mercatores tui erant
principes, says the Angel concerning Babylon, Revel. 18. Thy Merchants were
the Princes of the earth; And why should not ye great ones be the Merchants
of Truth? Blessed be the God of Truth, ye are so. It is no proud word to say,
That no Court under heaven has so rich a stock of Truth, as this of Great
Britain; yet let me tell you, the very Angels knew not so much, but they
desired to know more, Ephesians. 3.10. And if ye had already that vespertine
knowledge of the Saints, which ye shall once have in heaven, yet know that
this bargain stands not more in the judgment, than in the affections: What
ever our speculations may be, if our hearts be not set upon Truth, we may be
Brokers, we are not Merchants; Brokers for others, not Merchants for our
selves. As our Savior then, when he bids us sell all, forsake all, holds it
done, when in preparation of mind we are ready to abdicate all for his name,
though we do it not; so does God hold us to buy Truth, when we bestow our
best thoughts, our dearest well-wishes upon it, though we have it already. Oh
stir up your languishing zeal, ye noble Courtiers, rouse up your drouping
love to divine Truth; Give your hearts to it, ye cannot but give all for it;
And if ye do not find the sweet gain of this bargain, in this lower Region
of error; and confusion, ye shall once find it in those eternal, and
empireall habitations of Truth, where the God of Truth shall make up the Truth
of his promises, with the everlasting truth of his glorious performances; where
Mercy, and Truth shall so meet, and embrace one another, that both of them
shall embrace the faithful soul, for ever and ever.

This for the Bargain of Truth; The forbidden sale follows*: sell it not.
Commonly what we buy, we may sell. Alexander, not the Great, but the Good,
sold Miters, Keys, Altars; the verse gives the reason; Emerat ille prius, He
bought them. So Saint Austen of Simon Magus, Volebat emere spiritum Sanctum,
quia vendere volebat spiritum Sanctum; He would buy the Holy Ghost, because he
meant to sell it. Give me a man that buys a Seat of Judicature; I dare not
trust him for not selling of Justice; he that sits in the chair of Symonie,
will not give Orders; will not stick to sell souls. Some things we may buy to
sell, as Joseph did the Egyptian corn; some things we must sell, if we buy, as
an Israelites Inheritance, Leuit. 25. But here we are charged to buy what it is
a sin to sell; Buy the Truth, and sell it not; There is many a good thing ill
sold; Esau sels his birthright for pottage; Hanun and Shechem sell their
Country for love; Dalilah sels her lover for a bribe; The Patriarchs sell their
Brother for twenty silver rings; Haman sels the Jews for naught. The Gentiles
sell the Jewish girls for wine, Joel 3.3. Israel sels the righteous for
silver, and the poor for shoes, Amos 2.6. Their Judges sell sins or
innocence for rewards, Esa. 5.23. Abab sels himself to wickedness; Judas sels
his master; Demas sels the Truth; All these make an ill market; And in all it
is a surerule, the better the commodity is, the more pernicious is the sale.
The indefinitenesse of the charge implies a generality. Buy it at any price;
At no price sell it. It is the savor of God that it may be bought for any
rate; It is the Justice of God, that upon any rate it should not be sold: As
buying and selling are opposites in relation; So that for which we must not
sell Truth is opposite to that for which we may buy it. We must buy it with
labor, therefore we may not sell it for ease; If need be we must buy it with
loss, therefore we may not sell it for gain; we must buy it with disgrace, we
may not sell it for honor; we must buy it with exile or imprisonment; we may
not sell it for liberty; we must buy it with pain, we may not sell it for
pleasure; We must buy it with death, we may not sell it for life; Not for any,
not for all of these may we sell Truth; this were damnosa mercatio, as
Chrysostom: In every bargain and sale there must be a proportion; now ease,
gain, honor, liberty, pleasure, life, yea worlds of all these are no way
counteruaileable to Truth; For what shall it profit a man to win the whole
world, and leese his own soul? And he cannot sell Truth, but his soul is
lost: And if any thing in the world may seem a due price of Truth, it is
Peace. Oh sweet and dear name of Peace, the good news of Angels, the joy of
good men! who can but affect thee, who can but magnify thee? The God of heaven
before whom I stand, from whom I speak, knows how often, how deeply I have
mourned for the divisions of his Church, how earnestly I have set my hand on
work upon such poor thoughts of reunion, as my meannesse could reach; But when
all is done, I still found we may not offer to sell Truth for Peace. It is true
that there be some Scholasticall and immateriall Truths (the infinite
subdiuisions whereof have rather troubled than informed Christendom) which for
the purchase of peace might be kept in, and returned into such safe
generalities as minds not unreasonable might rest in; but sold out they may not
be; If some Truths may be contracted into a narrower room, none may be
contracted for; Qui diuinis innutriti sunt eloquijs, as that Father said; Those
that are trained up in divine Truths may not change a syllable for a world.
Tene quod habes, Hold that thou have, is a good rule in all things; which if in
temporalties it were well observed, we should not have so many gallants
squander away their inheritances to live Cameleon-like upon the air of favor;
But how ever this be too well observed in these earthly things by frugall hands,
which take as if they were quick, hold as if they were dead, yet in spiritual
graces it can never be observed enough; We get Truth, we buy it as Jacob did
his birthright, to keep, to enjoy, not to sell again: If therefore the
world, if Satan shall offer to grease us in the fist for Truth, let us answer
him as Simon Peter did Simon the Sorcerer, Thy money perish with thee, because
thou have thought the Truth of God may be purchased with money.

What shall we say then to those pedling petty-chapmen which we meet withal in
every market, that will be bartring away the Truth of God for trifles? Surely
the form of our spiritual market is contrary to the civil; In our civil
markets there are more buyers than sellers; there would be but poor takings,
if many did not buy of one; but in the spiritual, there are more Sellers of
Truth, than Buyers.

Many a one sels that he never had, that he should have had, the Truth of God;
Here one chops away the Truth for Fear or Ambition; There another lets it go
for the old shoes of a Gebeonitish pretense of Antiquity; Here one parts
with it for a painted, gilded hobbyhorse of an outwardly pompous magnificence
of the Church; there another for the bables of childish superstition; One for
the fancies of hope, another for the breath of a colloguing Impostor; Amongst
them all, Diminutae sunt veritates a filijs hominum, Psalm. 12. Truth is failed
from the children of men: Yea as Esaias complained in his time, Corruit in platea
veritas, Esa. 59.14. Truth is fallen in the streets. What a shame it is to see,
that in this clear and glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, under the pious
government of the True Defender of the Faith, there should not want some souls
that should trucke for the Truth of God, as if it were some Cheapside, or some
Smithfield-Commoditie. Commutauerunt veritatem Dei; They have changed the Truth
of God into a lie, Romans 1.25. And all their care is, that they may be deceived
good cheap.

Whose heart cannot bleed to see so many well-rigg'd and hopeful Barks of our
young Gentry, laden with the most precious Merchandises of Nature and Grace,
hall'd in every day to these deceitful Ports of Error, the owners partly
cheated, partly robbed of Truth, despoiled of their rich freight, and at last
turned ouer-boord into a sea of Desperation. Oh foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey, that ye should not hold fast the
Truth; Where shall I lay the fault of this mis-carriage? Me thinks I could
ask the Disciples question, Nunquid ego Domine, Is it we Lord? Are there of
us that preach our selves and not Christ? Are there that preach Christ, and
live him not? Woe to the world because of offenses. It must needs be that
offenses should come, but woe to the man by whom the offense comes: God
forbid that we should be so bad that the seuen-hils should not justify us; But
what ever we be, the Truth is still, and ever it self, neither the better for
our innocence, nor worse for our guilt. If men be faulty, what has Truth
offended? Except the sacred word of the everliving God can mis-guide you, we
have set you right. We are but Dust and Ashes, yet, O God, give us thine humble
vassals leave in an awful confidence so far to contest with thee, the Lord
of heaven and earth, as to say, If we be deceived, thou have deceived us. It is
thou that have spoken by us to thy people; Let God be True, and every man a
Lier; Whither should we go from thee, thou have the words of eternal life.
Dear Christians, our forefathers transmitted to us the entire inheritance of
the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, repurchased by the blood of their
martyrdom; Oh let not our ill husbandry impair it; Let not posterity once
say, they might have bin happy, but for the unthriftiness of us their
progenitors; Let it not be said, that the coldness of us the teachers, and
professors of Truth has dealt with Religion as Rehoboam did with his shields,
which he found of Gold, but left of Brass. If Truth had no friends, we should
plead for it, but now that we have before our eyes so powerful an (...) of
Christian faith, that with his very pen has so laid error upon the back, that
all the world cannot raise it, what a shame were it to be wanting to him, to
Truth, to our selves?

But perhaps now, I know some of your thoughts; you would buy Truth (ye think)
you would hold it, if ye could be sure to know it; There are many slips
amongst the true coin; Either of the mothers pleaded the living child to be
hers, with equal protestations, oaths, tears. True; Yet a Salomons sword can
divide Truth from falsehood; and there is a test, and fire that can discern
true metals from adulterate; In spite of all counterfeiting there are certain
infallible marks, to know Truth from Error; Take but a few of many; whether in
the originals, in the natures, in the ends of both. In the first, Truth is
divine, Error is humane; what is grounded upon the divine word must needs be
irrefragably true; that which upon humane Traditions, either must, or may be
erroneous. In the second, Truth is one, conform ever to it self, (...), as
one said; Omne verum omni vero consonat, All truth accords with every Truth, as
Gerson; and as it is pure, so peaceable; Error is full of dissonance, of
cruelty: No particulars of ours dissent from the written verity of God; We
teach no man to equivocate; Our practice is not bloody with treasons, and
massacres. In the third, Truth, as it came from God, so is referd to him;
neither has any other end, than the glory of the God of Truth; Error has ever
some self-respects; either (...), or (...), filthy lucre or vainglory;
profit, or pride; We do not prancke up nature; we aim not, either to fill the
cofers, or feed the ambition of men; Let your Wisdoms apply and infer, and
now (if ye can) shut your eyes, that you should not see the Truth; and, if ye
care not for your souls, when ye see it, sell it: Let no false tongue
persuade you there is no danger in this sale: How charitably so ever we think
of poor blinded souls, that live in the forced, and invincible darkness of
error, certainly Apostasy is deadly; How ever those speed that are robbed of
Truth, you cannot sell Truth, and be saved. Have mercy therefore on your own
souls, for their sakes, for the sake of him that bought them, with the dear
ransom of his precious blood; And as God has blessed you with the inualuable
treasure of Truth; so hoard it up in your hearts, and menage it in your lives;
Oh let us be Gens iusta custodiens veritate^, Es. 26. A just nation keeping
fast the Truth; So whiles ye keep the Truth, the Truth shall keep you, both
in Life, in Death, in Judgment; In life unto death, in death and judgment
unto the consummation of that endless and incomprehensible glory which the God
of Truth has prepared for them that overcome.

To the happy possession whereof he that has ordained, in his good time as
mercifully bring us; and that for the sake of the Son of his Love, JESUS
CHRIST the Righteous; To whom with thee O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, one
infinite God, be given all praise, honor, and glory, now and for ever. Amen.


