Contemplations, THE FIFTH VOLVME. By IOS. HALL D. of D.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Nathaniel Butter. 1620.

Contemplations UPON THE OLD TESTAMENT.

The 14th. Book.

Saul in David's Cave. Nabal and Abigail. David and Achish. Saul and the Witch
of Endor. Ziklag spoiled and revenged. The Death of Saul. Abner and Ioab.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY SINGVLAR good Lord, PHILIP Earl of MONGOMERY,
one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and Knight of the most
honorable Order of the Garter.
Right Honorable:
AFter some unpleasing intermissions, I return to that task of Contemplation,
wherein only my soul finds rest. If in other employments I have indeauoured
to serve God and his Church, yet in none (I must confess) with equal
contentment. Me thinks Controversy is not right in my way to Heaven; how ever
the importunity of an adversary may force me to fetch it in: Jf Truth
oppressed by an erroneous teacher cry (like a ravished virgin) for my aid, I
betray it, if J relieve it not; when I have done, I return gladly to these
paths of peace. The favor which my late Polemicall labor has found (beyond
merit) from the learned, cannot divert my love to those wrangling studies. How
earnestly does my heart rather wish an universal cessation of these arms; that
all the Professors of the dear name of Christ might be taken up with nothing,
but holy and peaceable thoughts of devotion; the sweetness whereof has so
far affected me, that (if J might do it without danger of mis-construction)
I could beg even of an enemy this leave to be happy. I have already given
account to the world, of some expenses of my hours this way, and here J bring
more; which if some reader may censure as poor, none can censure as
unprofitable. J am bold to write them under your Honorable Name, whereto I
deeply obliged; that J may leave behind me this mean, but faithful Testimony,
of mine humble thankfulness to your Lo: and your most honored and virtuous
Lady. The noble respects I have had from you both, deserve my prayers, and best
services, which shall never be wanting to you and yours,

From your Honors sincerely devoted in all true duty. IOS. HALL.

Contemplations.
SAVL in DAVID'S Cave.
IT was the strange lot of David, that those whom he pursued, preserved him
from those whom he had preserved; The Philistims, whom David had newly smitten
in Keilah, call off Saul from smiting David in the wilderness, when there was
but an hillock betwixt him and death: Wicked purposes are easily checked, not
easily broken off. Saul's sword is scarce dry from the blood of the Philistims,
when it thirsts anew for the blood of David; and now in a renewed chase, hunts
him dry-foot through every wilderness: The very desert is too fair a refuge
for innocence; The hills and rocks are searched in an angry jealousy; the very
wild goats of the mountains were not allowed to be companions for him, which
had no fault but his virtue. Oh the seemingly-vnequall distribution of these
earthly things; Cruelty and oppression reigns in a palace, whiles goodness
lurkes among the rocks and caves, and thinks it happiness enough to steal a
life.

Like a dead man, David is feign to be hid under the earth, and seeks the
comfort of protection in darkness: and now the wise providence of God leads
Saul to his enemy without blood; He, which before brought them within an hills
distance without interview, brings them now both within one roof; so as that
whiles Saul seeks David and finds him not, he is found of David unsought. If
Saul had known his own opportunities, how David and his men had interred
themselves, he had saved a treble labor, of chase, of execution, and burial,
for had he but stopped the mouth of that cave, his enemies had laid themselves
down in their own graves: The wisdom of God thinks fit to hide from evil
men, and spirits, those means and seasons, which might be (if they had been
taken) most prejudicial to his own: We had been often foiled; if Satan could
but have known our hearts: sometimes we lie open to evils, and happy it is for
us that he only knows it, which pitties in steed of tempting us.

It is not long, since Saul said of David (lodged them in Keilah) God has
delivered him into mine hands, for he is shut in, seeing he is come into a
City that has gates and bars; but now contrarily God delivers Saul (ere he was
aware) into the hands of David, and without the help of gates and bars, has
enclosed him within the valley of the shadow of death: How just it is with God,
that those who seek mischief to others, find it to them selves; and even
whiles they are spredding nets, are ensnared; Their deliberate plotting of
evil, is surprised with a sudden judgment.

How amazedly must David needs look, when he saw Saul enter into the cave,
where himself was? what is this (thinks he) which God has done? Is this
presence purposed, or casual; is Saul here to pursue, or to tempt me? Where
suddenly the action bewrayes the intent, and tells David that Saul sought
secrecy and not him. The superfluity of his maliciousness brought him into the
wilderness, the necessity of nature led him into the cave: Even those actions
wherein we place shame, are not exempted from a providence. The fingers of
David's followers itched to cease on their Masters enemy; and that they might
not seem led so much by faction, as by faith, they urge David with a promise
from God; The day is come whereof the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will
deliver thine enemy into thine hand, and thou shall do to him, as it shall
seem good to thee. This argument seemed to carry such command with it, as that
David not only may, but must embrue his hands in blood, unless he will be
found wanting to God and himself, those temptations are most powerful, which
fetch their force from the pretense of a religious obedience: Whereas those
which are raised from arbitrary and private respects, admit of an easy
dispensation.

If there were such a prediction, one clause of it was ambiguous; and they take
it at the worst: Thou shall do to him as shall seem good to thee: that might
not seem good to him, which seemed evil unto God. There is nothing more
dangerous then to make construction of Gods purposes out of euentuall
appearances, If carnal probabilities might be the rule of our judgment, what
could God seem to intend other then Saul's death in offering him naked into the
hands of those whom he unjustly persecuted? how could David's soldiers think
that God had sent Saul thither on any other errand, then to fetch his bane, and
if Saul could have seen his own danger, he had given himself for dead, for
his heart guilty to his own bloody desires could not but have expected the same
measure which is meant: But wise and holy David not transported either with
misconcert of the event, or fury of passion, or solicitation of his followers
dares make no other use of this accident then the trial of his loyalty, and
the inducement of his peace; It had been as easy for him to cut the throat
of Saul as his garment; but now his coat only shall be the worse, not his
person; neither does he in the moyming of a cloak seek his own revenge, but a
monument of his innocence. Before Saul rent Samuels garment, now David cutteth
Saul's; both were significant; The rending of the one, signified the Kingdom
torn out of those unworthy hands; the cutting of the other, that the life of
Saul might have been as easily cut off.

Saul needs no other monitor of his own danger, then what he wears. The upper
garment of Saul was laid aside, whiles he went to cover his feet; so as the
cut of the garment, did not threaten any touch of the body, yet even this
violence offered to a remote garment strikes the heart of David, which finds a
present remorse for harmefully touching, that which did once touch the person
of his master, Tender consciences are moved to regret at those actions, which
strong hearts pass over with a careless ease. It troubled not Saul to seek
after the blood of a righteons servant; there is no less difference of
consciences then stomachs; Some stomachs will digest the hardest meats, and
turn over substances, not in their nature edible, whiles others surret of the
lightest food, and complain even of dainties: Every gracious heart is in some
measure scrupulous, and finds more safety in fear, then in presumption: And
if it be so strait as to curb it self in from the liberty which it might
take in things which are not unlawful, how much less will it dare to take
scope unto evil: By how much that state is better, where nothing is allowed,
then where all things; by so much is the strict and timorous conscience better
then the lawless. There is good likelihood of that man which is any way
scrupulous of his ways; but he which makes no bones of his actions, is
apparently hopeless.

SINCE David's followers pleaded Gods testimony to him as a motive to blood.
David appeals the same God for his preservation from blood. The Lord keep me
from doing that thing to my master the Lords anointed; and now the good man
has work enough to defend both himself and his persecuter, himself, from
the importunate necessity of doing violence, and his master from suffering
it. It was not more easy to rule his own hands, then difficult to rule a
multitude: David's troop consisted of malcontents, all, that were in
distress, in debt, in bitterness of soul were gathered to him: Many if never
so well ordered, are hard to command, a few if disorderly, more hard; many and
disorderly must needs be so much the hardest of all, that David never atchiued
any victory like unto this, wherein the first overcame himself, then his
soldiers.

AND what was the charm, wherewith David allayed those raging spirits of his
followers? No other but this; He is the Anointed of the Lord. That holy oil
was the Antidote for his blood; Saul did not lend David so impearceable an
Armor, when he should encounter Goliath, as David now lent him in this plea of
his unction. Which of all the disconted outlawes that lurked in that cave,
durst put forth his hand against Saul, when they once heard, He is the Lords
anointed: Such an impression of awe has the divine providence caused his Image
to make in the hearts of men, as that it makes traitors cowards; So as instead
of striking they tremble; How much more lawless, then the outlawes of Israel
are those professed Ringleaders of Christianity; which teach and practice, and
encourage, and reward, and canonize the violation of majesty. It is not enough
for those who are commanders of others to refrain their own hands from evil,
but they must carefully prevent the iniquity of their heels, else they shall
be justly reputed to do that by others, which in their own person they
avoided; the laws both of God and man, presuppose us in some sort answerable
for our charge: as taking it for granted, that we should not undertake those
raynes, which we cannot manage.

There was no reason David should loose the thanks of so noble a demonstration
of his loyalty; Whereto he trusts so much, that he dares call back the man by
whom he was pursued; and make him judge whether that fact had not deserved a
life. As his act, so his word and gesture imported nothing but humble
obedience, neither was there more meekness then force in that seasonable
persuasion; Wherein he lets Saul see the error of his credulity, the unjust
slanders of maliciousness, the opportunity of his revenge, the proof of his
forbearance, the undeniable evidence of his innocence; and after a lowly
disparagement of himself, appeals to God for judgment, for protection.

So lively and feeling oratory did Saul find in the lap of his garment, and
the lips of David, that it is not in the power of his envy, or ill nature to
hold out any longer. Is this thy voice my son David, and Saul lift up his
voice and wept, and said: Thou art more righteous then I; He, whose harp had
wont to quiet the frenzy of Saul, has now by his words calmed his fury; so as
now he sheds tears in steed of blood: and confesses his own wrong, and
David's integrity; And (as if he were new again entered into the bounds of
Naioth in Ramath) he prays, and prophesies good to him, whom he maliced for
good; The Lord render thee good for that thou have done to me this day; for
now behold I know that thou shall be king. There is no heart made of flesh, that
some time or other relents not, even flint and marble, will in some wether
stand on dropes. I cannot think these tears and protestations feigned.
Doubtless Saul meant as he said, and passed through sensible fits of good and
evil: Let no man like himself the better for good motions; the praise and
benefit of those guests is not in the receipt, but the retention.

Who, that had seen this meeting, could but have thought all had been sure on
David's side? What can secure us if not tears, and prayers and oaths?
Doubtless David's men which knew themselves obnoxious to laws and creditors,
began to think of some new refuge, as making account this new peeced league
would be everlasting; they looked when Saul would take David home to the court,
and dissolve his army, and recompense that unjust persecution with just honor;
when behold in the loose, Saul goes home, but David and his men go up unto the
hold. Wise David knows Saul not to be more kind, then untrusty; and therefore
had rather seek safely in his hold, then in the hold of an hollow and vnsteedy
friendship. Here are good words but no security, which therefore an
experienced man gives the hearing, but stands the while upon his own guard. No
charity binds us to a trust of those, whom we have found faithless; Credulity
upon weak grounds after palpable disapointments, is the daughter of folly: A
man that is weatherwise, though he find an abatement of the storm, yet will
not stir from under his shelter whiles he sees it thick in the wind,
distrust is the just gain of unfaithfulness.

Nabal and Abigail.
IF innocence could have securd from Saul's malice, David had not been
persecuted; and yet under that wicked King, aged Samuel dies in his bed. That
there might be no place for envy, the good Prophet had retired himself to the
Schools. Yet he that hated David, for what he should be, did no less hate
Samuel for what he had been. Even in the midst of Saul's malignity, there
remained in his heart impressions of awfulnesse unto Samuel: he feared, where
he loved not. The restraint of God curbeth the rage of his most violent
enemies, so as they cannot do their worst. As good husbands, do not put all
their corn to the oven, but save some for seed, so does God ever in the worst
persecutions.

SAMVEL is dead, David banished, Saul tyranizeth, Israel has good cause to
mourn; it is no marvel if this lamentation be universal. There is no
Israelite that feels not the loss of a Samuel. A good Prophet is the common
treasure, wherein every gracious soul has a share That man has a dry heart,
which can part with Gods Prophet without tears.

NABAL was according to his name foolish; yet rich and mighty. Earthly
possessions are not always accompanied with wit and grace. Even the line of
faithful Caleb will afford an ill-condition'd Nabal. Virtue is not like unto
lands inheritable. All that is traduced with the seed, is either evil, or not
good. Let no mam brag with the Jews, that he has Abram to his father; God
has raised up of this stone, a son to Caleb.

ABIGAIL (which signified her fathers joy) had sorrow enough to be matched
with so unworthy an husband; If her father had meant, she should have had joy
in herself, or in her life, he had not disposed her to an husband (though
rich) yet fond and wicked; It is like he married her to the wealth, not to the
man. Many a child is cast away upon riches. Wealth in our matches, should be
as some grains or scruples in the balance, superadded to the gold of virtuous
qualities, to weigh down the scales; when it is made the substancc of the
weight, and good qualities the appendance, there is but one earth poysed with
another; which, wheresoever it is done, it is a wonder, if either the children
prove not the parents sorrow, or the parents, theirs.

NABALS sheep-shearing was famous; Three thousand fleeces must needs require
many hands; neither is any thing more plentiful commonly then a Churles feast:
What a world was this, that the noble Champion and Rescuer of Israel, Gods
Anointed, is driven to send to a base Carle for victuals? It is no measuring of
men by the depth of the purse, by outward prosperity. Servants are oft-times
set on horseback, whiles Princes walk on foot. Our estimation must be led
by their inward worth, which is not alterable by time, nor diminishable with
external conditions.

ONE rag of a David is more worth, then the ward-robes of a thousand Nabals.
Even the best deseruings may want. No man may be contemned for his necessity;
perhaps he may be so much richer in grace, as he is poorer in estate; neither
has violence or casualty more impouerished a David, then his poverty has
enriched him. He, whose folly has made himself miserable, is justly rewarded
with neglect; but he, that suffers for good, deserves so much more honor from
others, as his distress is more. Our compassion or respect must be ruled,
according to the cause of another misery.

ONE good turn requires another; in some cases not hurting is meritorious: He
that should examine the qualities of David's followers must needs grant it
worthy of a fee, that Nabals flocks lay untouched in Carmel; but more, that
David's Soldiers were Nabals Sheepheards; yea, the keepers of his shepherds,
gave them a just interest in that sheep-shearing feast, justly should they have
been set at the upper end of the table. That Nabals sheep were safe, he might
thank his Shepherds; that his Shepherds were safe, he might thank David's
Soldiers; It is no small benefit that we receive in a safe protection; well
may we think our substance due, where we owe our selves. Yet this churlish
Nabal does not only give nothing to David's messengers, but which is worse then
nothing, ill words; Who is David, or who is the son of Ishai; There be many
servants now a days, that break away from their Masters* David asked him
bread, he gives him stones. All Israel knew, and honored their Deliverer; yet
this Clown, to save his victuals, will needs make him a man, either of no
merits of ill; either an obscure man, or a Fugitive. Nothing is more cheap then
good words; these Nabal might have given, and been never the poorer; If he had
been resolved to shut his hands, in a fear of Saul's revenge, he might have so
tempered his denial, that the repulse might have been free from offense: But
now his foul mouth does not only deny, but revile. It should have been
Nabals glory, that his Tribe yielded such a Successor to the Throne of Israel;
now in all likely hood, his envy stirs him up to disgrace that man, who
surpassed him in honor and virtue, more then he was surpassed by him in
virtue and ease; Many an one speaks fair, that means ill, but when the mouth
speaks foul, it argues a corrupt heart; If with S. James his verbal
benefactors, we say only, Depart in peace, warm your selves, fill your
bellies, we shall answer for hypocritical uncharitableness, but if we rate
and curse those needy souls, whom we ought to relieve, we shall give a more
fearful account of a savage cruelty, in trampling on those whom God has
humbled. If healing with good words be justly punishable, what torment is
there for those that wound with evil.

DAVID, which had all this while been in the schole of patience; has now his
lesson to seek; He, who had happily digested all the railing and persecutions
of a wicked Master, cannot put off this affront of a Nabal, Nothing can assuage
his choler, but blood; How subject are the best of Gods Saints to weak
passions, and if we have the grace to ward an expected blow of temptations,
how easily are we surprised with a sudden foe. Wherefore serve these recorded
weaknesses of holy men, but to strengthen us against the conscience of our
infirmities? not that we should take courage to imitate them in the evil,
whereunto they have been miscarried; But we should take heart to our selves,
against the discouragement of our own evils.

THE wisdom of God has so contrived it, that commonly (in societies) good is
mixed with evil; wicked Nabal has in his house a wise and good servant, a
prudent and worthy wife; That wise servant is careful to advertise his
Mistress of the danger; his prudent Mistress is careful to prevent it.

THE lives of all his family were now in hazard: she dares not commit this
business to the fidelity of a messenger, but forgetting her sex, puts herself
into the errand; Her foot is not slow, her hand is not empty; According to the
offense she frames her satisfaction; Her husband refused to give, she brings
a bountiful gift; her husband gave ill words, she sweetens them with a meek
and humble deprecation; Her husband could say, Who is David? she falls at his
feet, her husband dismisses David's men empty, she brings her servants laden
with provision; as if it had been only meant to ease the repelled messengers of
the carriage, not to scant them of the required benevolence; No wit, no art
could devise a more pithy and powerful Oratory: As all satisfaction, so hers,
begins with a confession, wherein she deeply blames the folly of her husband:
She could not have been a good wife, if she had not honored her unworthy
head; If a stranger should have termed him fool in her hearing, he could not
have gone away in peace: Now to save his life, she is bold to acknowledge his
folly: It is a good disparagement that preserves. There is the same way to our
peace in heaven; the only means to escape judgment, is to complain of our
own vileness; she pleads her ignorance of the fact, and therein, her
freedom from the offense; she humbly craves acceptance of her present, with
pardon of the fault; she professes David's honorable acts and merits; she
foretells his future success and glory; she lays before him the happy peace of
his soul, in refraining from innocent blood. David's breast, which could not
through the seeds of grace, grow to a stubbornness in ill resolutions, cannot
but relent with these powerful and feasonable persuasions; and now, in steed
of revenge, he blesses God for sending Abigail to meet him; he blesses
Abigail for her council, he blesses the council for so wholesome efficacy,
and now rejoices more in being overcome with a wise and gracious advice, then
he would have rejoiced in a reuengefull victory.

A good heart is easily stayed from sinning, and is glad when it finds
occasion to be crossed in ill purposes; Those secret checks which are raised
within it self, do readily conspire with all outward retentiues; It never
yielded to a wicked motion, without much reluctation, and when it is overcome,
it is but with half a consent; whereas perverse and obdurate sinners, by
reason they take full delight in evil, and have already in their conceit
swallowed the pleasure of sin, abide not to be resisted, running on headily,
in those wicked courses they have propounded, in spite of opposition; and if
they be forcibly stopped in their way, they grow sullen and mutinous. David
had not only vowed, but deeply sworn the death of Nabal, and all his family,
to the very dog that lay at his door; yet now he praises God, that has given
the occasion and grace to violate it. Wicked vows are ill made, but worse
kept. Our tongue cannot tie us to commit sin. Good men think themselves
happy, that since they had not the grace to deny sin; yet they had not the
opportunity to accomplish it. If Abigail had fit still at home, David had
sinned, and she had dyed: Now her discreet admonition has preserved her from
the sword, and diuerted him from bloodshed. And now, what thanks, what
benedictons has she for this seasonable Council. How should it encourage us
to admonish our brethren; to see that if we prevail, we have blessings from
them; if we prevail not, we have yet blessings from God, and thanks of our
own hearts.

How near was Nabal to a mischief, and perceiues it not? David was coming at
the foot of the hill to cut his throat, while he was feasting in his house
without fear; Little do sinners know, how near their iollity is to
perdition. Many time judgment is at the threshold, whiles drunkenness and
surfeit are at the board. Had he been any other then ^ Nabal, he had not sat
down to feast, till he had been sure of his peace with David; either not to
expect danger, or not to clear it, was sottish; So foolish are carnal men,
that give themselves over to their pleasures, whiles there are deadly quarrels
depending against them in Heaven. There is nothing wherein wisdom is more
seen, then in the temperate use of prosperity. A Nabal cannot abound, but he
must be drunk and surfeit; Excess is a true argument of folly: We use to say,
that When drink is in, wit is out; but if wit were not out, drink would not
be in.

It was no time to advise Nabal, while his reason was drowned in a deluge of
wine. A beast or a stone is as capable of good council, as a Drunkard. Oh that
the noblest Creature should so far abase himself, as for a little liquor, to
lose the use of those faculties, whereby he is a Man. Those that have to do
with drink or phrenzy, must be glad to watch times; So did Abigail, who the
next morning presents to her husband, the view of his faults, of his danger, He
then sees how near he was to death, and felt it not. That worldly mind is so
apprehensiue of the death that should have been, as that he dies, to think
he had like to have dyed; Who would think a man could be so affected with a
danger past, and yet so senseless of a future, yea imminent? He that was
yester-night as a beast, is now as a stone; he was then ouer-merry, now dead
and lumpish; Carnal hearts are ever in extremity. If they be once down,
their desection is desperate, because they have no inward comfort, to mitigate
their sorrow; What difference there was betwixt the disposition of David and
Nabal? How often had David been in the valley of the shadow of death, and feared
no evil? Nabal is but once put in mind of a death that might have been, and
is stricken dead.

It is just with God, that they who live without grace, should dye without
comfort; neither can we expect better, while we go on in our sins. The speech
of Abigail smote Nabal into a qualme; that tongue had doubtless often advised
him well, and prevailed not; now, occasions his death, whose reformation it
could not effect; she meant nothing but his amendment; God meant to make that
loving Instrument the means of his revenge: she speaks, and God strikes;
within ten days, that swound ends in death. And now Nabal pays dear for his
uncharitable reproach; for his riotous excess; That God, which would not suffer
David to right himself by his own sword, takes the quarrel of his Servant
into his own hand, David has now his ends without sin; rejoicing in the just
executions of God, who would neither suffer him to sin in revenging, nor
suffer his adversary to sin unrevenged.

Our loving God is more angry with the wrongs done to his servants, then
themselves can be, and knows how to punish that justly, which we could not
undertake with wronging God, more then men have wronged us. He that says,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, repayes oft-times when we have forgiven, when
we have forgotten; and calls to reckoning after our discharges; It is dangerous
offending any favorite of him, whose displeasure and revenge is everlasting.

How far God looks beyond our purposes? Abigail came only to plead for an
ill husband; and now God makes this journey a preparation for a better; So that
in one act, she preserud an ill husband, and won a good one for the future;
David well remembers her comely person, her wife speeches, her graceful
carriage; and now, when modesty found it seasonable; he sendes to sue to her,
which had been his suppliant; she entreated for her husband, David treates
with her for his wife; her request was to escape his sword, he wishes her to
his bed; It was a fair suite to change a David for a Nabal; to become David's
Queen, in steed of Nabals drudge; she that learned humility under so hard a
Tuter, abaseth her self no less when David offers to advance her; (Let thine
handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord) None are so
fit to be great, as those that can stoop loewst: How could David be more happy
in a wife; he finds at once piety, wisdom, humility, faithfulness, wealth,
beauty? How could Abigail be more happy in an husband, then in the Prophet,
the Champion, the Anointed of God? Those marriages are well made, wherein
virtues are matched, and happiness is mutual.

David and Achish.
GOOD motions that fall into wicked hearts, are like some sparks that fall from
the flint and steel, into wet tinder; lightsome for the time, but soon out.
After Saul's tears and protestations, yet is he now again, in the wilderness
with three thousand men to hunt after inocent David: How invincible is the
charity and loyalty of an honest heart? The same hand that spared Saul in the
cave, spares him sleeping in the field; The same hand that cut away the lap
of his masters garment; carried away his spear; that spear, which might as
well have carried away, the life of the owner; is only born away for a proof of
the fidelity of the bearer. Still Saul is strong, but David victorious, and
triumphs over the malice of his persecutor; Yet still the victor flies, from
him whom he has overcome; A man that sees; how far Saul was transported,
with his rancorous envy, cannot but say, that he was never more mad then when
he was sober; For even after he had said (Blessed art thou my son David, thou
shall do great things and also prevail;) yet still he pursues him; whom he
grants assured to prevail; what is this but to resolve to loose his labor in
sinning? and in spite of himself to offend? How shameful is our inequality
of disposition to good? We know we cannot miss of the reward of well-doing,
and yet do it not; whiles wicked men cast away their endeauours upon those
evil proiects, whereof they are sure to fail; sin blindes the eyes and
hardens the heart, and thrusts men into wilful mischiefs, how ever dangerous,
how ever impossible; and never leaves them till it have brought them to utter
confusion.

THE ouer-long continuance of a tentation, may easily weary the best patience:
and may attain that by protraction, which it could never do by violence;
David himself at last begins to bend vncler this trial; and resolves so to
flee from Saul, as that he runs from the Church of God; and whiles he will
avoid the malice of his master, ioynes himself with Gods enemies. The
greatest Saints upon earth, are not always upon the same pitch of spiritual
strength; He that sometimes said (I will not be afraid for ten thousand, now
says, I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul) He had wont to consult with
God, now he says thus in his own heart; How many evident experiments had
David of Gods deliverances; how certain and clear predictions of his future
Kingdom; how infallible earnest was the holy oil, wherewith he was anointed,
of the crown of Israel? And yet (David said in his heart, I shall now perish
one day by the hand of Saul:) The best faith, is but like the twy-light, mixed
with some degrees of darkness, and infidelity; We do utterly misreakon the
greatest earthly holiness, if we exempt it from infirmities, It is not long
since David told Saul, that those wicked enemies of his, which cast him out
from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, did as good as bid him; Go serve
other Gods, yet now is he gone from the inheritance of God, into the land of
the Philistims; That Saul might seek him no more, he hides himself out of
the lists of the Church, where a good man would not look for him: Once before
had David fled to this Achish, when he was glad to scrabble on the doozes, and
let his spittle fall upon his beard, in a semblance of madness, that he might
escape, yet now in a semblance of friendship, is he returned to save that
life, which he was in danger to have lost in Israel; Goliath the Champion of the
Philistims, whom David slew, was of Gath; yet David dwells with Achish King of
the Philistims in Gath; Even amongst them whose fore-skins he had presented to
Saul, by two hundreds at once, does David choose to reside for safety:
Howsoever it was a weakness in David, thus by his league of amity to
strengthen the enemies of God, yet does not God take advantage of it for his
overthrow, but gives him protection, even where his presence offended; and
gives him favor where himself bore just hatred; Oh the infinite patience and
mercy of our God, who does good to us for our evil, and in the very act of our
provocation vpholdeth, yea, blesses us with preservation.

Could Saul have rightly considered it, he had found it no small loss and
impairing to his kingdom, that so valiant a Captain, attended with six
hundred able soldiers, and their families should forsake his land, and join
with his enemies; yet he is not quiet till he have abandoned his own strength:
The world has none so great enemy to a wicked man, as himself; his hands
cannot be held from his own mischief; he will needs make his friends,
enemies; his enemies, victors, himself, miserable.

DAVID was too wise, to cast himself into the hands of a Philistim King,
without assurance; What assurance could he have but promises? Those, David had
from Saul abundantly, and trusted them not; He dares trust the fidelity of a
Pagan, he dares not trust the vows of a King of Israel; There may be
fidelity without the Church, and falsehood within: It need not be any news to
find some Turks true, and some Christians faithless.

EVEN unwise men are taught by experience, how much more they, who have wit to
learn without it? David had well found, what it was to live in a Court; He
therefore, whom envy drove from the Court of Israel, voluntarily declines the
Philistim Court; and sies for a country-habitation; It had not been possible
for so noted a stranger, after so much Philistim-bloud shed, to live long in
such eminency, amongst the prease of those, whose sons, or brothers, or
fathers, or allies, he had slaughtered, without some perilous machination of
his ruin; therefore he makes suit for an early remove: (For why should thy
servant dwell in the chief City of the Kingdom with thee?) Those that would
stand sure, must not affect too much height, or conspicuity; The tall Cedars
are most subject to winds and lightnings, whiles the shrubs of the valleys
stand unmoved; Much greatness does but make a fairer mark for evil; There
is true firmness and safety in mediocrity.

How rarely is it seen, that a man loses by his modesty? The change fell out
well to David of Ziklag, for Gath; Now he has a City of his own; All Israel,
where he was anointed, afforded him not so much possession: Now the City, which
was anciently assigned to Judah, returns to the just Owner; and is by this
means entayled to the Crown of David's Successors. Besides, that now might
David live out of the sight, and hearing of the Philistim Idolatries, and enjoy
God no less in the walls of a Philistim-City, then in an Israelitish
wilderness; withal, an happy opportunity was now opened to his friends of
Israel, to resort unto his aid; the heads of the thousands that were of
Manasseh, and many valiant Captains of the other Tribes, fell daily to him,
and raised his six hundred followers to an army, like the Host of God. The
deserts os Israel could never have yielded David so great an advantage: That
God, whose the earth is makes room for his own euery-where; and often times
provides them a foreign home, more kindly then the native; It is no matter
for change of our soil, so we change not our God; If we can every where
acknowledge him, he will no where be wanting to us.

It was not for Gods Champion to be idle; no sooner is he free from Saul's
sword, then he begins an offensive war against the Amalekites, Girzites,
Geshurites: He knew these Nations branded by God to destruction; neither could
his increasing army be maintained with a little* By one act therefore, he both
reuenges for God, and prouides for his Host. Had it not been for that old
quarrel, which God had with this people, David could not be excused from a
bloody cruelty, in killing whole Countries, only for the benefit of the
spoil: Now his Soldiers were at once, Gods Executioners, and their own
Forragers. The interuention of a command from the Almighty, alters the state of
any act; and makes that worthy of praise, which else were no better then
damnable. It is now Justice, which were otherwise murder; The will of God is
the rule of good; what need we enquire into other reasons, of any act or
determination, when we hear it comes from Heaven?

How many hundred years had this brood of Cananites lived securely in their
Country; since God commanded them to be rooted out, and now promised
themselves the certainest peace? The Philistims were their friends, if not
their Lords; The Israelites had their hands full, neither did they know any
grudge betwixt them and their neighbors, when suddenly the sword of David cuts
them off, and leaves none alive to tell the news.

THERE is no safety in protraction; with men, delay causes forgetfulness, or
abates the force of anger; as all violent motions are weakest at the furthest;
but with him, to whom all times are present, what can be gained by prorogation?
Alas, what can it prevail any of the cursed seed of Canaan, that they have
made a truce with Heaven, and a league with Hell? Their day is coming, and is
not the further off, because they expect it not.

MISERABLE were the straits of David; while he was driven, not only to
maintain his army by spoil, but to color his spoil by a sinful
dissimulation; He tells Achish, that he had been rouing against the South or
Judah, and the South of the Ierahmelites, and the South of the Kenites; either
falsely, or doubtfully, so as he meant to deceive him, under whom he lived,
and by whom he was trusted: If Achish were a Philistim, yet he was David's
friend, yea his Patron; and if he had been neither, it had not becomne David
to be false. The infirmities of Gods children never appear, but in their
extremities. It is hard for the best man, to say, how far he will be tempted.
If a man will put himself among Philistims, he cannot promise to come forth
innocent.

How easily do we believe that which we wish; The more credit Achish gives
unto David, the more sin it was to deceive him. And now the conceit of this
engagement, procures him a further service. The Philistims are assembled to
fight with Israel; Achish dares trust David on his side; yea, to keep his head
for ever; neither can David: do any less then promise his aid against his own
flesh: Never was David, in all his life, driven to so hard an exigent: never
was he so extremely perplexed; For what should he do now* To fight with
Achish, he was tied by promise, by merit* Not to fight against Israel, he was
tied by his calling, by his unction; Not to fight for Achish, were to be
unthankful; To fight against Israel, were to be unnatural; Oh what an inward
battle must David needs have in his breast, when he thinks of this battle of
Israel, and the Philistims; How does he wish now, that he had rather stood to
the hazard of Saul's perfecution, then to have put himself upon the favor of
Achish; He must fight on one side, and on whether side soever he should fight,
he could not avoid to be treacherous; a condition worse then death, to an
honest heart; which way he would have resolved, if it had comne to the
execution, who can know, since himself was doubtful? either course had been
no better then desperate. How could the Israelites ever have received him for
their King, who in the open field, had fought against them? And contrarily, if
he would have fought against his friend, for his enemy; against Achish for
Saul, he was now environed with jealous Philistims; and might rather look for
the punishment of his treason, then the glory of a victory.

HIS heart had led him into these straits; the Lord finds a way to lead him
out: The suggestions of his enemies do herein befrend him; The Princes of the
Philistims (whether of envy, or suspicion) plead for David's dismission, (Send
this fellow back, that he may go again to his place, which thou have
appointed him, and let him not go down to the battle, lest he be an adversary
to us.) No advocate could have said more, himself durst not have said so much.
Oh the wisdom, and goodness of our God, that can raise up an adversary to
deliver out of those evils, which our friends cannot; That by the sword of an
enemy, can let out that apostume, which no Physician could tell how to cure: It
would be wide with us sometimes, if it were not for others malice.

There could not be a more just question, then this of the Philistim Princes,
What do these Hebrews here? An Israelite is out of his element, when he is in
an army of Philistims: The true servants of God are in their due places, when
they are in opposition to his enemies. Profession of hostility becomes them
better then leagues of amity.

YET Achish likes David's conversation and presence so well, that he professes
himself pleased with him, as with an Angel of God; How strange it is to
hear, that a Philistim should delight in that holy man, whom an Israelite
abhors, and should be loath to be quit of David, whom Saul has expelled. Terms
of ciuility be equally open to all religions, to all professions: The common
graces of Gods children, are able to attract love from the most obstinate
enemies of goodness; If we affect them for by-respects of valor, wisdom,
discourse, wit, it is their praise, not ours, But if for divine grace and
religion, it is our praise with theirs.

SVCH now was David's condition, that he must plead for that he feared, and
argue against that which he desired: (What have I done? and what have thou
found in thy servant, that I may not go, and fight against the enemies of my
Lord the King?) Never any news could be more cordial to him then this, of
his dismission; yet must he seem to strive against it, with an importunate
profession of his forwardness to that act, which he most detested.

One degree of dissimulation draws on another; those which have once given way
to a faulty course, cannot easily, either stop or turn back; but are in a
sort forced to second their ill beginnings, with worse proceedings. It is a
dangerous and miserable thing, to cast our selves into those actions, which
draw with them a necessity, either of offending, or miscarriage.

Saul and the Witch of Endor.
EVEN the worst men may sometimes make head against some sins. Saul has
expelled the Sorcerers out of the land of Israel; and has forbidden magic
upon pain of death. He that had no care to expel Satan out of his own heart,
yet will seem to drive him out of his kingdom. That we see wicked men oppose
themselves to some sins, there is neither marvel, nor comfort in it: No
doubt Satan made sport at this edict of Saul; what cares he to be banished in
sorcery, whiles he is entertained in malice? He knew and found Saul his; whiles
he resisted; and smiled to yield thus far unto his vassal: if we quit not
all sins, he will be content we should, either abandon or persecute some.

Where is* no place for holy fear, there will be place for the servile; The
graceless heart of Saul was astonished at the Philistims; yet was never moved at
the frowns of that God, whose anger sent them, nor of those sins of his,
which procured them. Those that cannot fear for love, shall tremble for fear:
and how much better is awe then terror? prevention then confusion? There is
nothing more lamentable to see a man laugh when he should fear; God shall
laugh when such a ones fear comes:

Extremiry of distress, will send even the prophanest man to God; like as the
drowning man, reaches out his hand to that bow, which he contemned whiles he
stood safe on the bank; Saul now asks counsel of the Lord; whose Prophet he
hated, whose priests he slew, whose anointed he persecutes; Had Saul consulted
with God when he should, this evil had not been; but now, if this evil had
not been; he had consulted with God; The thank of this act is due, not him,
but to his affection; A forced piety is thankelesse, and unprofitable; God will
not answer him neither by dreams, nor by vrim, nor by Prophets. Why should
God answer, that man by dreams, who had resisted him waking? Why should he
answer him by vrim, that had slain his Priests? Why should he answer him by
Prophets, who hated the Father of the Prophets, rebelled against the word of
the Prophets?

It is an unreasonable vnequality to hope to find God at our command, when we
would not be at his; To look that God should regard our voice in trouble, when
we would not regard his, in peace.

Unto what mad shifts are men driven by despair? If God will not answer,
Satan shall; (Saul said to his servants, seek me a woman that has a familiar
spirit) If Saul had not known this course Devilish, why did he decree to banish
it, to mulct it with death? yet now against the stream of his conscience, he
will seek to those whom he had condemned; There needs no other judge of Saul's
act then himself; had he not before opposed this sin, he had not so
haynously sinned in committing it; There cannot be a more fearful sign of
an heart given up to a reprobate sense, then to cast it self wilfully into
those sins, which it has proclaimed to detest. The declinations to evil are
many times insensible, but when it breaks forth into such apparent effects,
even others eyes may discern it; What was Saul the better to foreknow the
issue of his approaching battle? If this consultation could have strengthened
him against his enemies, or promoted his victory, there might have been some
color for so foul an act; Now, what could he gain, but the satisfying of
his bootlesse curiosity; in foreseeing that, which he should not be able to
avoid?

Foolish men give a way their souls for nothing; The itch of impertinent and
unprofitable knowledge, has been the heriditary distroyer of the sons of
Adam and Eve; How many have perished to know that which has procured their
perishing? How ambitious should we be to know those things, the knowledge
whereof is eternal life.

Many a lewd office are they put to; which serve wicked masters; one while
Saul's servants are set to kill innocent David; another while, to shed the blood
of Gods Priests; and now they must go seek for a Witch: It is no small
happiness to attend them, from whom we may receive precepts and examples of
virtue.

Had Saul been good, he had needed no disguise; Honest actions never shame the
doers; Now that he goes about a sinful business, he changes himself; he
seeks the shelter of the night, he takes but two followers with him; It is
true, that if Saul had comne in the port of a King, the Witch had as much
dissembled her condition, as now he dissembleth his; yet it was not only desire
to speed, but guiltiness that thus altered his habit; such is the power of
conscience, that even those who are most affected to evil, yet are ashamed to
be thought such as they desire to be.

Saul needed another face to fit that tongue, which should say (Conjecture to
me by the familiar spirit, and bring me up whom I shall name unto thee;) An
obdurate heart can give way to any thing:

Notwithstanding, the peremptory edict of Saul, there are still Witches in
Israel: Neither good laws nor careful executions, can purge the Church from
Malefactors; There will still be some that will ieopard their heads upon the
grossest sins; No garden can be so curiously tended, that there should not be
one weed left in it. Yet so far can good statutes, and due inflictions of
punishment upon offenders, prevail that mischeeuous persons are glad to pull
in their heads; and dare not do ill, but in disguise and darkness. It is no
small advantage of Justice, that it affrights sin, if it cannot be expelled; As
contrarily, woeful is the condition of that place, where is a public
profession of wickedness.

This Witch was no less crafty then wicked; she had before (as is like) bribed
Officers to escape indictment, lurk in secrecy; and now she will not work
her feats without security; her suspicion proiects the worst; (Wherefore
seek thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to dye?) Oh vain Sorceresse,
that could be wary to avoid the punishment of Saul, careless to avoid the
judgment of God; Could we fore-thinke what our sin would cost us, we durst
not, but be innocent: This is a good and seasonable answer for us, to make
unto Satan, when he sollicites us to evil (Wherefore seek thou to take me
in a snare, to cause me to dye?) Nothing is more sure then this intention in
the tempter, then this event in the issue; Oh that we could but so much fear
the eternal pains, as we do the temporary, and be but so careful to save
our souls from torment, as our bodies.

No sooner has Saul sworn her safety, then she addresseth her to her
sorcery; Hope of impunity draws on sin with boldness; were it not for the
delusions of false promises, Satan should have no Clients. Could Saul be so
ignorant, as to think that Magic had power over Gods deceased Saints, to
raise them up; yea, to call them down from their rest? Time was, when Saul was
among the Prophets. And yet now, that he is in the impure lodge of Devils, how
senseless he is, to say, Bring me up Samuel? It is no rare thing, to lose even
our wit and judgment together with graces; How justly are they given over to
sottishness, that have given themselves over to sin?

The Sorceresse (it seems) exercising her coniurations in a room apart, is
informed by her Familiar, who it was that set her on work; she can therefore
find time, in the midst of her exorcismes, to bind the assurance of her own
safety, by expostulation, She cried with a loud voice, Why have thou deceived
me, for thou art Saul,) The very name of Saul was an accusation; Yet is he so
far from striking his breast, that doubting lest this fear of the Witch, should
interrupt the desired work, he encourages her, whom he should have condemned;
(Be not afraid;) He that had more cause to fear, for his own sake, in an
expectation of just judgment, cheeres up her, that feared* nothing but
himself: How ill does it become us, to give that counsel to others, whereof
we have more need and use in our own persons?

As one that had more care to satisfy his curiosity, then her suspicion, he
asks, What saw thou? Who would not have looked, that Saul's hair should have
stared on his head, to hear of a spirit raised? His sin has so hardened
him, that he rather pleases himself in it, which has nothing in it but
horror; So far is Satan content to descend to the service of his servants, that
he will approve his fained obedience to their very outward senses; What form
is so glorious, that he either cannot, or dare not undertake? Here Gods ascend
out of the earth; Elsewhere Satan transformes him into an Angel of light; What
wonder is it, that his wicked Instruments appear like Saints in their
hypocritical dissimulation? If wec will be judging by the appearance, we
shall be sure to err: No eye could distinguish betwixt the true Samuel, and a
false spirit. Saul, who was well worthy to be deceived, seeing those gray
hairs, and that mantle, inclines himself to the ground, and bows himself;
He that would not worship God in Samuel alive, now worships Samuel in Satan;
and no meruel; Satan was now become his refuge in stead of God; his Vrim was
darkness, his Prophet a Ghost: Every one that consults with Satan, worships
him, though he bow not, neither does that evil spirit desire any other
reverence, then to be sought to.

How cunningly does Satan resemble, not only the habit and gesture, but the
language of Samuel, Wherefore have thou disquieted me, and wherefore do thou
ask of me, seeing the Lord is gone from thee, and is thine enemy? Nothin is
more pleasing to that evil one, then to be solicited, yet in the person of
Samuel, he can say, Why have thou disquieted me? Had not the Lord been gone
from Saul, he had never comne to the devilish Oracle of Endor, and yet the
counterfetting spirit can say, Why do thou ask of me, seeing the Lord is
gone from thee? Satan cares not how little he is known to be himself; he
loves to pass under any form, rather then his own.

The more holy the person is, the more carefully does Satan act him, that by
his stale he may ensnare us. In every motion it is good to try the spirits,
whether they be of God; Good words are no means, to distinguish a Prophet
from a Devil; Samuel himself, whiles he was alive, could not have spoken
more gravely, more severely, more divinely, then this evil Ghost, For the Lord
will rent thy Kingdom out of thy hand, and give it thy neighbor David,
because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his fierce
wrath upon the Amalekites, therefore has the Lord done this unto thee this
day: When the Devil himself puts on gravity and religion, who can marvel at
the hypocrisy of men? Well may lewd men be good Preachers, when Satan
himself can play the Prophet; Where are those Ignorants, that think
charitably of charms and spells, because they find nothing in them, but good
words? What Prophet could speak better words, then this Devil in Samuels
mantle? Neither is there at any time so much danger of that wicked spirit, as
when he speaks best.

I could wonder to hear Satan preach thus prophetically, if I did not know,
that as he was once a good Angel, so he can still act what he was; Whiles
Saul was in consultation of sparing Agag, we shall never find that Satan would
lay any block in his way; Yea, then he was a prompt Orator, to induce him into
that sin; now that it is past and gone; he can lade Saul with fearful
denunciations of judgment; Till we have sinned, Satan is a Parasite, when we
have sinned, he is a Tyrant: What cares he to flatter any more, when he has
what he would? Now his only work is to terrify, and confound, that he may
enjoy what he has won; How much better is it serving that Master, who when
we are most dejected with the conscience of evil, heartens us with inward
comfort, and speaks peace to the soul, in the midst of tumult?

Ziglag spoiled and revenged.
HAD not the King of the Philistims sent David away early, his wives, and his
people and substance, which he left at Ziglag had been utterly lost; Now
Achish did not more pleasure David in his intertainment, then in his
dismission. Saul was not David's enemy more in the persecution of his person,
then in the forbearance of God enemies; Behold, thus late does David feel the
smart of Saul's sin, in sparing the Amalekites; who, if Gods sentence had been
duly executed, had not now suruiued, to annoy this parcel of Israel.

As in spiritual respects, our sins are always hurtful to our selves, so in
temporal, oft-times prejudicial to posterity; A wicked man deserves ill of
those, he never lived to see.

I cannot marvel at the Amalekites assault made upon the Israelites of Ziglag;
I cannot but marvel at their clemency; how just it was, that while David would
give aid to the enemies of the Church, against Ifrael; the enemies of the
Church should rise against David, in his peculiar charge of Israel: But whilst
David, rouing against the Amalekites, not many days before, left neither man
nor woman alive, how strange is it, that the Amalekites inuading and surprising
Ziglag (in revenge) kill neither man nor woman? Shall we say that mercy is fled
from the breasts of Israelites, and rests in heathens? Or shall we rather
ascribe this to the gracious restraint of God, who having designed Amalek to
the slaughter of Israel, and not Israel to the slaughter of Amalek, moved the
hand of Israel, and held the hands of Amalek; This was that alone, that made
the heathens take up with an vn-bloody revenge; burning only the walls, and
leading away the persons. Israel crossed the revealed will of God, in sparing
Amalek; Amalek fulfills the secret will of God in sparing Israel.

It was still the lot of Amalek, to take Israel at all advantages; upon their
first coming out of Egypt, when they were weary, weak, and unarmed, then did
Amalek assault them: And now, when one part of Israel was in the field against
the Philistims, another was gone with the Philistims against Israel; the
Amalakites set upon the coasts of both; and goes away laded with the spoil: No
other is to be exspected of our spiritual adversaries, who are ever readiest
to assail, when we are the vnreadiest to defend.

It was a woeful spectacle for David and his Soldiers, upon their return to
find ruins and ashes in steed of houses, and in steed of their families,
solitude; Their city was vanished into smoke, their households into captivity;
neither could they know whom to accuse, or where to enquire for redress;
whiles they made account that their home should recompense their tedious
journey with comfort, the miserable desolation of their home doubles the
discomfort of their journey; what remained there but tears and lamentations?
They lifted up their voices, and wept, till they could weep no more* Here was
plenty of nothing but misery and sorrow. The heart of every Israelite was
brim-full of grief; David's ran over; for besides that his cross was the same
with theirs, all theirs was his alone; each man looked on his fellow as a
partner of affliction, but every one looked upon David as the cause of all their
affliction; and (as common displeasure is never but fruitful of revenge) they
all agree to stone him as the auther of their undoing, whom they followed all
this while, as the hopeful means of their aduancements.

Now David's loss is his least grief; neither (as if every thing had conspired
to torment him) can he look besides the aggrauation of his sorrow and danger;
Saul and his soldiers had hunted him out of Israel; the Philistim Courtiers
had hunted him from the favor of Achish; the Amalekites spoiled him in Ziglag;
yet all these are easy adversaries in comparison of his own; his own
followers are so far from pitying his participation of the loss, that they
are ready to kill him, because they are miserable with him. Oh the many and
grievous perplexities of the man after Gods own heart; If all his train had
joined their best helps for the mitigation of his grief, their cordials had
been too weak, but now the vexation that arises from their fury, and malice,
drowneth the sense of their loss, and were enough to distract the most
resolute heart; why should it be strange to us, that we meet with hard trials,
when we see the dear anointed of God thus plunged into evils?

What should the distressed Son of Ishai now do? whether should he think to
turn him? to go back to Israel he durst not; to go to Achish he might not;
to abide amongst those waste heaps he could not; or if there might have been
harbor in those burnt walls, yet there could be no safety to remain with
those mutinous spirits. (But David comforted himself in the Lord his God;) oh
happy and sure refuge of a faithful Soul; The earth yielded him nothing, but
matter of disconsolation, and heaviness; he lifts his eyes above the hills,
whence comes his salvation; It is no marvel that God remembered David in all
his troubles; Since David in all his troubles, did thus remember his God; he
knew that though no mortal eye of reason; or sense could discern any
euasision from these intricate evils, yet that the eye of divine providence had
descryed it long before; and that though no humane power could make way for his
safety, yet that the ouerruling hand of his God, could do it with ease; His
experience had assured him of the fidelity of his Guardian in heaven; and
therefore he comforted himself in the Lord his God.

In uaine is comfort expected from God, if we consult not with him. Abiathar
the Priest is called for; David was not in the court of Achish, without the
Priest by his side; nor the Priest without the Ephod; Had these been left
behind in Ziglag, they had been miscarried with the rest, and David had now
been hopeless. How well it succeedes to the great, when they take God with
them in his Ministers, in his ordinances? As contrarily, when these are laid
by, as superfluous, there can be nothing but uncertainty of success, or
certainty of mischief. The presence of the Priest and Ephod, would have little
auailed him without their use; by them he asks counsel of the Lord in these
straits. The mouth and ears of God, which were shut unto Saul, are open unto
Saul, are open unto David; no sooner can he ask, then he receives answer; and
the answer that he receives is full of courage and comfort. (Follow, for thou
shall surely overtake them, and recover all) That God of truth, never
disappoynted any man's trust. David now finds, that the eye which waited upon
God, was not sent away weeping.

David therefore, and his men, are now upon their march after the Amalekite: It
is no lingering, when God bids us go; They which had promised rest to their
weary limbs, after their return from Achish, in their harbor of Ziglag, are
glad to forget their hopes, and to put their stiff joints unto a new task of
motion; It is no marvel, if two hundred of them were so ouertyred, with their
former toil, that they were not able to pass over the river Besor. David was
a true type of Christ. We follow him in these holy wars, against the spiritual
Amalekites. All of us are not of an equal strength; Some are carried by the
vigor of their faith, through all difficulties; Others, after long pressure,
are ready to languish in the way; Our Leader is not more strong then pitiful;
neither does he scornfully cashier those, whose desires are hearty, whiles
their abilities are unanswerable; How much more should our charity pardon the
infirmities of our brethen; and allow them to sit by the stuff, who cannot
endure the march?

The same Providence, which appointed David to follow the Amalekites; had also
ordered an Egyptian to be cast behind them. This cast servant, whom his
cruel Master, had left to faintness and famine, shall be used as the means
of the recovery of the Israelites loss; and of the revenge of the Amalekites.
Had not his Master neglected him, all these rouers of Amalek, had gone away
with their life and booty; It is not safe to despise the meanest vassal upon
earth. There is a mercy and care due to the most despicable piece of all
humanity; wherein we cannot be wanting without the offense, without the
punishment of God.

Charity distinguishes an Israelite from an Amalekite. David's followers are
strangers to this Egyptian; an Amalekite was his Master; His Master leaves him
to dye (in the field) of sickness and hunger; these strangers relieved him:
and ere they know, whether they might by him receive any light in their
pursuit, they refresh his dying spirits with bread and water, with figs and
raisins; Neither can the haste of their way be any hindrance to their
compassion; He has no Israelitish blood in him, that is utterly merciless;
Perhaps, yet David's Followers might also, in the hope of some intelligence,
show kindness to this forlorn Egyptian. Worldly wisdom teaches us, to sow
small courtesies, where we may reap large haruests of recompense: No sooner
are his spirits recalled, then he requites his food with information. I cannot
blame the Egyptian, that he was so easily induced, to descry these unkind
Amalekites, to merciful Israelites; those that gave him over unto death, to the
restorers of his life; much less, that ere he would descry them; he requires
an oath of security, from so bad a Master; Well does he match death with such
a servitude; Wonderful is the Providence of God; even over those, which are
not in the nearest bonds, his own; Three days, and three nights, had this
poor Egyptian Slave lain sick and hunger-starued in the fields, and looks
for nothing but death, when God sends him succor from the hands of those
Israelites, whom he had helped to spoil; though not so much for his sake, as
for Isreal's, is this heathenish Stragler preserved.

It pleases God, to extend his common favors to all his creatures; but in
miraculous preferuations; he has still wont to have respect to his own. By
this means therefore, are the Israelites brought to the sight of their late
spoylers, whom they find scattered abroad, upon all the earth, eating, and
drinking, and dancing in triumph, for the great prey they had taken.

It was three days at least, since this gainefull forraging of Amalek; and
now, seeing no fear of any Pursuer, and promising themselves safety, in so
great and vntraced a distance, they make themselves merry with so rich and
easy a victory; and now suddenly, when they began to think of enjoying the
beauty and wealth they had gotten; the sword of David was upon their throats.
Destruction is never nearer, then when security has chased away fear. With
how sad faces and hearts, had the wives of David, and the other Captives of
Israel, looked upon the triumphall revels of Amalek; and what a change, do we
think, appeared in them, when they saw their happy and ualiant Rescuers,
flying in upon their insolent Victors, and making the death of the Amalekites,
the ransom of their captivity; They mourned even now at the dances of Amalek;
now in the shriekes and death of Amalek, they shout and rejoice; The mercy of
our God forgets not to enterchange our sorrows with joy, and the joy os the
wicked with sorrow.

The Amalekites have paid a dear lone for the goods of Israel, which they now
restore with their own lives; and now their spoil has made David richer then
he expected; that booty which they had swept from all other parts accrewed to
him.

Those Isralites that could not go on to fight for their share, are comne to
meet their brethren with gratulation. How partial are we wont to be unto our
own causes? Even very Israelites will be ready to fall out for matter of
profit: where self-love has bred a quarrel, every man is subject to flatter
his own case. It seemed plausible, and but just to the actors in this rescue,
that those which had taken no part in the pain, and hazard of the journey,
should receive no part of the commodity. It was favor enough for them to
recover their wives and children, though they shared not in the goods. Wise and
holy David (whose praise was no less, to overcome his own in time of peace,
then his enemies in war) calls his contending followers from law to equity,
and so orders the matter, that since the plaintifes were detained not by will,
but by necessity; and since their forced stay, was useful in garding the
stuff, they should partake equally of the prey with their fellows. A sentence
well-beseeming the justice of Gods anointed. Those that represent God upon
earth, should resemble him in their proceeding. It is the just mercy of our
God, to measure us by our wills not by our abilities; to recompense us
graciously, according to the truth of our desires, and endeavors; and to
account that performed by us, which he only lets us from performing. It
were wide with us, if sometimes purpose did not supply actions. Whiles our heart
faulteth not, we that through spiritual sickness are feign to abide by the
stuff, shall share both in grace and glory with the victors.

The death of Saul.
THe Witch of Endor, had half slain Saul before the battle: It is just, that
they who consult with devils, should go away with discomfort: He has eaten
his last bread, at the hand of a Sorceresse: and now necessity draws him into
that field, where he sees nothing but despair. Had not Saul believed the ill
news of the counterfeit Samuel, he had not been struck down on the ground
with words: Now his belief made him desperate; Those actions which are not
sustained by hope; must needs languish: and are only promoted by outward
compulsion: Whiles the mind is uncertain of success, it relieues it self
with the possibilities of good: in doubts there is a comfortable mixture: but
when it is assured of the worst event, it is utterly discouraged, and dejected.
It has therefore pleased the wisdom of God to hide from wicked men, his
determination of their final estate, that their remainders of hope, may harten
them to good;

In all likelihood on selfsame day, saw David a victor over the Amalakites,
and Saul discomfited by the Philistims; How should it be otherwise? David
consulted with God, and prevailed; Saul with the Witch of Endor and perishes;
The end is commonly answerable to the way; It is an idle injustice when we do
ill to look to speed well. The slaughter of Saul and his sons, was not in the
first scene of this Tragical field, that was rather reserved by God, for the
last act, that Saules measure might be full: God is long ere he strikes, but
when he does, it is to purpose; First, Israel flees and falls down wounded in
mount Gilboa; They had their part in Saul's sin: they were actors in David's
persecution: Justly therefore do they suffer with him, whom they had seconded
in offense. As it is hard to be good under an evil Prince, so it is as rare,
not to be enwrapped in his judgments: It was no small addition to the anguish
of Saul's death, to see his sons dead, to see his people fleeing, and slain
before him; They had sinned in their King, and in them* is their King punished.
The rest were not so worthy of pity; but whose heart would it not touch to
see Jonathan, the good Son of a wicked Father, inuolued in the common
destruction. Death is not partial: All dispositions, all merits are alike to
it: If valor, if holiness, if syncerity of heart could have been any defense
against mortality, Jonathan had suruiued: Now by their wounds and death, no man
can discern which is Jonathan; The soul only finds the difference, which the
body admits not; Death is the common gate both to heaven and hell; we all
pass that, ere our turning to either hand: The sword of the Philistims,
fetches Jonathan through it with his fellows: no sooner is his foot over that
threshold, then God conducteth him to glory: The best cannot be happy but
through their dissolution; Now therefore has Jonathan no cause of complaint,
he is by the rude and cruel hand of a Philistim, but removed to a better
Kingdom, then he leaves to his brother: and at once is his death both a
temporal affliction to the Son of Saul, and an entrance of glory to the
friend of David.

The Philistim-archers shot at random: God directs their arrows into the body
of Saul; Least the discomfiture of his people, and the slaughter of his sons
should not be grief enough to him, he feels himself wounded, and sees
nothing before him but horror and death; and now as a man forsaken of all
hopes, he begs of his armor-bearer that deaths-blow, which else he must (to the
doubling of his indignation) receive from a Philistim. He begs this bloody
favor of his servant, and is denied: Such an awefulnes has God placed in
sovereignty, that no entreaty, no extremity, can move the hand against it:
What metal are those men made of, that can suggest or resolve, and attempt
the violation of majesty? Wicked men care more for the shame of the world, then
the danger of their soul: Desperate Saul will now supply his armor-bearer; and
as a man that bore arms against himself, he falls upon his own sword. What
if he had dyed by the weapon of a Philistim? So did his Son Jonathan, and lost
no glory: These conceits of disreputation prevail with carnal hearts above
all spiritual respects: There is no greater murderer then vainglory: Nothing
more argues an heart void of grace, then to be transported by idle popularity
into actions prejudicial to the Soul.

Evil examples, especially of the great never escaped imitation; the
armor-bearer of Saul follows his master: and dares do that to himself, which
to his King he durst not: as if their own swords had been more familiar
executioners, they yielded unto them, what they grudged to their pursuers. From
the beginning was Saul ever his own enemy, neither did any hands hurt him but
his own: and now his death is suitable to his life: his own hand pays him the
reward of all his wickedness, The end of hypocrites, and envious men is
commonly fearful: Now is the blood of Gods Priests, which Saul shed, and of
David, which he would have shed, required, and requited. The evil spirit had
said the evening before, To morrow thou shall be with me: and now Saul hastes
to make the devil no liar: rather then fail, he gives himself his own
mittimus: Oh the woeful extremities of a dispayring Soul, plundging him ever
into a greater mischief, to avoid the less. He might have been a patient in
another violence, and faultlesse; now whiles he will needs act the Philistims
part upon himself, he lived and dyed a murderer; The case is deadly, when the
prisoner breaks the Iayle, and will not stay for his delivery: and though we
may not pass sentence upon such a Soul, yet upon the fact we may: the Soul
may possibly repent in the parting, the act is heinous, and such as without
repentance, kills the Soul.

It was the next day, ere the Philistims knew how much they were victors; then
finding the dead corpse of Saul and his Sons, they begin their triumphs: The
head of King Saul is cut off in lieu of Goliahs, and now all their Idol
temples ring of their success; Foolish Philistims, If they had not been more
beholden to Saul's sins, then their Gods, they had never carried away the
honor of those trophies: In steed of magnifying the justice of the true God,
who punished Saul with deserved death, they magnify the power of the false:
Superstition is extemely injurious to God: It is no better then theft, to
ascribe unto the second causes that honor which is due unto the first: but to
give Gods glory to those things which neither act, nor are, it is the highest
degree of spiritual robbery.

Saul was none of the best Kings: yet so impatient are his subjects of the
indignity offered to his dead corpse, that they will rather leave their own
bones amongst the Philistims, then the carcass of Saul. Such a close relation
there is betwixt a Prince and subject, that the dishonor of either is
inseparable from both: How willing should we be to hazard our bodies or
substance fo the vindication either of the person, or name of a good King,
whiles he lives to the benefit of our protection: It is an unjust ingratitude
in those men, which can endure the disgrace of them, under whose shelter they
live; but how unnatural is the villainy of those miscreants, that can be
content to be actors in the capital wrongs offered to sovereign authority:

It were a wonder, if after the death of a Prince, there should want some
Pick-thanke, to insinuate himself into his Successor: An Amalekite young
manrides post to Ziklag, to find out David, whom even common rumor had notified
for the anointed heir to the Kingdom of Israel; to be the first messenger of
that news, which he thought could be no other then acceptable; the death of
Saul: and that the tidings might be so much more meritorious, he adds to the
report, what he thinks might carry the greatest retribution: In hope of
reward, or honor, the man is content to belly himself to David: It was not the
spear, but the sword of Saul, that was the instrument of his death: neither
could this stranger find Saul, but dying, since the Armor-bearer of Saul saw
him dead, ere he offered that violence to himself: The hand of this Amalekite
therefore was not guilty, his tongue was: Had not this messenger measured David's
foot, by his own last, he had forborne this piece of the news; and not hoped
to advantage himself by this falsehood: Now he thinks; The tidings of a
Kingdom cannot but please: None but Saul and Jonathan stood in David's way: He
cannot choose, but like to hear of their remouall: Especially, since Saul did
so tyrannously persecute his innocence. If I shall only report the fact done
by another, I shall go away but with the recompense of a lucky Post; whereas,
if I take upon me the action, I am the man, to whom David is beholden for the
Kingdom: he cannot but honor and requite me, as the author of his deliverance
and happiness. Worldly minds think no man can be of any other, then their
own diet; and because they find the respects of self-love, and private
profit, so strongly prevailing with themselves, they cannot conceive, how these
should be capable of a repulse from others.

How much was this Amalekite mocked of his hopes: whiles he imagined, that
David would now triumph, and feast in the assured expectation of the Kingdom,
and possession of the Crown of Israel, he finds him renting his clothes, and
wringing his hands, and weeping, and mourning: as if all his comfort had been
dead with Saul and Jonathan: and yet perhaps he thought: This sorrow of David
is but fashionable, such as great heirs make show of in the fatal day they
have longed for; These tears will soon be dry; the sight of a Crown will
soon breed a succession of other passions: But this error is soon corrected:
For when David had entertained this Bearer, with a sad fast all the day: he
calls him forth in the evening to execution: (How wast thou not afraid (says
he) to put forth thy hand, to destroy the Anointed of the Lord:) Doubtless,
the Amalekite made many fair pleas for himself, out of the grounds of his
own report: Alas, Saul was before fallen upon his own spear. It was but mercy
to kill him, that was half dead, that he might die the shorter: Besides, his
entreaty and importunate prayers, moved me to hasten him, through those
painful gates of death: had I stricken him as an enemy, I had deserved the blow
I had given; now I sent him the hand of a friend: why am I punished for obeying
the voice of a King? and for perfiting what himself begun, and could not
finish: And if neither his own wound, nor mine, had dispatched him, the
Philistims were at his heels, ready to do this same act with insultation,
which I did in favor: and if my hand had not prevented them, wherehad been the
Crown of Israel, which I now have here presented to thee: I could have
delivered that to King Achish, and have been rewarded with honor: let me not
dye for an act well meant to thee, how ever construed by thee: But no pretense
can make his own tale not deadly. (Thy blood be upon thine own head, for
thine own mouth has testified against thee saying, I have slain the Lords
Anointed.) It is a just supposition, that every man is so great a Favorer of
himself, that he will not mis-report his own actions, nor say the worst of
himself: In matter of confession, men may without injury be taken at their
words: If he did it, his fact was capital, If he did it not, his lie: It is
pittyany other recompense should befall those false flatterers, that can be
content to father a sin, to get thanks. Every drop of royal blood is
sacred: For a man to say that he has shed it, is mortal. Of how far
different spirits from this of David, are those men, which suborne the death of
Princes, and celebrate and canonize the murderers. Into their secret, let not
my soul come, my glory, be thou not joined to their assembly.

Abner and Joab.
HOw merciful and seasonable are the provisions of God? Ziglag was now nothing
but ruins and ashes: David might return to the soil where it stood, to the
roofes and walls he could not: No sooner is he disapointed of that harbor,
then God prouides him Cities of Hebron: Saul shall dye to give him elbow-roome:
Now does David find the comfort that his extremity sought in the Lord his God:
Now are his clouds for a time passed over: and the Sun breaks gloriously
forth: David shall reign after his sufferings. So shall we, if we endure to
the end, find a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge,
shall give us at that day: But though David well knew that his head was long
before anointed, and had heard Saul himself confidently auouching his
succession: yet he will not stir from the heaps of Ziglag, till he have
consulted with the Lord: It did not content him, that he had Gods warrant for
the kingdom, but he must have his instructions for the taking possession of
it: How safe and happy is the man that is resolved to do nothing without God?
Neither will generalities of direction be sufficient; even particular
circumstances must look for a word: still is God a pillar of fire, and cloud
to the eye of every Israelite: neither may there be any motion or stay but from
him; That action cannot but succeed, which proceeds upon so sure a warrant:

God sends him to Hebron a city of Judah: Neither will David go up thither
alone, but he takes with him all his men with their whole households: they shall
take such part as himself: As they had shared with him in his misery, so they
shall now in his prosperity: Neither does he take advantage of their late
mutinye (which was yet fresh and green) to cashier those unthankful, and
ungracious followers, but pardoning their secret rebellions, he makes them
partakers of his good success. Thus does our heavenly leader (whom David
prefigured) take us to reign with him who have suffered with him: passing by
our manyfold infirmities, as if they had not been, he remoueth us from the
land of our banishment, and the ashes of our forlorn Ziklag, to the Hebron of
our peace, and glory: The expectation of this day must (as it did with David's
soldiers) digest all our sorrows.

Never any calling of God was so conspicuous, as not to find some opposites:
What Israelite did not know David, appointed by God to the succession of the
kingdom? Even the Amalekite, could carry the Crown to him as the true owner:
yet there wants not an Abner to resist him, and the title of an Ishbosheth to
color his resistance: If any of Saul's house could have made challenge to the
Crown, it should have been Mephibosheth the Son of Jonathan: Who, it seems
had too much of his Fathers blood to be a competitor with David: the question
is not who may claim the most right, but who may best serve the faction;
Neither was Ishbosheth any other then Abners stale: Saul could not have a
fitter Courtier: whether in imitation of his masters envy, or the ambition of
ruling under a borrowed name, he strongly opposes David: there are those who
strive against their own hearts, to make a side, with whom conscience is
oppressed by affection: An ill quarrel once undertaken shall be maintained,
although with blood: Now, not so much the blood of Saul, as the engagement of
Abner makes the war. The Sons of Zeruiah stand fast to David: It is much,
how a man places his first interest: If Abner had been in Ioabs room, when
Saul's displeasure drove David from the Court, or Ioab in Abners, these actions,
these events had been changed with the persons: It was the only happiness of
Ioab that he fell on the better side:

Both the Commanders under David and Ishbosheth were equally cruel: both are
so inured to blood, that they make but a sport of killing* Custom makes sin
so familiar, that the horror of it, is to some turned into pleasure. (Come let
the young men play before us.) Abner is the Challenger, and speeds thereafter:
for though in the matches of duel both sides miscarried, yet in the following
conflict, Abner and his men are beaten: By the success of those single combats
no man knows the better of the cause: Both sides perish, to show, how little
God liked either the offer, or the acceptance of such a trial, but when both
did their best, God punishes the wrong part with discomfiture.

Oh, the misery of civil dissension: Israel and Judah were brethren: One
carried the name of the Father, the other of the Son: Judah was but a branch
of Israel, Israel was the root of Judah: yet Judah and Israel must fight, and
kill each other; only upon the quarrel of an ill leaders ambition. The speed
of Asahel was not greater then his courage: It was a mind fit for one of
David's worthies, to strike at the head, to match himself with the best: He was
both swift and strong: but the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong: If he had gone never so slowly, he might have overtaken death: now he
runs to fetch it. So little lust had Abner to shed the blood of a Son of
Zeruiah, that he twice aduises him to retreat from pursuing his own peril:
Asahels cause was so much better as Abners success: Many a one mis-carries in
the rash prosecution of a good quarrel, when the Abettors of the worst part
go away with victory. Heat of zeal, sometimes in the indiscreet pursuit of a
just adversary, proves mortal to the agent, prejudicial to the service.

Abner, whiles he kills, yet he flies, and runs away from his own death,
whiles he inflicts it upon another: David's followers had the better of the
field and day; The Sun, as unwilling to see any more Israelitish blood shed by
brethren, has withdrawn himself: and now both parts having got the advantage
of an hill under them, have safe conuenience of parley: Abner begins, and
persuades Ioab to surcease the fight (Shall the sword devour for ever? Know
thou not, that it will be bitterness in the end? How long shall it be, ere
thou bid the people return from following their brethren?) It was his fault,
that the sword devoured at all: and why was not the beginning of a civil war
bitterness? why did he call forth the people to skirmish, and inuit them to
death? Had Abner been on the winning hand, this motion had been thank-worthy:
It is a noble disposition in a Victor, to call for a cessatum of arms: whereas
necessity wrings this suit from the ouer-mastered. There cannot be a greater
praise, to a valiant and wise Commander, then a propension to all just terms
of peace: For war, as it is sometimes necessary, so it is always evil; and
if fighting have any other end proposed besides peace, it proves murder. Abner
shall find himself no less overcome, by Ioab in clemency, then power; He
says not, I will not so easily leave the advantage of my victory: since the
dice of war run on my side, I will follow the chase of my good success: Thou
should have considered of this before thy provocation: It is now too late,
to move unto forbearance: but, as a man that meant to approve himself equally
free from cowardice, in the beginning of the conflict, and from cruelty in the
end; he professes his forwardness, to entertain any pretense of sheathing up
the swords of Israel; and swears to Abner, that if it had not been for his
proud irritation, the people had in the morning before ceased from that bloody
pursuit of their brethren: As it becomes public persons to be lovers of
peace, so they must show it upon all good occasions: letting pass no
opportunity of making spare of blood.

Ishbosheth was (it seems) a man of no great spirits, for being no less then
forty years old, when his father went into his last field against the
Philistims, he was content to stay at home; Abner has put ambition unto him;
and has easily raised him to the head of a faction, against the anointed
Prince of Gods people. If this usurped Crown of Saul's son, had any worth or
glory in it, he cannot but acknowledge, to owe it all unto Abner, yet how
forward is unthankful Ishbosheth to receive a false suggestion against his
chief Abettor: (Wherefore have thou gone in, to my fathers Concubine?) He that
made no conscience of an unjust claim of the Crown, and a maintenance of it
with blood, yet seems scrupulous of a less sin, that carried in it the
color of a disgrace; The touch of her, who had been honored by his fathers
bed, seemed an intolerable presumption, and such as could not be severed from
his own dishonor: Self-love sometimes borrowes the face of honest zeal.
Those, who out of true grounds, dislike sins, do hate them all indifferently,
according to their haynousnesse; hypocrites are partial in their detestation;
bewraying ever most bitterness, against those offenses, which may most
prejudice their persons and reputations.

It is as dangerous as unjust for Princes, to give both their ears and their
heart to misgrounded rumors of their innocent followers: This wrong has stripped
Ishbosheth of the Kingdom; Abner in the mean time cannot be excused from a
treacherous inconstancy; If Saul's son had no true title to the Crown, why did
he maintain it; If he had, why did he forsake the cause and person? Had
Abner out of remorse, for furthering a false claim taken off his hand, I know
not wherein he could be blamed, except for not doing it sooner; But now to
withdraw his professed allegegeance, upon a private revenge, was to take a lewd
leave of an ill action: If Ishbosheth were his lawful Prince, no injury could
warrant a revolt; Even betwixt private persons, a return of wrongs is both
uncharitable, and unjust, how ever this go current for the common justice of
the world, how much more should we learn from a supreme hand, to take hard
measures with thanks? It had been Abuers duty, to have given his King a
peaceable and humble satisfaction, and not to fly out in a snuff. If the
spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place, for yielding,
pacifieth great offenses; now, his impatient falling, although to the right
side, makes him no better then traitorously honest.

So soon as Abner has entertained a resolution of his rebellion; he
persuades the Elders of Israel to accompany him in the change: and whence does
he fetch his main motive, but from the Oracle of God? (The Lord has spoken of
David, saying, By the hand of my servant David, will I save my people Israel,
out of the hand of the Philistims, and out of the hand of all their enemies;)
Abner knew this full well before, yet then was well content to smother a known
truth for his own turn, and now the publication of it may serve for his
advantage, he wins the heart of Israel, by showing Gods Charter for him, whom
he had so long opposed: Hypocrites make use of God for their own purposes; and
care only to make divine authority a color for their own designs; No man
ever heard Abner godly till now; neither had he been so at this time, if he
had not intended a reuengefull departure from Ishbosheth: Nothing is more
odious, then to make religion a stalking horse to policy.

Who can but glorify God in his Justice, when he sees the bitter end of this
treacherous dissimulation: David may upon considerations of state, entertain
his new guest with a feast; and well might he seem to deserve a welcome, that
undertakes to bring all Israel to the league and homage of David: but God never
meant to use so unworthy means, for so good a work. Ioab returns from
pursuing a troop, and finding Abner dismissed in peace and expectation of a
beneficial return follows him, and whether out of envy, at a new rival of
honor, or out of the revenge of Asahel, he repayes him both dissimulation and
death; God does most justly by Ioab, that which Ioab did for himself most
unjustly, I know not (setting the quarrel aside) whether we can worthily blame
Abner for the death of Asahel, who would needs after fair warnings, run
himself upon Abners spear: yet this fact shall procure his payment for worse.
Now is Ishbosheths wrong revenged by an enemy; we may not always measure the
Justice of Gods procedings, by present occasions; He needs not make us
acquainted, or ask us leave when he will call for the arrerages of forgotten
sins.

Contemplations UPON THE HISTORY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK:

Vzzah and the Arc David with Mephibosheth and Ziba. Hanun and David's
Ambassadors David with Bashsheba and Vriah Nathan and David Amon and Thamar
Absaloms return and Conspiracy.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, WILLIAM Lord Burleigh All grace and
happiness.
Right Honorable,
THere are but two Books wherein we can read God; The one is his word, his
works the other; This is the bigger volume, that the more exquisite. The
Characters of this are more large, but dim; of that, smaller but clearer.
Philosophers have turned over this, and erred; That, Divines and studious
Christians, not without full and certain information. In the works of God we
see the shadow, or footsteps of the Creator, in his word we see the face of
God in a glass. Happiness consists in the vision of that infinite Majesty: and
if we be perfectly happy above in seeing him face to face, our happiness is
well forward below, in seeing the lively representation of his face in the
glass of the Scriptures. We cannot spend our eyes too much upon this object;
For me, the more I see, the more I am amazed, the more I am ravished with this
glorious beauty: With the honest lepers, I cannot be content to enjoy this
happy sight alone; there is but one way to every man's felicity; May it please
your Lordship to take part with many your Peers in these my weak; but not
unprofitable Contemplations; which shall hold themselves not a little graced
with your Honorable name; Whereto, together with your right noble and most
worthy Lady, I have gladly devoted my self; to be

Your Lordships in all dutiful observance IOS: HALL.

Vzzah and the Arc removed.
THe house of Saul is quiet, the Philistims beaten, victory cannot end better
then in devotion; David is no sooner settled in his house at Jerusalem, then he
fetches God to be his guest there; the thousands of Israel go now in an holy
march, to bring up the Ark of God, to the place of his rest: The tumults of
war afforded no opportunity of this service; only peace is a friend to
religion, neither is peace ever our friend, but when it is a servant of piety:
The use of war is not more pernicious to the body, then the abuse of peace is
to the Soul; Alas, the riot bred of our long ease, rather drives the Ark of
God from us; so the still sedentary life, is subject to diseases, and standing
waters putrify. It may be just with God, to take away the blessing which we
do so much abuse, and to scour off our rust with bloody war, etc.

The Ark of God had now many years, rested in the obscure lodge of Abinadab,
without the honor of a Tabernacle. David will not endure himself glorious, and
the Ark of God contemptible, his first care is to provide a fit room for God;
in the head of the Tribes, in his own city; The chief care of good Princes,
must be the advancement of religion; What should the deputies of God rather do,
then honor him whom they represent? It was no good that Israel could learn of
Philistims; Those Pagans had sent the Ark back in a new cart; the Israelites
saw God blessed that conduct, and now they practice it at home: But that which
God will take from Philistims, he will not brook from Israel; Aliens from God
are no fit patterns for children: Divine institution had made this a carriage
for the Levites, not for Oxen: Neither should those Sons of Abinadab have
driven the cart, but carried that sacred burden. Gods businesses must be done
after his own forms, which if we do with the best intentions alter, we
presume:

It is long, since Israel saw so fair a day as this, wherein they went in this
holy triumph to fetch the Ark of God; Now their warlike trumpets are turned
into Harpes and Timbrils; and their hands in steed of weilding the Sword and
Spear, strike upon those musical strings whereby they might express the joy
of their hearts; here was no noise but of mirth, no motion but pleasant: oh
happy Israel that had a God to rejoice in, that had this occasion of rejoicing
in their God, and an heart that embraced this occasion. There is nothing but
this wherein we may not joy immoderately, unseasonably; this spiritual joy
can never be either out of time, or out of measure* let him that rejoices,
rejoice in the Lord. But now when the Israelites were in the midst of this
Angel-like iolity, their hearts lifted up, their hands playing, their feet
moving, their tongues singing and shouting, God sees good to strike them into a
sudden dumpe by the death of Vzzah: They are scarce set into the tune when God
mars their Music, by a fearful judgment; and changes their mirth into
astonishment, and confusion; There could not be more excellent work then this
they were about; there could not be more cheerful hearts in the performing of
it, yet will the most holy God rather dash all this solemn service, then
endure an act of presumption or infidelity. Abinadab had been the faithful
host of Gods Ark, for the space of twenty years: even in the midst of the
terrors of Israel, who were justly affrighted with the vengance inflicted upon
Beth-shemesh, did he give harbor unto it; Yet even the Son of Abinadab is
stricken dead, in the first departing of that blessed guest: The Sanctity of the
Parent cannot bear out the sin of his Son: The holy one of Israel will be
sanctified in all that come near him: He will be served like himself.

What then was the sin of Vzzah? What was the capital crime, for which he so
fearfully perished? That the Ark of God was committed to the Cart, it was not
his device only, but the common act of many, That it was not carried on the
shoulders of Levites, was no less the fault of Ahio, and the rest of their
brethren; only Vzzah is stricken: The rest sinned in negligence, he in
presumption; the Ark God shakes with the agitation of that carriage; he puts
forth his hand to hold it steady; Humane judgment would have found herein
nothing heinous: God sees not with the eyes of men; None but the Priests should
have dared to touch the Ark; It was enough for the Levites to touch the bars
that carried it; An unwarranted hand cannot so lightly touch the Ark, but he
strikes the God that dwells in it: No marvel if God strike that man with death,
that strikes him with presumption; There was wel-neare the same quarrel against
the thousands of Bethshemesh, and against Vzzah; They dyed for looking into the
Ark, he for touching it; least Israel should grow into a contemptuous
familiarity with this Testimony of Gods presence, he will hold them in awe with
judgments: The revenging hand of the Almighty, that upon the return of the
Ark stayed at the house of Ahinadab, upon the remove of the Ark begins there
again: Where are those that think God will take up with a careless and
slubbred service? He whose infinite mercy uses to pass by our sins of
infirmity, punishes yet severely our bold faults: If we cannot do any thing
in the degrees that he requires, yet we must learn to do all things in the
form that he requires; Doubtless Vzzah meant no otherwise then well in
putting forth his hand to stay the Ark; He knew the sacred vtensills that were
in it, the pot of Manna, the Tables of the Law, the rod of Aaron, which might
be wronged by that ouer-rough motion: to these he offers his aid, and is
stricken dead; The best intentions cannot excuse; much less warrant us in
unlawful actions; where we do ought in faith, it pleases our good God to
wink at, and pity our weaknesses; but if we dare to present God with the
well-meant services of our own making, we run into the indignation of God;
There is nothing more dangerous, then to be our own caruers in matter of
devotion.

I marvel not if the countenance of David were suddenly changed, to see the
pale face of death in one of the chief actors in this holy procession: He
that had found God so favorable to him in actions of less worth, is troubled
to see this success of a business so heartily directed unto his God; and now
he begins to look through Vzzah at himself, and to say, (How shall the Ark of the Lord come to me?) Then only shall we make a right use of the judgments of
God upon others, when we shall fear them in our selves, and finding our sins
at least equal, shall tremble at the expectation of the same deserved
punishments. God intends not only revenge in his executions, but reformation;
As good Princes regard not so much the smart of the evil past, as the
prevention of the future; which is never attained, but when we make
applications of Gods hand; and draw common cases out of Gods particular
proceedings.

I do not hear David say; Surely, this man is guilty of some secret sin, that
the world knows not; God has met with him; there is no danger to us; why
should I be discouraged to see God just? We may go on safely and prosper;
but here his foot stays, and his hand falls from his instrument, and his tongue
is ready to tax his own unworthiness, (How shall the Ark of the Lord come
unto me?) That heart is carnal and proud, that thinks any man worse then
himself; David's fear stays his progress; Perhaps, he might have proceeded
with good success, but he dares not venture, where he sees such a deadly
check: It is better to be too fearful, then too forward in those affairs,
which do immediately concern God; As it is not good to refrain from holy
businesses, so it is worse to do them ill; Awfulnesse is a safe interpreter of
Gods secret actions, and a wise guide of ours.

This event has helped Obed-Edom to a guest he looked not for, God shall now
soiourne in the house of him, in whose heart he dwelt before by a strong faith;
else the man durst not have undertaken, to receive that dreadful Arc, which
David himself feared to harbor; Oh the courage of an honest and faithful
heart; Obed-Edom knew well enough what slaughter the Arc had made among the
Philistims, and after that amongst the Beth shemites, and now he saw Vzzah lie
dead before him, yet does he not make any scruple of entertaining it, neither
does he say, My neigbour Abinadab was a careful and religious host to the Ark,
and is now paid with the blood of his son; how shall I hope to speed better;
but he opens his doors with a bold cheerfulness, and notwithstanding all
those terrors, bids God welcome: Nothing can make God not amiable to his own;
Even his very Justice is lovely: Holy men know how to rejoice in the Lord with
trembling, and can fear without discouragement.

The God of Heaven will not receive any thing from men on free cost; he will
pay liberally for his lodging, a plentiful blessing upon Obed-Edom, and all
his household. It was an honor to that zealous Gittite, that the Arc would
come under his roof; yet God rewards that honor with benediction: Never man
was a loser by true godliness; The house of Obed-Edom cannot this while want
observation; the eyes of David, and all Israel are never off from it, to see
how it fared with this entertainment. And now, when they find nothing, but a
gracious acceptance and sensible blessing, the good King of Israel takes new
heart, and hastens to fetch the Arc into his royal City. The view of Gods
favors upon the godly, is no small encouragement to confidence and obedience;
Doubtless, Obed-Edom was not free from some weaknesses; If the Lord should
have taken the advantage of judgment against him, what Israelites had not been
dishartned from attending the Arc? Now David and Israel was not more
affrighted with the vengeance upon Vzzah, then encouraged by the blessing of
Obed-Edom; The wise God does so order his just and merciful proceedings, that
the awefulnesse of men may be tempered with love. Now the sweet singer of
Israel reuiues his holy Music; and adds both more spirit and more pomp to
so devout a business* I did not before hear of trumpets, nor dancing, nor
shouting, nor sacrifices, nor the linen Ephod; The sense of Gods passed
displeasure, doubles our care to please him, and our joy in his recovered
approbation; we never make so much of our health, as after sickness, nor
never are so officious to our friend, as after an unkindness. In the first
setting out of the Ark, David's fear was at least an equal match to his joy;
therefore after the first six paces he offered a sacrifice, both to pacify
God, and thank him: but now when they saw no sign of dislike, they did more
freely let themselves loose to a fearelesse joy; and the body strove to
express the holy affection of the Soul; there was no limme, no part that did
not profess their mirth by motion, no noise of voice, or instrument wanted to
assist their spiritual iollity; David led the way, dancing with all his might
in his linen Ephod; Vzzah was still in his eye; he durst not usurp upon a
garment of Priests; but he will borrow their color to grace the solemnity,
though he dare not the fashion; White was ever the color of joy, and linen
was light for use; therefore he couers his Princely robes with white linnin, and
means to honor himself by his conformity to Gods ministers. Those that think
there is disgrace in the Ephod, are far from the Spirit of the man after Gods
own heart; Neither can there be a greater argument of a foul Soul, then a
dislike of the glorious calling of God: Barren Mical has too many Sons that
scorn the holy habit and exercises: she looks through her window, and seeing
the attire and gestures of her devout husband, despises him in her heart,
neither can she conceal her contempt, but like Saul's daughter cast it proudly
in his face (Oh how glorious was the King of Israel this day; which was
uncovered to day in the eyes of the Maidens of his servants, as a fool
uncovers himself.) Worldly hearts can see nothing in actions of zeal, but
folly and madness: Piety has no relish to their palate but distasteful.

David's heart did never swell so much at any reproach, as this of his wife; his
love was for the time lost in his anger; and as a man impatient of no affront
so much as in the way of his devotion, he returns a bitter check to his
Micall; (It was before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy Father, and all
his house, etc.) Had not Mical twitted her husband with the shame of his zeal,
she had not heard of the shameful reiection of her Father; now since she will
be forrgetting, whose wife she was, she shall be put in mind whose daughter
she was. Contumelyes that are cast upon us in the causes of God, may safely be
repayed: If we be meal-mouthed in the scorns of religion, we are not patient,
but zeale-lesse: Here we may not forbear her, that lies in our bosom. If
David had not loved Mical dearly, he had never stood upon those points with
Abner; He knew that if Abner came to him, the Kingdom of Israel would
accompany him, and yet he sends him the charge of not seeing his face, except
he brought Mical, Saul's daughter with him; as if he would not regard the Crown
of Israel, whiles he wanted that wife of his; Yet here he takes her up
roundly, as if she had been an enemy, not a partener of his bed; All relations
are a loofe off, in comparison of that betwixt God, and the Soul; He that
loves Father, or Mother, or wife, or child, better then me (says our Savior)
is not worthy of me. Even the highest delights of our hearts must be trampled
upon, when they will stand out in riuality with God. Oh happy resolution of the
royal Prophet, and prophetical King of Israel, (I will be yet more vile then
thus, and will be low in mine own sight) he knew this very abasement
heroycall; and that the only way to true glory, is not to be ashamed of our
lowest humiliation unto God: Well might he promise himself honor from those,
whose contempt she had threatened; The hearts of men are not their own, he
that made them, ouer-rules them, and inclines them to an honorable conceit of
those that honor their maker; So as holy men have oft-times inward reverence,
even where they have outward indignities. David came to bless his house, Mical
brings a curse upon her self; Her scorns shall make her childelesse to the
day of her death; Barrenness was held in those times, none of the least
judgments; God does so revenge David's quarrel upon Mical, that her sudden
disgrace, shall be recompensed with perpetual: She shall not be held worthy
to bear a Son, to him whom she unjustly contemned; How just is it with God
to provide whips for the back scorners? It is no marvel if those that mock at
goodness, be plagued with continual fruitlesnesse.

Mephibosheth and Ziba.
SO soon as ever David can but breathe himself from the public cares, he
casts back his thoughts to the dear remembrance of his Jonathan. Saul's
servant is likely to give him the best intelligence of Saul's sons; The question
is therefore moved to Ziba; Remains there yet none of the house of Saul? and
lest suspicion might conceal the remainders of an emulous line in fear of
revenge intended, he adds: On whom I may show the mercy of God for Ionathans
sake. O friendship worthy of the monuments of eternity; fit only to requite
him, whose love was more then the love of women; He does not say, Is there any
of the house of Jonathan, but of Saul; that for his friends sake he may show
favor to the posterity of his Persecutor. Ionathans love could not be greater
then Saul's malice, which also suruiued long in his issue; from whom David found
a busy and stubborn riuality for the Crown of Israel; yet as one that gladly
buried all the hostility of Saul's house in Ionathans grave, he asks, Is there
am man left of Saul's house, that I may show him mercy for Ionathans sake? It is
true love that ouer-liues in the person of a friend, will be inherited of his
seed* but to love the posterity of an enemy in a friend, it is the miracle of
friendship: The formal amity of the world is confined to a face; or to the
possibility of recompense, languishing in the disability, and dying in the
decease of the party affected: That love was ever false, that is not ever
constant, and then most operative, when it cannot be either known, or
requited.

To cut of all unquiet competition for the Kingdom of Israel, the providence
of God had so ordered, that there is none left to the house of Saul (besides
the sons of his Concubines) save only young and lame Mephibosheth; so young,
that he was but five years of age, when David entered upon the government of
Israel; so lame, that if his age had fitted, his impotence had made him unfit
for the throne. Mephibosheth was not borne a Cripple, it was an heedlesse nurse
that made him so: She hearing of the death of Saul and Jonathan, made such
haste to flee, that her young Master was lamed with the fall: Ywis there needed
no such speed to run away from David; whose love pursues the hidden son of his
brother Jonathan: How often does our ignorant mistaking, cause us to run from
our best friends, and to catch knocks and maymes of them that profess our
protection?

Mephibosheth could not come otherwise then fearfully, into the presence of
David, whom he knew so long; so spitefully opposed by the house of Saul: he
could not be ignorant, that the fashion of the world is, to build their own
security upon the blood of the opposite faction; neither to think themselves
safe, whiles any branch remains springing out of that root of their emulation:
Seasonably does David therefore first, expel all those unjust doubts, ere he
administer his further cordials; (Fear not; for I will surely show thee
kindness, for Jonathan thy fathers sake, and will restore thee all the fields
of Saul thy father, and thou shall eat bread at my table continually:)

David can see neither Saul's blood, nor lame legs in Mepibosheth, whiles he
sees in him the features of his friend Jonathan; how much less shall the God of
mercies regard our infirmities, or the corrupt blood of our sinful
progenitors, whiles he beholds us in the face of his son, in whom he is well
pleased.

Favors are wont so much more to affect us, as they are less expected by us;
Mephibosheth as ouer-ioyed with so comfortable a word, and confounded in
himself at the remembrance of the contrary deseruings of his family, bows
himself to the earth, and says (What is thy servant, that thou should look
upon such a dead dog as I am?) I find no defect of wit, (though of limbs) in
Mephibosheth, he knew himself the grandchild of the King of Israel, the Son
of Jonathan, the lawful heir of both, yet in regard of his own impotency,
and the trespass and reiection of his house, he thus abaseth himself unto
David; Humiliation is a right use of Gods afflictions; What if we were borne
great? If the sin of his grandfather has lost his estate, and the hand of
his Nurse has deformed and disabled his person, he now forgets what he was,
and calls himself worse then he is a, A dog; Yet a living dog, is better
then a dead Lion; there is dignity and comfort in life; Mephibosheth is
therefore a Dead Dog unto David: It is not for us to nourish the same Spirits
in our adverse estate, that we found in our highest prosperity; What use have
we made of Gods hand, if we be not the lower with our fall? God intends we
should carry our cross, not make a fire of it to warm us; It is no bearing up
our sails in a tempest; Good David cannot dis-esteeme Mephibosheth ever the
more for disparaging himself; he loves and honors this humility, in the Son of
Jonathan; There is no more certain way to glory and advancement, then a lowly
deiection of our selves: He that made himself a dog, and therefore fit only
to lie under the table, Yea a dead dog, and therefore fit only for the ditch,
is raised up to the Table of a King; his seat shall be honorable, yea,
royal, his fare delicious, his attendance noble. How much more will our
gracious God, lift up our heads, unto true honor before men and Angels, if we
can be syncerely humbled in his sight? If we miscall our selves in the
meandness of our conceits to him, he gives us a new name, and sets us at the
table of his glory; It is contrary with God and men; if they reckon of us as
we set out our selves, he values us according to our abasements. Like a
Prince truly munificent and faithful, David promises and performs at once;
Ziba Saul's servant has the charge given him, of the execution of that royal
word; He shall be the Bayliffe of this great husbandry of his master
Mephibosheth; The land of Saul, how ever forfaited, shall know no other master
then Saul's grandchild; As yet, Saul's servant had sped better then his Son* I
read of twenty servants of Ziba, none of Mephibosheth; Earthly possessions, do
not always admit of equal divisions; The wheel is now turned up;
Mephibosheth is a Prince, Ziba is his officer; I cannot but pity the condition
of this good Son of Jonathan; Into how ill hands did honest Mephibosheth fall,
first, of a careless Nurse, then of a treacherous servant; She maimed his body,
he would have overthrown his estate; After some years of eye service to
Mephibosheth, wicked Ziba intends to give him a worse fall then his nurse.
Never any Court was free from detractors, from delators, who if they see a man
to be a creeple, that he cannot go to speak for himself, will be telling
tales of him, in the ears of the great; such a one was this perfidious Ziba;
who taking the opportunity of David's flight from his Son Absalom, follows him
with a fair present, and a false tale, accusing his impotent master of a foul
and traiterous ingratitude; laboring to tread upon his lame Lord to raise
himself to honor: True-harted Mephibosheth had as good a will as the best; if
he could have commanded legs, he had not been left behind David: now that
he cannot go with him; he will not be well without him; and therefore puts
himself to a wilful and sullen penance, for the absence and danger of his
King; he will not so much as put on clean clothes for the time, as he that
could not have any joy in himself, for the want of his Lord David;
Unconscionable miscreants care not how they collogue, whom they slander for a
private advantage; Lewd Ziba comes with a gift in his hand, and a smooth tale
in his mouth; Oh sir, you thought you had a Jonathan at home; but you will
find a Saul, It were pity but he should be set at your table, that would
sit in your throne; you thought Saul's land would have contented Mephibosheth,
but he would have all yours; though he be lame yet he would be climbing;
would you have thought that this creple could be plotting for your kingdom,
now that you are but gone aside? Ishbosheth will never die whiles Mephibosheth
lives: How did he now forget his impotence, and raised up his spirits in hope
of a day; and durst say, that now the time was comne, wherein the Crown should
reuert to Saul's true heir, Oh viper: If a Serpent bite in secret when he is
not charmed, no better is a slanderer; Honest Mephibosheth in good manners made
a dead dog of himself, when David offered him the favor of his board; but Ziba
would make him a very dog indeed, an illnatur'd curre, that when David did thus
kindly feed him at his own table, would not only bite his fingers, but fly
at his throat.

But what shall we say to this? Neither earthly sovereignty, nor holiness can
exempt men from humane infirmities. Wise and good David has now but one ear;
and that misled; with credulity; His charity in believing Ziba, makes him
uncharitable in distrusting, in censuring Mephibosheth. The detractor has not
only sudden credit given him, but Saul's land, Ionathans Son has lost (unheard)
that inheritance, which was given him unsought. Hearsay is no safe ground of
any judgment; Ziba slanders, David believes, Mephibosheth suffers.

Lies shall not always prosper, God will not abide the truth to be ever
oppressed; At last Ionathans lame Son shall be found as sound in heart, as
lame in his body; He whose Soul was like his father Ionathans Soul, whose
body was like to his grandfather Saul's Soul, meets David (as it was high
time) upon his return; bestirs his tongue, to discharge himself of so foul a
slander; The more horrible the crime had been, the more villainous was the
unjust suggestion of it, and the more necessary was a just Apology; Sweetly
therefore, and yet passionately does he labor to greaten David's favors to
him; his own obligations and vileness; showing himself more affected with
his wrong, then with his loss; welcomming David home with a thankful neglect
of himself, as not caring that Ziba had his substance, now that he had his
king. David is satisfied, Mephibosheth restored to favor and lands; here are
two kind hearts well met. David is full of satisfaction from Mephibosheth;
Mephibosheth runs over with joy in David: David, like a gracious King, gives
Mephibosheth (as before) Saul's lands to halues with Ziba; Mephibosheth, like a
King, gives all to Ziba, for joy that God had given him David; All had been
well, if Ziba had fared worse; Pardon me, o holy and glorious soul of a
Prophet, of a King, after Gods own heart, I must needs blame thee for mercy: A
fault that the best and most generous natures are most subject to. It is pity,
that so good a thing should do hurt; yet we find, that the best, misvsed is
most dangerous: Who should be the pattern of Kings, but the King of God? Mercy
is the gentliest flower in his Crown, much more in theirs, but with a
difference. Gods mercy is infinite, theirs limited; he says, I will have mercy
on whom I will: they must say, I will have mercy on whom I should: And yet he,
for all his infinite mercy, has vessels of wrath, so must they; of whom his
Justice has said, Thine eye shall not spare them: A good man is pitiful to
his beast, shall he therefore make much of toads and snakes? Oh that Ziba
should go away with any possession, save of shame and sorrow; that he should
be coupled with a Mephibosheth in a partnership of estates: Oh that David had
changed the word a little;

A division was due here indeed; but of Ziba's ears from his head, or his head
from his shoulders, for going about so maliciously, to divide David from the
son of Jonathan; An eye for an eye, was Gods rule; If that had been true,
which Ziba suggested against Mephibosheth, he had been worthy to lose his head
with his lands, being false, it had been but reason, Ziba should have changed
heads with Mephibosheth; Had not holy David himself been so stung with
venomous tongues, that he cries out in the bitterness of his soul; What
reward shall be given to thee, o thou false tongue? even sharp arrows with hot
burning coals. He that was so sensible of himself in Doegs wrong, does he
feel so little of Mephibosheth in Ziba's? Are these the arrows of David's
quiver? are these his hot burning coals (Thou and Ziba divide?) He that had
said, Their tongue isa sharp sword, now that he had the sword of just revenge
in his hand, is this the blow he gives, Divide the possessions? I know not
whether, excess, or want of mercy, may prove most dangerous in the great; the
one may discourage good intentions with fear; the other may encourage wicked
practices through presumption; Those that are in eminent place, must learn the
midway betwixt both; so pardoning faults, that they may not provoke them; so
punishing them, that they may not dishearten virtuous and wel-meant actions;
they must learn to sing that absolute ditty (whereof David had here forgotten
one part) of Mercy and Judgment.

Hanun and David's Ambassadors.
IT is not the meaning of religion, to make men uncivil; If the King of Ammon
were heathenish, yet his kindness may be acknowledged, may be returned by the
King of Israel. I say not, but that perhaps David, might maintain too strayt a
league with that forbidden nation; A little friendship is enough to an Idolater;
but even the savage Cannibals may receive an answer of outward courtesy: If a
very dog fawn upon us, we stroke him on the head, and clap him on the side;
much less is the common band of humanity untied by Grace: Disparity in
spiritual professions, is no warrant for ingratitude: He therefore, whose good
nature proclaimed to show mercy to any branch of Saul's house, for Ionathans
sake, will now also show kindness to Hanun, for the sake of Nahash his father.

It was the same Nahash, that offered the cruel condition to the men of Iabesh
Gilead, of thrusting out their right eyes for the admission into his covenant.
He that was thus bloody in his designs against Israel, yet was kind to David;
perhaps for no cause so much, as Saul's opposition; And yet even this favor is
held worthy both of memory; and retribution: where we have the acts of
courtesy, it is not necessary we should enter into a strict examination of
the grounds of it; whiles the benefit is ours, let the intention be their own;
What ever the hearts of men are, we must look at their hands, and repay, not
what they meant, but what they did;

Nahash is dead, David sends Ambassadors to condole his loss, and to comfort
his son Hanun. No Ammonite, but is sadly affected with the death of a father,
though it gain him a Kingdom: Even Esau could say, the days of mourning for
my father will come; No earthly advantage can fill up the gap of nature: Those
children are worse then Ammonites, that can think either gain, or liberty,
worthy to counteruaile a parents loss.

Carnal men are wont to measure another foot, by their own last; their own
falsehood makes them unjustly suspicious of others. The Princes of Ammon,
because they are guilty to their own hollownesse, and doubleness of heart,
are ready so to judge of David and his messengers (Think thou that David
does honor thy father, that he has sent comforters unto thee. Has not David
rather sent his own servants to thee, to search the City, and to spy it out,
to overthrow it;) It is hard for a wicked heart to think well of any other;
because it can think none better then it self, and knows it self evil: The
freer a man is from vice himself, the more charitable he uses to be unto
others.

Whatsoever David was particularly in his own person, it was ground enough of
prejudice, that he was an Israelite; It was an hereditary and deep settled
hatred, that the Ammonites had conceived against their brethren of Israel:
neither can they forget that shameful and fearful foil, which they received
from the rescuers of Iabesh-Gilead; and now still do they stomach at the name
of Israel; Malice once conciued in worldly hearts, is not easily extinguished,
but upon all occasions, is ready to break forth into a flame of reuengefull
actions.

Nothing can be more dangerous, then for young Princes, to meet with ill
counsel in the entrance of their government; for both then are they most prone
to take it, and most difficultly recovered from it; If we be set out of our way
in the beginning of our journey, we wander all the day; How happy is that
state, where both the Counselors are faithful, to give only good advice; and
the King wise to discern good advice from evil: The young King of Ammon is
easily drawn to believe his Peers, and to mistrust the messengers; and having
now in his conceit turned them into Spies, entertaines them with a scornful
disgrace; he shaues off, one half of their beards, and cuts off one half of
their garments; exposing them to the derision of all beholders. The Israelites
were forbidden either a shaven beard, or a short garment; in despite, perhaps,
of their Law, these Ambassadors are sent away with both: Certainly in a
despite of their Master, and a scorn of their persons.

King David is not a little sensible of the abuse of his Messengers, and of
himself in them; first therefore, he desires to hide their shame, then to
revenge it. Man has but a double ornament of body, the one of nature, the
other of Art; The natural ornament is the hair, the artificial is apparel;
David's Messengers are deformed in both; The one is easily supplied by a new
suit, the other can only be supplied out of the wardrobe of Time; Tarry at
Jericho till your beards be grown. How easily had this deformity been
removed, if as Hanun had shaven one side of their faces, so they had shaven
the other; what had this been but to resemble their younger age, or that other
sex, in neither of which, do we use to place any imagination of unbeseeming;
neither did their want some of their neighbor Nations, whose faces age it
self had not wont to cover with this shade of hair: But so respective is good
David, and his wise Senators, of their country-formes; that they shall by
appointment rather tarry abroad, till time have wrought their conformity, then
vary from the received fashions of their own people. Alas, into what a
licentious variety of strange disguises are we fallen? the glory of attire is
sought in nouelty, in mishapennesse, in monstrousness: There is much latitude,
much liberty in the use of these indifferent things; but because we are free,
we may not run wild; and never think we have scope enough, unless we
outrun modesty.

It is lawful for public persons, to feel their own indignities, and to
endeavor their revenge. Now David sends all the host of the mighty men to
punish Ammon, for so foul an abuse; Those that received the Messengers of his
love, with scorn and insolency, shall now be severely saluted with the
Messengers of his wrath. It is just both with God and men, that they, who know
not how to take favors aright, should smart with judgments. Kindness
repulsed, breaks forth into indignation, how much more when it is repayd with
an injurious affront?

David cannot but feel his own cheeks shaven, and his own cotes cut in his
Ambassadors; They did but carry his person to Hanun; neither can he therefore
but appropriate to himself the kindness, or injury offered unto them; He that
did so take to heart the cutting off, but the lap of King Saul's garment, when
it was laid aside from him, how must he needs be affected with this
disdainefull haluing of his hair and robes, in the person of his Deputies. The
name of Ambassadors has been ever sacred, and by the universal Law of
Nations, has carried in it sufficient protection, from all public wrongs,
nether has it ever been violated, without a revenge. Oh God, what shall we
say to those notorious contempts which are daily cast upon thy spiritual
messengers? Is it possible thou should not feel them, thou should not
avenge them? We are made a gazing stock to the world, to Angels and to men,
we are despised and trodden down in the dust; Who has believed our report,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

How obstinate are wicked men in their perverse resolutions. These foolish
Ammonites had rather hyre Syrians to maintain a war against Israel in so
foul a quarrel, besides the hazard of their own lives, then confess the
error of their jealous mis-construction.

It is one of the mad principles of wickedness, that it is a weakness to
relent, and rather to Dye then yield; Even ill causes once undertaken, must be
vpheld although with blood; whereas the gracious heart finding his own
mis-taking, does not only remit of an ungrounded displeasure, but studies to
be revenged of it self; and to give satisfaction to the offended.

The mercenary Syrians are drawn to venture their lives for a fee; twenty
thousand of them are hired into the field against Israel; Fond Pagans that know
not the value of a man; their blood cost them nothing, and they care not to
sell it good cheap; How can we think those men have Souls, that esteem a
little white earth above themselves? that never inquire into the justice of the
quarrel, but the rate of the pay, that can rifle for drams of silver, in the
bowels of their own flesh, and either kill or die for a days wages?

Ioab the wise General of Israel soon finds, where the strength of the
battle lay, and so marshalls his troops, that the choice of his men shall
encounter the vantgard of the Syrians. His brother Abishai leads the rest
against the children of Ammon; with this covenant of mutual assistance, (If
the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me; but if the
children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then will I come and help thee;) It
is an happy thing, when the captains of Gods people join together as brethren,
and lend their hand to the aid of each other against the common adversary.
Concord in defense, or assault is the way to victory; as contrarily, the
division of the Leaders is the overthrow of the army.

Set aside some particular actions, Ioab was a worthy Captain, both for
wisdom and valor. Who could either exhort or resolve better then he, (Be of
good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and for the cities of
our God; and the Lord do that which seems him good?) It is not either
private glory or profit that whets his fortitude, but the respect to the cause
of God, and his people; That Soldier can never answer it to God, that strikes
not more as a Iusticer, then as an enemy; Neither does he content himself
with his own courage, but he animates others. The tongue of a Commander fights
more then his hand; it is enough for private men to exercise what life and
limbs they have, a good Leader must out of his own abundance, put life and
spirits into all others; If a Lion lead sheep into the field, there is hope of
victory: Lastly, when he has done his best, he resolves to depend upon God for
the issue: not trusting to his sword, or his bow, but to the providence of the
Almighty for success; as a man religiously awful, and awfully confident,
whiles there should be no want in their own endeavors: he knew well that the
race was not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, therefore he looks
up above the hills whence comes his salvation; All valor is cowardice to
that, which is built upon religion.

I marvel not to see Ioab victorious, whiles he is thus godly; The Syrians flee
before him, like flocks of sheep; the Amonites follow them; The two Sons of
Zeruiah have nothing to do, but to pursue and execute; The throats of the
Amonites are cut, for cutting the beards and cotes of the Israelitish
messengers; Neither does this revenge end in the field; Rabba the royal city
of Ammon is strongly beleguered by Ioab; the City of waters (after well-neare a
years siege) yeildeth; the rest can no longer hold out; now Ioab, as one that
desired more to approve himself a loyal and careful subject, then a happy
General, sends to his master David that he should come personally, and encampe
against the City and take it; Least (says he) I take it and it be called after
my name. Oh noble and imitable fidelity of a dutiful servant, that prefers his
Lord to himself, and is so far from stealing honor from his masters deserts,
that he willingly remits of his own, to add unto his. The war was not his;
he was only employed by his Sovereign; The same person that was wronged in the
Ambassadors, reuengeth by his soldiers; the praise of the act shall (like
fountain water) return to the sea, whence it originally came: To seek a man's
own glory is not glory. Alas, how many are there, who being sent to sue for
God, woo for themselves. Oh God, it is a fearful thing to rob thee of that
which is dearest to thee, glory; which as thou will not give to any creature,
so much l^sse will thou endure that any creature should filtch it from thee,
and give it to himself. Have thou the honor of all our actions, who give a
being to our actions and us, and in both have most justly regarded thine own
praise.

David with Bathsheba and VRIAH.
WIth what unwillingness, with what fear, do I still look upon the miscariage
of the man after Gods own heart? O holy Prophet, who can promise himself
always to stand, when he sees thee fallen and maimed in the fall? Who can
assure himself of an immunity from the foulest sins, when he sees the
offending so haynously, so bloudily? Let profane eyes behold thee contentedly,
as a pattern, as an excuse of sinning; I shall never look at thee but through
tears, as a woeful spectacle of humane infirmity:

Whiles Ioab and all Israel were busy in the war against Ammon, in the siege
of Rabbah, Satan finds time to lay siege to the secure heart of David; Who ever
found David thus tempted, thus foiled in the days of his busy wars? Now
only do I see the King of Israel, rising from his bed in the evening; The time
was, when he rose up in the morning to his early devotions; when he brake his
nightly rest with public cares, with the business of estate; all that while
he was innocent, he was holy; but now that he wallowes in the bed of idleness,
he is fit to inuit a tentation. The industrious man has no leisure to sin.
The idle has neither leisure nor power to avoid sin; Exercise is not wore
wholesome for the body, then for the Soul, the remission whereof breeds matter
of disease in both: The water that has been heated, soonest freezeth; the
most active Spirit soonest ty^eth with slackning; The earth stands still, and
is all dregs; the heavens ever move, and are pure. We have no reason to
complain of the assiduity of work; the toil of action is answered by the
benefit; If we did less we should suffer more; Satan like an idle companion,
if he find us busy, flies back and sees it no time to entertain vain
purposes with us; We cannot please him better then by casting away our work,
to hold chat with him; we cannot yield so far and be guiltless.

Even David's eyes have no sooner the sleep rubbed out of them, then they roue
to wanton prospects; He walks upon his roof, and sees Bathsheba washing her
self; inquires after her, sends for her, solicits her to uncleanness. The
same Spirit that shut up his eyes in an unseasonable sleep, opens them upon an
intising object; whiles sin has such a Solicitor, it cannot want either
means or opportunity* I cannot think Bathsheba could be so immodest, as to
wash her self openly, especially from her natural uncleanness; Lust is
quick-sighted; David has espied her, where she could espy no beholder: His
eyes recoyle upon his heart, and have smitten him with a sinful desire.

There can be no safety to that Soul, where the senses are let loose. He can
never keep his covenant with God, that makes not a covenant with his eyes: It
is an Idle presumption to think the outward man may be free, whiles the inward
is safe: He is more then a man, whose heart is not led by his eyes, he is no
regenerate man whose, eyes are not restrained by his heart.

Oh Bathsheba, how were thou washed from thine uncleanness, when thou
yeildedst to go into an adulterous bed? Never were thou so foul: as now when
thou were new washed; The worst of nature, is cleanliness, to the best of
sin: thou had been clean if thou had not washed; yet for thee, I know
how to plead infirmity of sex; and the importunity of a King; But what shall I
say for thee, O thou royal Prophet, and prophetical King of Israel; where
shall I find ought to extenuate that crime, for which God himself has noted
thee? Did not thine holy profession teach thee to abhor such a sin more then
death? Was not thy justice wont to punish this sin with no less then death?
Did not thy very calling call thee to a protection and preservation of justice,
of chastity in thy subjects? Did thou want store of wines of thine own? were
thou restrained from taking more? was there no beauty in Israel, but in a
subjects mariage-bed? Were thou overcome by the vehement solicitations of an
adulteress? were thou not the tempter, the prosecutor of this uncleanness? I
should accuse thee deeply, if thou had not accused thy self; Nothing wanted
to greaten thy sin, or our wonder, and fear. O God, whither do we go if
thou stay us not? Who ever amongst the millions of thy servants could find
himself furnished with stronger preservatives against sin? Against whom
could such a sin find less pretense of prevailing? Oh keep thou us, that
presumtuous sins prevail not over us; So only shall we be free from great
offenses.

The suites of Kings are imperative; Ambition did now prove a bawd to lust.
Bathsheba yeildeth to offend God, to dishonor her husband, to clogge and wound
her own Soul, to abuse her body: Dishonesty grows bold, when it is
countenanced with greatness. Eminent persons had need be careful of their
demands; they sin by authority, that are solicited by the mighty.

Had Bathsheba been mindful of her matrimonial fidelity, perhaps David had
been soon checked in his inordinate desire; her facility furthers the sin.
The first motioner of evil is most faulty, but as in quarrels, so in offenses,
the second blow (which is the consent) makes the fray. Good Joseph was moved to
folly, by his great and beautiful mistres, this fire fell upon wet tinder, and
therefore soon went out. Sin is not acted alone; if but one party be wise,
both escape. It is no excuse to say, I was tempted, though by the great, though
by the holy and learned; Almost all sinners are misled by that transformed
Angel of light; The action is that we must regard, not the person; Let the
mouer be never so glorious, if he stir us to evil, he must be entertained
with defiance.

The God that knows how to raise good out of evil, blesses an adulterous
copulation with that increase, which he denies to the chaste imbracements of
honest wedlock: Bathsheba has conceived by David; and now at once conceiues a
sorrow and care how to smother the shame of her conception; He that did the
fact, must hide it. Oh David, where is thy repentance? Where is thy tenderness
and compunction of heart? Where are those holy meditations, which had wont to
take up thy Soul? Alas, in steed of clearing thy sin, thou labourest to
cloak it; and spendest those thoughts in the concealing of thy wickedness,
which thou should rather have bestowed in preventing it: The best of Gods
children may not only be drenched in the waves of sin, but lie in them for
the time, and perhaps sink twice to the bottom; What hypocrite could have
done worse, then study how to cover the face of his sin from the eyes of men,
whiles heregarded not the sting of sin in his soul. As there are some acts,
wherein the Hypocrite is a Saint, so there are some, wherein the greatest Saint
upon earth may be an Hypocrite; Saul did thus go about to color his sin, and
is cursed; The vessels of mercy and wrath, are not ever distinguishable by
their actions. He makes the difference, that will have mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will, he hardens.

It is rare and hard to commit a single sin; David has abused the wife of
Vriah, now he would abuse his person, in causing him to father a false seed:
That worthy Hittite is sent for from the wars; and now after some cunning, and
far-fetcht questions; is dismissed to his house, not without a present of
favor; David could not but imagine, that the beauty of his Bathsheba, must
needs be attractiue enough to an husband, whom long absence in wars, had
withheld all that while from so pleasing a bed; neither could he think, that
since that face, and those breasts had power to allure himself to an unlawful
lust, it could be possible, that Vriah should not be invited by them, to an
allowed and warrantable fruition.

That David's heart might now the rather strike him, in comparing the chaste
resolutions of his servant, with his own light incontinence; good Vriah sleeps
at the door of the Kings palace, making choice of a stony pillow, under the
canopy of Heaven, rather then the delicate bed of her, whom he thought as
honest, as he knew fair. The Arc (says he) and Israel, and Judah, dwell in
tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord, abide in the open fields;
shall I then go into mine house, to eat, and drink, and lie with my wife; by
thy life, and by the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing. Who can but
be astonished at this change, to see a Soldier austere, and a Prophet wanton?
And how does that Soldiers austerity, shame the Prophets wantonness? Oh
zealous and mortified soul, worthy of a more faithful wife, of a more just
master, how did thou ouer-looke all base sensuality, and hatedst to be happy
alone? War and lust had wont to be reputed friends; thy breast is not more full
of courage then chastity, and is so far from wandering after forbidden
pleasures, that it refuses lawful.

There is a time to laugh, and a time to mourn; a time to embrace, and a time
to be far from embracing; even the best actions are not always seasonable,
much less the indifferent: He that ever takes liberty to do what he may,
shall offend no less, then he that sometimes takes liberty to do what he may
not.

If any thing, the Ark of God is fittest to lead our times; according as that
is either distressed, or prospers, should we frame our mirth, or mourning. To
dwell in sieled houses, whiles the Temple lies waste, is the ground of Gods
just quarrel. How shall we sing a song of the Lord in a strange land; If I
forget thee, o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; yea, if I prefer
not Jerusalem to my chief joy.

As every man is a limme of the community, so must he be affected with the
estate of the universal body, whether healthful, or languishing; It did not
more aggrauate David's sin, that whiles the Arc and Israel was in hazard and
distress, he could find time to loose the reins to wanton desires, and
actions, then it magnifies the religious zeal of Vriah, that he abandons
comfort, till he see the Arc and Israel victorious.

Common dangers, or calamities must (like the rapt motion) carry our hearts
contrary to to the ways of our private occasions.

He that cannot be moved with words, shall be tried with wine, Vriah had
equally protested against feasting at home, and society with his wife; To the
one, the authority of a King forces him abroad, in hope that the excess
thereof shall force him to the other: It is like, that holy Captain intended
only to yield so much obedience, as might consist with his course of
austerity. But wine is a mocker, when it goes plausibly in, no man can imagine
how it will rage and tyrannize; he that receives that Traitor within his gates,
shall too late complain of a surprizall. Like unto that ill spirit, it
insinuates sweetly, but in the end, it bites like a Serpent, and hurts like a
Cockatrice. Even good Vrias is made drunk; the holiest soul may be overtaken;
It is hard gaine-saying, where a King begins an health to a subject; Where, oh
where, will this wickedness end? David will now procure the sin of another, to
hide his own; Vriahs drunkenness is more David's offense, then his. It is
weakly yielded to of the one, which was wilfully intended of the other. The one
was as the sinner, the other as the tempter.

Had not David known, that wine was an inducement to lust, he had spared those
superfluous cups. Experience had taught him, that the eye debauched with wine,
will look upon strange women: The Drunkard may be any thing save good. Yet in
this the aim failed; Grace is stronger then wine; Whiles that withholds, in
vain shall the fury of the grape attempt to carry Vriah to his own bed. Sober
David is now worse then drunken Vriah. Had not the King of Israel been more
intoxicate with sin, then Vriah with drink, he had not in a sober intemperance
climbed up into that bed, which the drunken temperance of Vriah refused.

If David had been but himself, how had he loved, how had he honored this
honest and religious zeal, in his so faithful servant; whom now he cruelly
seeks to reward with death? That fact which wine cannot hide, the sword shall;
Vriah shall bear his own Mittimus unto Ioab; Put ye Vriah in the fore front
of the strength of the battle, and recule back from him, that he may be
smitten, and die.) What is becomne of thee, o thou good Spirit, that had wont
to guide thy chosen servant in his former ways? Is not this the man, whom we
lately saw so heart-smitten, for but cutting off the lap of the garment of a
wicked Master, that is now thus lavish of the blood, of a gracious and
well-deseruing Servant? Could it be likely, that so worthy a Captain could
fall alone? Could David have expiated this sin with his own blood, it had
been but well spent, but to cover his sin with the innocent blood of others,
was a crime above astonishment. Oh the deep deceitfulness of sin; If the
Devil should have comne to David, in the most lovely form of Bathsheba her
self, and at the first should have directly, and in terms, solicited him to
murder his best servant; I doubt not, but he would have spat scorn in that
face, on which he should otherwise have doted; now, by many cunning windings,
Satan rises up to that tentation, and preuailes; that shall be done for a
color of guiltiness, whreof the soul would have hated to be immediately
guilty; Even those, that find a just horror, in leaping down from some hie
tower, yet may be persuaded to descend by stayres to the bottom. He knows
not where he shall stay, that has willingly slipped into a known wickedness.

How many does an eminent offender draw with him into evil? It could not be,
but that diverse of the attendants both of David and Bathsheba must be conscious
to that adultery; Great men's sins are seldom secret; And now Ioab must be
fetched in, as accessory to the murder: How must this example needs harden Ioab
against the conscience of Abners blood? Whiles he cannot but think, David
cannot avenge that in me, which he acts himself.

Honor is pretended to poor Vriah, death is meant. This man was one of the
worthies of David; their courage sought glory in the difficultest exploits:
That reputation had never been purchased without attempts of equal danger; Had
not the leader and followers of Vriah: been more treacherous, then his enemies
were strong, he had comne off with victory; Now, he was not the first or last
that perished by his friends. David has forgotten, that himself was in like
sort betrayed in his masters intention, upon the dowry of the
Philistim-foreskins. I fear to ask, Who ever noted so foul a plot in David's
rejected predecessor? Vriah must be the messenger of his own death, Ioab must
be a traitor to his friend, the host of God must shamefully turn their backs
upon the Ammonites, all that Israelitish blood must be shed, that murder must
be seconded with dissimulation, and all this to hide one adultery. O God thou
had never suffered so dear a favorite of thine to fall so fearfully, if
thou had not meant to make him an universal example to mankind; of not
presuming, of not despayring; How can we presume of not sinning, or despair
for sinning, when we find so great a Saint thus fallen, thus risen.

Nathan and David.
YEt Bathsheba mourned for the death of that husband, who^ she had been drawn
to dishonor: How could she bestow tears enough upon that funeral, whereof her
sin was the cause? If she had but a suspicion of the plot of his death, the
fountains of her eyes could not yield water enough to wash off her husbands
blood; Her sin was more worthy of sorrow, then her loss. If this grief had
been right placed, the hope of hiding her shame, and the ambition to be a
Queen had not so soon mittigated it; neither had she upon any terms been
drawn into the bed of her husbands murderer. Every gleame of earthly comfort
can dry up the tears of worldly sorrow. Bathsheba has soon lost her grief
at the Court; The remembrance of an husband is buried in the iollity and state
of a Princess. David securely inioyes his ill-purchased love, and is content
to exchange the conscience of his sin, for the sense of his pleasure. But the
just and holy God will not put it up so; he that hates finne so much the more,
as the offender is more dear to him, will let David feel the bruise of his
fall. If Gods best children have been sometimes suffered to sleep in a sin, at
last he has awakened them in a fright.

David was a Prophet of God, yet he has not only stepped into these foul
sins, but soiournes with them; If any profession or state of life could have
privileged from sin; the Angels had not sinned in heaven, nor man in
Paradise: Nathan the Prophet is sent to the Prophet David, for reproof, for
conviction, Had it been any other man's case, none could have been more
quick-sighted then the Princely Prophet, in his own he is so blind, that God
is feign to lend him others eyes. Even the Physician himself when he is sick,
sends for the counsel of those whom his health did mutually aid with advise.
Let no man think himself too good to learn; Teachers themselves may be taught
that in their own particular, which in a generality they have often taught
others; It is not only ignorance that is to be removed, but mis-affection.

Who can prescribe a just period to the best man's repentance? About ten months
are passed since David's sin; in all which time I find no news of any
serious compunction; It could not be but some glaunces of remorse must needs
have passed thorough his Soul long ere this; but a due and solemn contrition
was not heard of till Nathans message; and perhaps had been further adiourned,
if that Monitor had been longer deferred; Alas, what long and dead sleeps may
the holiest Soul take in fearful sins; Were it not for thy mercy, O God,
the best of us should end our spiritual lethargy in a sleep of death:

It might have pleased God as easily to have sent Nathan to check David in his
first purpose of sinning; So had his eyes been restrained, Bathsheba honest,
Vriah alive with honor; now the wisdom of the Almighty knew how to win more
glory by the permission of so foul an evil, then by the prevention; yea, he
knew how by the permission of one sin, to prevent millions; how many thousand
had sinned in a vain presumption on their own strength, if David had not thus
offended; how many thousand had despayred in the conscience of their own
weaknesses, if these horrible sins had not received forgiveness. It is
happy for all times, that we have so holy a sinner, so sinful a penitent; It
matters not how bitter the pill is, but how well wrapped; so cunningly has
Nathan conveyed this dose, that it begins to work ere it be tasted; there is
no one thing wherein is more use of wisdom, then the due contriuing of a
reprehension, which in a discreet delivery helps the disease, in an unwise,
destroys nature.

Had not Nathan been used to the possession of David's ear; this complaint had
been suspected. It well beseemes a King to take information by a Prophet.
Whiles wise Nathan was querulously discoursing, of the cruel rich man that had
forceably taken away the only Lamb of his poor neighbor, how willingly does
David listen to the story, and how sharply (even above law) does he censure the
fact? As the Lord lives the man that has done this thing shall surely dye.)
Full little did he think that he had pronounced sentence against himself; It
had not been so heavy, if he had known on whom it should have light; We have
open ears and quick tongues to the vices of others; How severe Iusticers we
can be to our very own crimes in others persons? how flattering parasites to
another crime in our selves? The life of doctrine is in application; Nathan
might have been long enough in his narration, in his inuectiue, ere David
would have been touched with his own guiltiness; but now that the Prophet
brings the word home to his bosom, he cannot but be affected. We may take
pleasure, to hear men speak in the clouds, we never take profit till we find
a propriety in the exhortation, or reproof; There was not more cunning in the
parable, then courage in the application (Thou art the man) If David be a King,
he may not look, not to hear of his faults; Gods messages may be no other
then impartial. It is a treacherous flattery in divine errands to regard
greatness: If Prophets must be mannerly in the form, yet in the matter of
reproof, resolute: The words are not their own, They are but the Heralds of
the King of heaven, Thus says the Lord God of Israel.

How thunder-striken do we think David did now stand? how did the change of
his color bewray the confusion in his Soul; whiles his conscience said the
same within, which the Prophet sounded in his ear? And now least ought should
be wanting to his humiliation, all Gods former favors shall be laid before
his eyes, by way of exprobration: He is worthy to be vpbraided with mercies,
that has abused mercyes unto wantonness; whiles we do well, God gives and
says nothing, when we do ill, he lays his benefits in our dish, and casts
them in our teeth, that our shame may be so much the more; by how much our
obligations have been greater. The blessings of God in our unworthy caryage
prove but the aggrauations of sin, and additions to judgment.

I see all Gods children falling into sin, some of them lying in sin; none
of them maintayning their sin; David cannot have the heart, or the face to
stand out against the message of God, but now as a man confounded, and
condemned in himself, he cries out in the bitterness of a wounded Soul, (I
have sinned against the Lord) It was a short word, but passionate; and such as
came from the bottom of a contrite heart; The greatest griefs are not most
verbal: Saul confessed his sin more largely, less effectually; God cares
not for phrases, but for affections. The first piece of our amends to God for
sinning, is the acknowledgement of sin; He can do little that in a just
offense cannot accuse himself: If we cannot be so good as we would, it is
reason we should do God so much right, as to say, how evil we are. And why was
not this don sooner? It is strange to see how easily sin gets into the heart,
how hardly it gets out of the mouth; Is it because sin, like unto Satan,
where it has got possession is desirous to hold it; and knows that it is
fully eiected by a free confession? or, because in a guiltiness of deformity,
it hides it self in the breast where it is once entertained, and hates the
light? or because the tongue is so fee'd with self-love, that it is loath to
be drawn unto any verdict against the heart, or hands? or, is it out of an
idle misprision of shame, which whiles it should be placed in offending, is
misplaced in disclosing of our offense?

Howeuer, sure I am, that God has need even of racks to draw out confessions,
and scarce in death it self, are we wrought to a discovery of our errors.

There is no one thing, wherein our folly shows it self more, then in these
hurtful concealements: Contrary to the proceedings of humane Justice, it is
with God, Confess and live; no sooner can David say, I have sinned, then
Nathan infers, The Lord also has put away thy sin. He that hides his sins
shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall find
mercy Who would not accuse himself, to be acquitted of God? O God, who would
not tell his wickedness to thee, that know it better then his own heart, that
his heart may be eased of that wickedness, which being not told, kills?
Since we have sinned, why should we be niggardly of that action, wherein we
may at once give glory to thee, and relief to our souls?

David had sworn in a zeal of Justice, that the rich Oppressor, for but
taking his poor neighbors lamb, should dye the death; God, by Nathan, is
more favorable to David, then to take him at his word; Thou shall not dye: O
the marvelous power of repentance; Besides adultery, David had shed the blood
of innocent Vriah; The strict law was eye for tie, tooth for tooth; He that
smites with the sword, shall perish with the sword; Yet, as if a penitent
confession had dispensed with the rigor of Justice, now God says, Thou shall
not dye. David was the voice of the Law, awarding death unto sin; Nathan was
the voice of the Gospel, awarding life unto the repentance for sin. Whatsoever
the sore be, never any soul applied this remedy, and dyed; never any soul
escaped death, that applied it not.

David himself shall not dye for this fact; but his mis-begotten child shall
dye for him; He that said, The Lord has put away thy sin, yet said also, The
sword shall not depart from thine house.

The same mouth, with one breath, pronounces the sentence both of absolution,
and death, Absolution to the person, death to the issue. Pardon may well stand
with temporal afflictions. Where God has forgiven, though he do not punish,
yet he may chastize, and that unto blood; neither does he always forbear
correction, where he remits revenge. So long as he smites us not as an angry
Judge, we may endure to smart from him, as a loving father.

Yet even this rod did David deprecate with tears: how feign would he shake
off so easy a lode? The child is stricken; the father fasts and prays, and
weeps, and lies all night upon the earth, and abhors the noise of comfort;
That child, which was the fruit and monument of his odious adultery, whom he
could never have looked upon, without a recognition of his sin; in whose face
he could not but have still read the records of his own shame, is thus mourned
for, thus sued for; It is easy to observe that good man ouerpassionately
affected to his children. Who would not have thought, that David might have
held himself well appayd, that his soul escaped an eternal death, his body a
violent: though God should punish his sin, in that child, in whom he sinned:
Yet even against this cross, he bends his prayers, as if nothing had been
forgiven him: There is no child that would be scourged, if he might escape for
crying; No affliction is for the time other then grievous; neither is therefore
yielded unto, without some kind of reluctation. Far yet was it from the heart
of David, to make any opposition to the will of God; he sued, he strugled not;
There is no impatience in entreaties; He well knew, that the threats of temporal
evils, ran commonly with a secret condition; and therefore might perhaps be
avoided by humble importunity: If any means under Heaven can auert judgments,
it is our prayers.

God Could not choose, but like well the boldness of David's faith, who after
the apprehension of so heavy a displeasure, is so far from doubting of the
forgiveness of his sin, that he dares become a Suitor unto God for his sick
child. Sin does not make us more strange, then faith, confident.

But, it is not in the power of the strongest faith, to preserve us from all
afflictions; After all David's prayers and tears, the child must dye. The
careful servants dare but whisper this sad news: They, who had found their
Master so auerse from the motion of comfort, in the sickness of the child,
feared him incapable of comfort in his death.

Suspicion is quick-witted; Every occasion makes us misdoubt that event, which
we fear; This secrecy proclaymes, that which they were so loath to utter;
David perceiues his child dead, and now he rises up from the earth whereon he
lay, and washes himself, and changes his apparel, and goes first into Gods
house to worship, and then into his own to eat; now he refuses no comfort, who
before would take none; The issue of things does more fully show the will of
God, then the prediction; God never did any thing, but what he would; he has
sometimes foretold that for trial, which his secret will intended not; he
would foretell it, he would not effect it, because he would therefore foretell
it, that he might not effect it; His predictions of outward evils are not
always absolute, his actions are; David well sees by the event, what the
decree of God was, concerning his child; which now he could not strive
against, without a vain impatience; Till we know the determinations of the
Almighty, it is free for us to strive in our prayers; to strive with him, not
against him; when once we know them, it is our duty to sit down in a silent
contentation;

(Whiles the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, Who can tell
whether the Lord will be gracious to me, that the child may live, but now
he is dead, Wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again?)

The grief that goes before an evil for remedy, can hardly be too much, but
that which follows an evil, past remedy, cannot be too little: Even in the
saddest accident, death, we may yield something to nature, nothing to
impatience: Immoderation of sorrow, for losses past hope of recovery, is more
sullen, then useful; our stomach may be bewrayed by it, not our wisdom.

Amnon and Tamar.
IT is not possible, that any word of God should fall to the ground: David is
not more sure of forgiveness, then smart: Three maine sins passed him in this
business of Vriah; Adultery, murder, dissimulation: for all which, he receives
present payment, for adultery, in the deflouring of his daughter Thamar; for
murder, in the killing of his son Amnon; for dissimulation in the contriuing of
both. Yet all this was but the beginning of evils. Where the father of the
family, brings sin home to the house, it is not easily swept out: Unlawful
lust propagates it self by example; How justly is David scourged by the sin of
his sons, whom his act taught to offend?

Maacah was the daughter of an Heathenish King; By her, had David that
beautiful, but unhappy issue; Absalom, and his no less fair sister, Thamar:
Perhaps, thus late does David feel the punishment of that unfit choice: I
should have marvelled, if so holy a man had not found crosses in so unequal a
match, either in his person, or at least in his seed.

Beauty, if it be not well disciplined, proves not a friend, but a traitor;
three of David's children are undone by it at once; What else was guilty of
Amnons incestuous love, Thamars rauishment, Absaloms pride? It is a blessing to
be fair, yet such a blessing, as if the soul answer not to the face, may
lead to a curse; How commonly have we seen the foulest soul dwell fairest? It
was no fault of Thamars, that she was beautiful; the candle offends not in
burning, the foolish fly offends in scorching it self in the flame; yet it is
no small misery to become a tentation unto another; and to be made but the
occasion of others ruin. Amnon is loue-sicke of his sister Tamar, and
languishes of that unnatural heat. Whither will not wanton lust, carry the
inordinate minds of pampered and ungoverned youth; None but his halfe-sister,
will please the eyes of the young Prince of Israel: Ordinary pleasures will not
content those, whom the conceit of greatness, youth, and ease, have let loose
to their appetite.

Perhaps, yet this unkindly flame might, in time, have gone out alone, had not
there been a Ionadab, to blow these coals with ill counsel. It were strange,
if great Princes should want some parasiticall followers, that are ready to
feed their ill humors. Why art thou, the Kings son so lean from day to day?
As if it were unworthy the heir of a King, to suffer either law, or
conscience, to stand in the way of his desires: Whereas wise Princes know well,
that their places give them no privilege of sinning: but call them in rather
to so much more strictness, as their example may be more prejudicial.

Ionadab was the cozen german of Amnon; Ill advise is so much more dangerous,
as the interest of the giver is more; Had he been a true friend, he had bent all
the forces of his disswasion, against the wicked motions of that sinful lust;
and had showed the Prince of Israel how much those lewd desires provoked God,
and blemished himself; and had lent his hand to strangle them in their first
conception. There cannot be a more worthy improuement of friendship, then in a
fervent opposition to the sins of them; whom we profess to love: No enemy
can be so mortal to great Princes, as those officious clients, whose flattery
soothes them up in wickedness; These are traitors to the Soul, and by a
pleasing violence kill the best part eternally.

How ready at hand is an evil suggestion? Good counsel is like unto well
water, that must be drawn up with a Pumpe, or bucket; Ill counsel is like to
Conduit-water, which if the cock be but turned, runs out alone; Ionadab has
soon proiected how Amnon shall accomplish his lawless purpose. The way must
be to feign himself sick in body, whose mind was sick of lust; and under
this pretense to procure the presence of her, who had wounded, and only might
cure him.

The daily-increasing languor, and leanenesse, and palenesse of loue-sicke
Amnon might well give color to a kercheife, and a pallet. Now it is soon told
David that his eldest Son is cast upon his sickebed; there needs no suit for
his visitation; The careful father hastens to his bedside, not without doubts
and fears* He that was lately so afflicted with the sickness of a child that
scarce lived to see the light, how sensible must we needs think he would be,
of the indisposition of his first borne Son, in the prime of his age and
hopes; It is not given to any Prophet to foresee all things; Happy had it been
for David, if Amnon had been truly sick, and sick unto death; yet who could
have persuaded this passionate father to have been content with this
succession of losses, this early loss of his successor: How glad is he to
hear, that his daughter Tamars skill might be likely to fit the diet of so
dear a patient. Conceit is wont to rule much both in sickness, and the cure.
Tamar is sent by her father to the house of Amnon; Her hand only must dress
that dish, which may please the nice Palate of her sick brother. Even the
children of Kings, in those homelyer times, did not scorn to put their
fingers, to some works of huswifrie: (She took flower and did knead it, and
did make cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes, and took a pan, and
poured them out before him.) Had she not been sometimes used to such
domestique employments, she had been now to seek; neither had this been
required of her, but upon the knowledge of her skill: She does not plead, the
impayring of her beauty by the scorching of the fire; nor thinks her hand too
dainty for such mean services; but fettles to the work, as one that had
rather regard the necessities of her brother, then her own state: Only pride
and idleness, have banished honest and thrifty diligence, out of the houses of
the great.

This was not yet the dish that Amnon longed for. It was the Cook, and not the
cates which that wanton eye affected. Unlawful acts seek for secrecy; The
company is dismissed, Tamar only stays; Good meaning suspects nothing; Whiles
she presents the meat she had prepared, to her sick brother, her self is
made a pray to his outrageous lust. The modest virgin entreats, and persuades
in vain; she lays before him the sin, the shame, the danger of the fact; and
since none of these can prevail, feign would win time by the suggesting of
impossible hopes; Nothing but violence can stay a resolved sinner; What he
cannot by entreaty, he will have by force. If the Devil were not more strong
in men, then nature, they would never seek pleasure in violence. Amnon has no
sooner fulfilled his beastly desires, then he hates Tamar more then he loved
her. Inordinate lust never ends but in coffeehouse; Loss of spirits, and
remorse of soul make the remembrance of that act tedious, whose expectation
promised delight. If we could see the back of sinful pleasures, ere we behold
their face, our hearts could not but be forstalled with a just detestation.
Brutish Amnon, it was thy self whom thou should have hated for this villainy;
not thine innocent sister; Both of you lay together; only one committed incest:
What was she but a patient, in that impotent fury of lust? How unjustly do
carnal men mis-place their affections? No man can say whether that love, or
this hatred were more unreasonable: Fraud drew Thamar into the house of Amnon,
force entertained her within; and drove her out. Feign would she have hid her
shame where it was wrought, and may not be allowed it; That roof under which,
she came with honor, and in obedience and love, may not be lent her for the
time as a shelter of her ignominy. Never any savage could be more barbarous:
Shechem had ravished Dinah, his offense did not make her odious; his affection
so continued, that he is willing rather to draw blood of himself and his
people, then forgo her whom he had abused; Amnon in one hour is in the
excess of love and hate; and is sick of her, for whom he was sick; She that
lately kept the keys of his heart, is now locked out of his doors. Unruly
passions run ever into extremities, and are then best apayd, when they are
furthest off from reason and moderation.

What could Amnon think, would be the event of so foul a fact, which as he
had not the grace to prevent, so he has not the care to conceal? If he looked
not so hie as heaven, what could he imagine would follow hereupon, but the
displeasure of a father, the danger of law, the indignation of a brother, the
shame and outcries of the world; All which he might have hoped to avoid by
secrecy, and plausible courses of satisfaction. It is the just judgment of
God upon presumptuous offenders, that they lose their wit, together with their
honesty; and are either so blinded, that they cannot foresee the issue of
their actions, or so besotted that they do not regard it.

Poor Thamar can but bewail that which she could not keep, her virginty, not
lost, but torn from her by a cruel violence: She rends her princely robe, and
lays ashes on her head, and laments the shame of another sin; and lives
more desolate then a widow, in the house of her brother Absalom.

In the mean time, what a corosiue must this news needs be to the heart of
good David, whose fatherly command had out of love, cast his daughter into the
jaws of this Lion? What an insolent affront must he needs construe this, to
be offered by a Son to a father; that the father should be made the Pandar of
his own daughter to his son? He that lay upon the ground weeping for, but
the sickness of an infant, how vexed do we think he was with the villainy of
his heir, with the rauishment of his daughter, both of them worse then many
deaths? What revenge can he think of, for so heinous a crime less then death;
and what less then death is it to him, to think of a revenge? Rape was by the
law of God, capital, how much more, when it is seconded with incest? Anger was
not punishment enough for so hye an offense; Yet this is all that I hear of,
from so indulgent a father, saving that he makes up the rest with sorrow;
punishing his sons outrage in himself; The better-naturd, and more gracious a
man is, the more subject he is to the danger of an over remissness, and the
excess of favor and mercy: The mild injustice is no less perilous to the
commonwealth, then the cruel.

If David (perhaps out of the conscience of his own late offense) will not
punish this fact, his son Absalom shall: not out of any care of justice, but
in a desire of revenge. Two whole years, has this sly Courtier smothered his
indignation, and feigned kindness; else his inuitation of Amnon in special,
had been suspected. Even gallant Absalom was a great sheep-master; The bravery
and magnificence of a Courtier, must be built upon the grounds of frugality;
David himself is bidden to this bloody sheep-shearing; It was no otherwise
meant, but that the fathers eyes, should be the witnesses, of the tragical
execution of one son by another; Only David's love kept him from that horrible
spectacle: He is careful not to be chargeable to that son, who cares not to
ouer-charge his fathers stomach with a feast of blood.

Amnon has so quite forgot his sin, that he dares go to feast in that
house where Tamar was mourning; and suspects not the kindenes of him, whom he
had deserved, of a brother to make an enemy; Nothing is more unsafe to be
trusted, then the fair looks of a festered heart: Where true charity or just
satisfaction, have not wrought a sound reconciliation, malice does but lurk for
the opportunity of an advantage.

It was not for nothing, that Absalom deferred his revenge; which is now so
much the more exquisite, as it is longer protracted: What could be more
fearful, then when Amnons heart was merry with wine, to be suddenly stricken
with death? As if this execution had been no less intended to the Soul, then
to the body; How wickedly soever this was ^one by Absalom, yet how just was it
with God, that he, whom in two years impunity would find no leisure o^
repentance, should now receive a punishment without possibility of repentance.

O God, thou art righteous to reckon for those sins, which humane partiality
or negligence has omitted, and whiles thou punishest sin with sin, to punish
sin with death; If either David had called Amnon to account for this villainy,
or Amnon had called himself, the revenge had not been so desperate; Happy is
the man that by an unfeigned repentance acquits his soul from his known evils,
and improues the days of his peace to the prevention of future vengeance;
^hi^h if it be not d^ne, the hand of God shall as surely oue^^ake us in
judgment, as the hand of Satan has overtaken us in miscariage unto sin.

Absaloms return and conspiracy.
ONE act of injustice draws on another; The injustice of David, in not
punishing the rape of Amnon, procures the injustice of Absalom, in punishing
Amnon with murder: That which the father should have justly revenged, and did
not; the son reuenges unjustly; The rape of a sister was no less worthy of
death; then the murder of a brother; Yea, this latter sin was therefore the
less, because that brother was worthy of death, though by another hand;
whereas that sister was guilty of nothing but modest beauty: yet he that knew
this rape passed over (whole two years) with impunity, dares not trust the
mercy of a father, in the pardon of his murder; but for threeyeers, hides his
head in the Court of his Grandfather, the King of Geshur. Doubtless, that
heathenish Prince gave him a kind welcome, for so meritorious a revenge of the
dishonor done to his own loins. No man can tell, how Absalom should have
sped from the hands of his otherwise ouer-indulgent Father, if he had been
apprehended in the heat of the fact. Even the largest love may be
ouerstrayned, and may give a fall in the breaking; These fearful effects of
lenity, might perhaps have whetted the severity of David, to shut up these
outrages in blood; Now this displeasure was weakened with age: Time and thoughts
have digested this hard morsel; David's heart told him, that his hands had a
share in this offense; that Absalom did but give that stroke, which himself
had wrongfully forborne; that the unrecoverable loss of one son, would be but
woefully releiued with the loss of another; He therefore, that in the news of
the deceased infant could change his clothes, and wash himself, and cheer up
his spirits, with the resolution of, I shall go to him, he shall not return
to me, comforts himself concerning Amnon; and begins to long for Absalom.

Those three years banishment seemed not so much a punishment to the son, as
to the father; Now David begins to forgive himself; yet out of his wisdom, so
inclines to favor, that he conceales it; and yet so conceales it, that it may
be descryed by a cunning eye; If he had cast out no glances of affection,
there had been no hopes for his Absalom, if he had made profession of love
after so foul an act, there had been no safety for others; now he lets fall
so much secret grace, as may both hold up Abfalom in the life of his hopes, and
not hearten the presumption of others.

Good eyes see light through the smallest chinke; The wit of Ioab has soon
discerned David's reserved affection; and knows how to serve him in that which
he would, and would not accomplish: and now devises how to bring into the
light, that birth of desire, whereof he knew David was both big, and ashamed. A
woman of Tekoah (that sex has been ever held more apt for wiles) is suborned
to personate a mourner, and to say that, by way of parable, which in plain
terms would have sounded too harshly; and now whiles she lamentably lays
forth the loss and danger of her sons, she shows David his own; and whiles
she moves compassion to her pretended issue, she wins David to a pity of
himself, and a favorable sentence for Absalom. We love our selves better then
others, but we see others better then our selves; who so would perfectly know
his own case, let him view it in another person.

Parables sped well with David; One drew him to repent of his own sin;
another, to remit Absaloms punishment; And now, as glad to hear this plea, and
willing to be persuaded unto that, which if he durst, he would have sought
for, he gratifies Ioab with the grant of that suit, which Ioab more gratified
him in suing for; Go bring again the young man Absalom.

How glad is Ioab, that he has light upon one act, for which the Sun, both
setting and rising, should shine upon him? and now he speeds to Geshur, to
fetch back Absalom to Jerusalem: he may bring the long-banished Prince to the
City; but to the Court he may not bring him. (Let him turn to his own house,
and let him not see my face.)

The good King has so smarted with mercy; that now he is resolved upon
austerity; and will relent but by degrees; It is enough for Absalom that he
lives, and may now breathe his native air; David's face is no object for the
eyes of a murderer: What a Dearling this son was to his father, appears in
that, after an unnatural and barbarous rebellion, passionate David wishes to
have changed lives with him; yet now, whiles his bowels yearned, his brow
frowned; The face may not be seen, where the heart is set. The best of Gods
Saints may be blinded with affection; but when they shall once see their
errors, they are careful to correct them. Wherefore serves the power of Grace,
but to subdue the insolences of nature? It is the wisdom of parents, as to
hide their hearts from their best children, so to hide their countenances from
the ungracious: Fleshly respects may not abate their rigor to the ill
deserving. For the child to see all his fathers love, it is enough to make him
wanton, and of wanton, wicked: For a wicked child, to see any of his fathers
love, it emboldens him in evil, and draws on others.

Absaloms house is made his prison; Justly is he confined to the place which
he had stained with blood; Two years does he live in Jerusalem, without the
happiness of his fathers sight; It was enough for David and him, to see the
smoke of each others chimnies. In the mean time, how impatient is Absalom of
this absence? He sends for Ioab, the Solicitor of his return; So hard an
hand, does wise and holy David carry over his reduced son, that his friendly
Intercessor, Ioab, dares not visit him. He, that afterward kindled that
seditious fire over all Israel, sets fire now on the field of Ioab; whom love
cannot draw to him, fear and anger shall; Continued displeasure has made
Absalom desperate; Five years are passed, since he saw the face of his
father; and now he is no less weary of his life, then of this delay;
(Wherefore am I comne down from Geshur? It had been better for me, to have
been there still: Now therefore let me see the Kings face, and if there be
any iniquity in me, let him kill me.) Either banishment, or death, seemed as
tolerable to him, as the debarring of his fathers sight. What a torment shall
it be to the wicked, to be shut out for ever, from the presence of a God,
without all possible hopes of recovery? This was but a father of the flesh, by
whom, if Absalom lived at first, yet in him he lived not, yea, not without him
only, but against him that son found he could live; God is the Father of
Spirits, in whom we so live, that without him can be no life, no being; to be
ever excluded from him, in whom we live and are, what can it be but an
eternal dying, an eternal perishing? If in thy presence, o God, be the fulness
of joy, in thine absence, must needs be the fulness of horror and torment; Hide
not thy face from us, o Lord, but show us the light of thy countenance, that we
may live, and praise thee.

Even the fire of Ioabs field, warmed the heart of David, whiles it gave him
proof of the heat of Absaloms filial affection. As a man therefore inwardly
weary of so long displeasure, at last he receives Absalom to his sight, to his
favor; and seals his pardon with a kiss: Natural parents, know not how to
retain an everlasting anger toward the fruit of their loins; how much less
shall the God of mercies, be vnreconcileably displeased with his own; and
suffer his wrath to burn like fire that cannot be quenched? He will not
always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever; His wrath endures but
a moment, in his favor is life; weeping may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning.

Absalom is now as great, as fair; beauty and greatness make him proud; pride
works his ruin; Great spirits will not rest content with a moderate
prosperity: Ere two years be run out, Absalom runs out into a desperate plot
of rebellion; None but his own father was above him in Israel; None was so
likely, in humane expectation, to succeed his father; If his ambition could but
have contained it self for a few years, (as David was now near his period)
dutiful carrige might have procured, that by succession, which now he sought
by force. An aspiring mind is ever impatient, and holds Time it self an
enemy, if it thrust it self importunately betwixt the hopes and fruition:
Ambition is never but in travel, and can find no intermission of painful
throws, till she have brought forth her abortiue desires: How happy were we,
if our affectation could be so eager of spiritual and heavenly promotions; Oh
that my soul could find it self so restless, till it feel the weight of
that crown of glory.

Outward pomp, and unwonted shows of magnificence, are wont much to affect the
light minds of the vulgar. Absalom therefore to the incomparable comeliness
of his person, adds the unusual state of a more-then-princely equipage His
Charets rattle, and his hor ses trample proudly in the streets; Fifty footmen
run before their glittering master; Jerusalem rings of their glorious Prince;
and is ready to adore these continual triumphs of peace. Excess and nouelty,
of expensiue bravery and ostentation in public persons, gives just cause to
suspect either vanity, or a plot; True-harted David can misdoubt nothing in
him, to whom he had both given life, and forgiven death* Love construed all
this, as meant to the honor of a fathers Court, to the expression of joy and
thankfulness for his reconcilement: The eyes and tongues of men are thus taken
up; now has Absalom laid snares for their hearts also; He rises early, and
stands beside the way of the gate; Ambition is no niggard of her pains;
seldom ever is good meaning so industrious; The more he shined in beauty and
royal attendance, so much more glory it was to neglect himself, and to prefer
the care of justice to his own ease; Neither is Absalom more painful then
plausible, his ear is open to all plaintiues, all petitioners: there is no
cause Which he flatters not, See thy matters are good and right; his hand
flatters every commer with a salutation, his lips with a kiss. All men, all
matters are soothed, saving the state and government; the censure of that is no
less deep, then the applause of all others, (There is none deputed of the King
to hear thee.) What insinuations could be more powerful; No music can be so
sweet to the ears of the unstable multitude, as to hear well of themselves,
ill of their governors; Absalom needs not to wish himself upon the Bench;
Every man says, Oh what a courteous Prince is Absalom? What a just and careful
ruler would Absalom be? How happy were we, if we might be judged by Absalom?
Those qualities which are wont single to grace others, have conspired to meet
in Absalom; goodlines of person, magnificence of state, gracious affability,
unwearied diligence, humility in greatness, feeling pity, love of justice, care
of the Commonwealth; The world has not so complete a Prince as Absalom; Thus
the hearts of the people are not won, but stolen by a close traitor from their
lawfully-anointed Sovereign. Ouer-faire shows are a just argument of
unsoundness; no natural face has so clear a white and red, as the painted:
Nothing wants now but a cloak of religion, to perfect the treachery of that
ungracious Son, who carried peace in his name, war in his heart: and how
easily is that put on? Absalom has an holy vow to be paid in Hebron; The
devout man had made it long since, whiles he was exiled in Syria, and now he
hasts to perform it, (If the Lord shall bring me back again to Jerusalem,
then I will serve the Lord;) wicked hypocrites, care not to play with God that
they may mock men. The more deformed any act is, the fayrer visor it still
seeks.

How glad is the good old King, that he is blessed with so godly a Son; whom he
dismisseth laden with his causeless blessings: What trust is there in flesh
and blood when David is not safe from his own loins? The conspiracy is now
fully forged, there lacked nothing but this guilt of piety to win favor and
value in all eyes; and now it is a wonder, that but two hundred honest Citizens
go up with Absalom from Jerusalem: The true-harted lie most open to credulity:
How easy it is to beguile harmless intentions? The name of David's Son
carries them against the father of Absalom, and now these simple Israelites,
are unwittingly made loyal rebels. Their hearts are free from a plot, and they
mean nothing, but fidelity in the attendance of a traitor. How many thousands
are thus ignorantly misled into the train of error; Their simplicity is as
worthy of pity, as their misguidance of indignation. Those that will suffer
themselves to be carried with semblances of truth and faithfulness, must needs
be as far from safety, as innocence.

Contemplations UPON THE HISTORY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

THE SECOND BOOK:

Christ among the Doctors. Christ Baptized. Christ Tempted. Simon Called. The
Marriage in Cana. The good Centurion.


TO THE HONORABLE GENERAL Sir EDWARD CECILL Knight, all honor and happiness,
Most Honored Sir,
THE store of a good Scribe is (according to our Savior) both old and new; I
would (if I durst) be ambitions of this only honor; having therefore drawn
forth these not-friuolous thoughts, out of the old Testament, I fetch these
following from the new; God is the same in both; as the body differs not with
the age of the suit, with the change of robes: The old and new wine of holy
Truth, came both out of one vineyard; yet here may we safely say to the word
of his father, as was said to the Bridegroom of Cana, Thou have kept the best
wine till the last; The authority of both is equally sacred, the use admits no
less difference, then is betwixt a Savior fore-shadowed, and comne. The
intermission of those military employments, which have won you just honor, both
in foreign nations, and at home, is in this only gainefull, that it yields you
leisure to these happy thoughts, which shall more fully acquaint you with him
that is at once the God of hosts, and the Prince of Peace: To the furtherance
whereof these my poor labors, shall do no thankelesse offices. In lieu of
your noble favors to me both at home, and where you have merited command,
nothing can be returned but humble acknowledgements, and hearty prayers for the
increase of your Honor, and all happiness to your self, and your thrice-worthy
and virtuous Lady, by him that is deeply obliged, and truly devoted to you
both.

IOS: HALL.

CHRIST among the Doctors.
EVEN the spring shows us what we may hope for of the tree in Summer; In his
nonage therefore, would our Savior give us a taste of his future proof, least
if his perfection should have showed it self without warning to the world, it
should have been entertained with more wonder, then belief; now this act of
his Childe-hood shall prepare the faith of men by fore-expectation;
notwithstanding all this early demonstration of his divine graces, the
incredulous Jews could afterward say, whence has this man this wisdom and
great works? What would they have said, if he had suddenly leapt forth into
the clear light of the world? The Sun would dazzle all eyes, if he should
break forth at his first rising into his full strength; now he has both the
day star to go before him, and to bid men look for that glorious body, and
the lively colors of the day, to publish his approach, the eye is comforted,
not hurt by his appearance.

The Parents of Christ went up yearly to Jerusalem at the feast of the
Passover; the law was only for the males, I do not find the blessed virgin
bound to this voyage, the weaker sex received indulgence from God: yet she
knowing the spiritual profit of that journey, takes pains voluntarily to
measure that long way every year; Piety regards not any distinction of sexes
or degrees, nether yet does Gods acceptance; rather does it please the mercy
of the highest, more to reward that service, which, though he like in all, yet
out of favor he will not impose upon all! It could not be but that she whom
the holy ghost ouershadowed, should be zealous of Gods service: those that
will go no further then they are dragged in their religious exercises, are no
whit of kin to her whom all generations shall call blessed.

The child Jesus in the minority of his age, went up with his Parents to the
holy solemnity, not this year only, but in all likelihood others also; he in
the power of whose Godhead, and by the motion of whose Spirit, all others
ascended thither, would not himself stay at home. In all his examples he meant
our Instruction: this pious act of his nonage intended to lead our first years
into timely devotion. The first liquor seasons the vessel for a long time
after: It is every way good for a man, to bear Gods yoke even from his
Infancy: it is the policy of the devil to discourage early holiness: he that
goes out betimes in the morning, is more like to dispatch his journey, then he
that lingers till the day be spent. This blessed Family, came not to look at
the feast and be gone; but they duly stayed out all the appointed days of
unleavened bread: they and the rest of Israel could not want household
businesses at home; those secular affairs could not either keep them from
repayring to Jerusalem, or send them away immaturely; Worldly cares must give
place to the sacred: Except we will depart unblessed, we must attend Gods
services till we may receive his dismission:

It was the fashion of those times and places, that they went up, and so
returned by troops, to those set meetings of their holy festiuals. The whole
parish of Nazareth went and came together, Good-fellowship does no way so well,
as in the passage to Heaven: much comfort is added by society to that journey,
which is of it self pleasant; It is an happy word, Come let us go up to the
house of the Lord: Mutual encouragement is none of the least benefits of our
holy assemblies: Many sticks laid together, make a good fire, which if they lie
single, lose both their light and heat.

The feast ended, what should they do, but return to Nazareth? Gods services
may not be so attended, as that we should neglect our particular callings:
Himself calls us from his own house to ours: and takes pleasure to see a
painful Client: They are foully mistaken, that think God cares for no other
trade, but devotion: Piety and diligence must keep meet changes with each
other; neither does God less acept of our return to Nazareth, then our going
up to Jerusalem.

I cannot think that the blessed Virgin, or good Joseph, could be so negligent
of their divine charge, as not to call the child Jesus, to their setting forth
from Jerusalem: But their back was no sooner turned upon the Temple, then his
face was toward it; he had business in that place, when theirs was ended:
there he was both worshipped and represented: he, in whom the Godhead dwelt
bodily, could do nothing without God: his true father led him away from his
supposed: Sometimes the affairs of our ordinary vocation, may not grudge to
yield unto spiritual occasions: The Parents of Christ knew him well, to be of
a disposition, not strange, nor sullen and stoycall, but sweet and sociable:
and therefore they supposed, he had spent the time and the way, in the company
of their friends and neighbors: They do not suspect him wandered into the
solitary fields, but when evening came, they go to seek him among their
kinsfolk and acquaintance: If he had not wonted to converse formerly with
them, he had not now been sought amongst them: Neither as God, nor man does
he take pleasure in a stern froward austerity, and wild retiredness: but in
a mild affablenesse, and amiable conuersasation.

But, o blessed Virgin, who can express the sorrows of thy perplexed soul;
when all that euening-search could afford thee no news of thy Son Jesus* Was
not this one of those swords of Simeon, which should pierce through thy tender
breast? How did thou chide thy credulous neglect, in not observing so precious
a charge, and blame thine eyes, for once looking beside this object of thy
love? How did thou, with thy careful husband, spend that restless night, in
mutual expostulations, and bemonings of your loss? How many suspicious
imaginations did that while rack thy grieved spirit? Perhaps thou might
doubt, lest they which laid for him, by Herod's command, at his birth, had now
by the secret instigation of Archelaus, surprised him in his childhood: or it
may be, thou thoughtst thy divine Son had now withdrawn himself from the
earth, and returned to his heavenly glory, without warning: or peradventure,
thou studyedst with thy self, whether any careless on thy behalf, had not
given occasion to this absence.

Oh dear Savior, who can miss and not mourn for thee? Never any soul
conceived thee by faith, that was less afflicted with the sense of thy
dissertion, then comforted with the joy of thy presence: Just is that sorrow,
and those tears seasonable, that are bestowed upon thy loss; What comfort are
we capable of, whiles we want thee? What relish is there in these earthly
delights without thee? What is there to mitigate our passionate discomforts, if
not from thee? Let thy self loose, o my soul, to the fullness of sorrow, when
thou find thy self bereeued of him, in whose presence is the fullness of
joy, and deny to receive comfort from any thing, save from his return.

In vain is Christ sought among his kindred, according to the flesh: So far are
they still from giving us their aid, to find the true Messiah, that they lead
us from him: Back again therefore are Joseph and Mary gone, to seek him at
Jerusalem; She goes about in the City, by the streets, and by the open
places, and seeks him whom her soul loves: She sought him, for the time, and
found him not. Do we think she spared her search, the evening of her return,
she hastes to the Inn, where she last left him; where missing him, she
inquires of every one she met, Have you not seen him, whom my soul loves?
At last, the third day, she finds him in the Temple: One day was spent in the
journey toward Galile; another in the return to Jerusalem: The third day
recouers him: He, who would rise again the third day, and be found amongst
the living, now also would the third day be found of his Parents, after the
sorrow of his absence. But where were thou, o blessed Jesus, for the space of
these three days? Where did thou bestow thy self, or who tended thee,
whiles thou were thus alone at Jerusalem? I know, if Jerusalem should have
been as unkind to thee, as Bethelem, thou could have commanded the Heavens
to harbor thee, and if men did not minister to thee, thou could have
commanded the service of Angels, but since the form of a servant, called thee
to a voluntary homeliness, whether it pleased thee to exercise thy self thus
early, with the difficulties of a stranger, or to provide miraculously for thy
self; I inquire not, since thou reuealest not, only this I know, that hereby
thou intendest to teach thy parents, that thou could live without them, and
that not of any indigency, but out of a gracious dispensation, thou would
ordinarily depend upon their care.

In the mean time, thy divine wisdom could not but foreknow all these
corroding thoughts, wherewith the heart of thy dear mother must needs bleed,
through this sudden dereliction; yet would thou leave her for the time to her
sorrow: Even so, o Savior, thou thoughtest fit to visit her, that bore thee
with this early affliction; Never any loved thee, whom thou do not
sometimes exercise with the grief of missing thee, that both we may be more
careful to hold thee, and more joyful in recovering thee. Thou have said, and
can not lie, I am with you to the end of the world: but even whiles thou art
really present, thou think good to be absent unto our apprehensions: yet if
thou leave us, thou will not forsake us; if thou leave us for our humiliation,
thou will not forsake us to our final discomfort; thou may for three days
hide thy self; but then we shall find thee in the Temple; None ever sought
thee with a sincere desire, of whom thou were not found: Thou will not be
either so little absent, as not to whet our appetites, nor so long, as to
fainten the heart. After three days we shall find thee; and where should we
rather hope to find thee then in the Temple? There is the habitation for the
God of Israel, there is thy resting place for ever; Oh all ye that are grieved
with the want of your Savior, see where ye must seek him: In vain shall ye
hope to find him in the strects, in the Tauernes, in the Theaters, seek him in
his holy Temple: Seek him with piety, seek him with faith, there shall ye
meet him, there shall ye recover him. Whiles children of that age were playing
in the streets, Christ was found sitting in the Temple, not to gaze on the
outward glory of that house, or on the golden Candlesticks, or tables, but to
hear and appose the Doctors; He, who as God, gave them all the wisdom they
had, as the Son of man hearkens to the wisdom he had given them: He, who sat
in their hearts, as the Author of all learning and knowledge, sets in the midst
of their school, as an humble Disciple: That by learning of them, he might
teach all the younger sort humility, and due attendance upon their
Instructours, he could at the first have taught the great Rabbis of Israel,
the deep mysteries of God; but because he was not yet called by his Father,
to the public function of a Teacher, he contents to hear with diligence,
and to ask with modesty, and to teach only by insinuation. Let those consider
this, which will needs run as soon as they can go: and when they find
ability, think they need not stay for a further vocation of God, or men; Open
your eyes, ye rathe ripe Inuaders of Gods Chair: and see your Savior in his
younger years, not sitting in the eminent pulpits of the Doctors, but in the
lowly floores of the Auditors: See him that could have taught the Angels,
listening in his minority, to the voice of men; Who can think much, to learn of
his Ancients, when he looks upon the Son of God, sitting at the feet of the
Doctors of Israel. First he hears, the^ he asks: how much more does it concern
vsto be hearers, ere we offer to be teachers of others; he gathers that hears,
he spe^ds that teaches; if we spend ere we gather, we shall soon prove
bankrupts.

When he has heard, he asks, and after that, he answers: doubtless those
very questions were instructions, and meant to teach more then to learn: Never
had these great Rabbis heard the voice of such a tutor: in whom they might see
the wisdom of God so concealing it self, that yet it would be known to be
there: No marvel then if they all wondered at his understanding and answers*
Their eyes saw nothing but humane weakness, their ears heard divine
sublimity of matter; betwixt what they saw, and what they heard, they could not
but be distracted with a doubting admiration. And why did ye not (o ye Jewish
teachers) remember That to us a Child is borne, and unto us a Son is given,
and the government is upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace? Why did ye not now bethink yourselues, what the star, the Sages, the
Angels, the Shepherds, Zachary, Simeon, Anna, had premonished you. Fruitless
is the wonder that ends not in faith; No light is sufficient where the eyes
are held through unbelief or pre^udice.

The Doctors were not more amazed, to hear so profound a childe-hood, then the
parents of Christ were to see him among the Doctors; the Joy of finding him,
did strive with the astonishment of finding him thus, And now, not Joseph (he
knew how little right he had to that divine Son) but Mary breaks forth into a
loving expostulation (Son why have thou dealt so with us;) that she might not
sceme to take upon her as an imperious mother, it is like she reserved this
question till she had him alone: Wherein she meant rather to express grief
then co^reption: Only herein the blessed virgin offended, that he
inconsideration did not suppose (as it was) that some hy^ respects, then could
be due to flesh and blood, called away the Son of God from her, that wa^ the
daughter of man: She tha^ was but the mother of his humanity, should not hau^
thought that the business o^ God must for her sake be neglected: We are all
partial to our selves naturally, and prone to the regard of our own rights;
questionless this gracious saint would not for all the world, have willingly
preferred her own attendance, to that of her God: through heedlesnesse she does
so: her Son and Savior is her monitor: out of his divine love reforming her
natural: How is ^t that ye sought me? Knew ye not that I must go about my
Fathers business? Immediately before the blessed virgin had said, thy father
and I sought thee with heavy hearts: Wherein both according to the supposition
of the world, she called Joseph the father of Christ, and according to the
fashion of a dutiful wife, she names her Joseph, before her self. She well
knew that Joseph had nothing but a name in this business, she knew how God had
dignified her beyond him; yet, she says: Thy father and I sough^ thee; The
Son of God stand not upon contradiction to hi^ mother, but leading he
thoughts from his supposed father, to his true; from earth t^ heaven, he
answers (Knew ye no^ that I must go about my Father^ business?) It was honor
enough to her that he had vouchsafed to take flesh of her; It was his eternal
honor, that he wa^ God of God; the everlasting Son of the heavenly Father;
good reason therefore was it that, the respects to flesh: should give place to
the God of Spirits* How well contented was holy Mary with so just an answer,
how does she now again in her heart, renew her answer to the Angel (Behold the
servant of the Lord, be it according to thy word.

We are all the sons of God in another kind. Nature and the world thinks
we should attend them; we are not worthy to say, we have a Father in heaven,
if we cannot steal away from these earthly distractions, and employ our selves
in the services of our God.

Christ's Baptism.
JOHN did every way fore-runne Christ, not so much in the time of his birth, as
in his office; nether was there more unlikeness in their disposition and
carriage, then similitude in their function; both did preach and baptize; only
John baptized by himself, our Savior by his disciples; our Savior wrought
miracles by himself, by his disciples; John wrought none by either; Wherein
Christ meant to show himself a Lord, and John a servant; and John meant to
approve himself a true servant to him, whose harbinger he was; he that leapt
in the womb of his mother, when his Savior (then newly conceived) came in
presence, bestirred himself when he was brought forth into the light of the
Church, to the honor and service of his Savior: he did the same before Christ,
which Christ charged his disciples to do after him, preach and baptize. The
Gospel ran always in one tenor, and was never but like it self; So it became
the word of him in whom there is no shadow by turning, and whose word it is, I
am Iehoua, I change not.

It was fit, that he which had the Prophets, the star, the Angels to
foretell his coming into the world, should have his Usher to go before him,
when he would notify himself to the world; John was the voice of a Crier,
Christ was the word of his Father; it was fit this voice should make a noise to
the world, ere the word of the Father should speak to it; John's note was
still, repentance; the axe to the root, the fan to the flower, the chafe to
the fire; as his raiment was rough, so was his tongue, and if his food were
wild honey, his speech was stinging locusts: Thus must the way be made for
Christ in every heart: Plausibility is no fit preface to regeneration: if the
heart of man had continued upright, God might have been entertained without
contradiction; but now violence must be offered to our corruption, ere we can
have room for grace; if the great way-maker do not cast down hills, and
raise up vallyes in the bosoms of men, there is no passage for Christ; never
will Christ come into that soul, where the herald of repentance has not been
before him.

That Savior of ours, who from eternity lay hid in the counsel of God, who in
the fulness of time so came, that he lay hid in the womb of his mother, for
the space of forty weeks; after he was come, thought fit to lie hid in
Nazareth, for the space of thirty years, now at last begins to show himself
to the world, and comes from Galile to Jordan. He that was God always, and
might have been perfect man in an instant, would by degrees rise to the
perfection both of his manhood, and execution of his mediator-ship; to teach
us, the necessity of leisure in spiritual proceedings; that many suns, and
successions of seasons, and means must be stayed for, ere we can attain our
maturity; and that when we are ripe for the employments of God, we should no
less willingly leave our obscurity, then we took the benefit of it for our
preparation. He that was formerly circumcised, would now be baptized; what is
baptism but an Evangelical circumcision? What was circumcision but a legal
baptism? One both supplied and succeeded the other; yet the author of both
will undergo both; He would be circumcised to satisfy his Church that was,
and baptized to sanctify his Church that should be; that so in both
Testaments he might open away into heaven. There was in him neither filthiness,
nor foreskin of corruption, that should need either knife, or water; He came
not to be a Savior for himself, but for us, we are all uncleanness, and
uncircumcision, he would therefore have that done to his most pure body, which
should be of force to clear our impure souls; thus making himself sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

His baptism gives virtue to ours. His last action (or rather passion) was his
baptising with blood, his first was his baptization with water, both of them
wash the world from their sins. Yea, this latter did not only wash the souls
of men, but washes that very water, by which we are washed; from hence is
that made both clean and holy, and can both cleanse and hallow us; And if the
very hadkerchiefe which touched his Apostles, had power of cure, how much more
that Water, which the sacred body of Christ touched? Christ comes far, to seek
his baptism: to teach us (for whose sake he was baptized) to wait upon the
ordinances of God; and to sue for the favor of spiritual blessings; They are
worthless commodities, that are not worth seeking for; it is rarely scene,
that God is found of any man unsought for: that desire which only makes us
capable of good things, cannot stand with neglect.

John durst not baptize unbidden: his Master sent him to do this service, and
behold the Master comes to his servant, to call for the participation of that
privilege, which he himself had instituted, and enjoined; how willingly
should we come to our spiritual Superiors, for our part in those mysteries,
which God has left in their keeping; y^^, how gladly should we come to that
Christ, who gives us these blessings; who is given to us in them.

This seemed too great an honor for the modesty of John to receive; If his
mother could say, when her blessed cozen the Virgin Mary, came to visit her
(Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?) how much
more might he say so, when the divine Son of that mother, came to call for a
favor from him? I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? O
holy Baptist, if there were not a greater borne of women then thou; yet thou
could not be borne of a woman, and not need to be baptized of thy Savior.
He baptized with fire, thou with water; Little would thy water have auailed
thee without his fire, If he had not baptized thee, how were thou sanctified
from the womb? There can be no flesh without filthiness; neither thy
supernatural conception, nor thy austere life could exempt thee from the need
of baptism: Even those, that have not lived to sin after the similitude of
Adam, yet are they so tainted with Adam, that unless the second Adam cleanse
them by his baptism they are hopeless; There is no less use of baptism unto
all, then there is certainty of the need of baptism; John baptized without;
Christ within. The more holy a man is, the more sensible he is of his
unholiness; No carnal man could have said (I have need to be baptized of
thee;) neither can he find, what he is the better for a little Font-water. The
sense of our wretchedness, and the valuation of our spiritual helps, is the
best trial of our regeneration: Our Savior does not deny, that either John
has need to be baptized of him, or that it is strange, that he should come to
be baptized of John, but he will needs thus far, both honor John, and disparage
himself, to be baptized of his Messenger; he that would take flesh of the
Virgin, education from his Parents, sustenance from his creatures, will take
baptism from John: It is the praise of his mer cy, that he will stoop so
low, as to be beholden to his creatures, which from him receive their being
and power, both to take and give. Yet not so much respect to John, as obedience
to his Father, drew him to this point of humiliation, (Thus it behooues us to
fulfill all righteousness.) The counsels and appoyntments of God, are
righteousness it self; There needs no other motive, either to the servant, or
the Son, then the knowledge of those righteous purposes. This was enough to
lead a faithful man through all difficulties and inconveniences; neither will
it admit of any reply, or any demurre: John yields to this honor, which his
Savior puts upon him, in giving baptism to the Author of it: He baptized
others to the remission of their sins: now he baptizes him by them, they are
remitted both to the Baptizer, and to others.

No sooner is Christ baptized, then he comes forth of the water: The element
is of force, but during the use: It turns common, when that is past, neither
is the water sooner powered on his head, then the Heavens are opened, and the
Holy Ghost descends upon that head which was baptized: The Heavens are never
shut, whiles either of the Sacraments is duly administered, and received:
neither do the Heavens ever thus open without the descent of the Holy Ghost:
But now that the God of Heaven is baptized, they open unto him, which are
opened to all the faithful by him: and that Holy Ghost which proceeded from
him, together with the Father; ioynes with the Father in a sensible testimony
of him; that now the world might see what interest he had in the Heavens, in
the Father, in the Holy Spirit, and might expect nothing but divine, from the
enttance of such a Mediator.

CHRIST tempted.
NO sooner is Christ comne out of the water of Baptism, then he enters into
the fire of Tentation: No sooner is the Holy Spirit descended upon his head, in
the form of a Dove, then he is led by the spirit to be tempted. No sooner
does God say (This is my Son) then Satan says, (If thou be the Son of God.)
It is not in the power, either of the gtft or seals of Grace, to deliver us
from the assaults of Satan; they may have the force to repel evil
suggestions, they have none to prevent them; yea, the more we are engaged unto
God by our public vows, and his pledges of favor, so much more busy and
violent is the rage of that evil one, to encounter us; We are no sooner stepped
forth into the field of God, then he labors to wrest our weapons out of our
hands, or to turn them against us.

The voice from Heaven, acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God; this divine
Testimony did not allay the malice of Satan, but exasperate it: Now that
venomous Serpent swells with inward poison, and hastes to assail him, whom God
has honored from Heaven. O God, how should I look to escape the suggestious
of that wicked one, when the Son of thy love cannot be free? when even grace
it self draws on enmity? That Enemy, that spared not to strike at the head,
will he forbear the weakest and remotest lim? Arm thou me therefore, with an
expectation of that evil I cannot avoid, Make thou me as strong, as he is
malicious; Say to my soul also (Thou art my Son) and let Satan do his worst.

All the time of our Saviors obscurity, I do not find him set upon; Now,
that he looks forth to the public execution of his divine Office, Satan
bends his forces against him: Our priuacy, perhaps, may sit down in peace, but
never man did endeavor a common good without opposition. It is a sign, that
both the work is holy, and the Agent faithful, when we meet with strong
affronts.

We have reason to be comforted with nothing so much, as with resistance, If
we were not in a way to do good, we should find no rubs; Satan has no cause
to molest his own, and that whiles they go about his own service; He
desires nothing more, then to make us smooth paths to sin; but when we would
turn our feet to holiness, he blocks up the way with tentations.

Who can wonder enough at the sawcines of that bold Spirit, that dares to set
upon the Son of the everliving God? who can wonder enough at thy meeknes and
patience, o Savior, that would be tempted? He wanted not malice and
presumption to assault thee, thou wantedst not humility to endure those
assaults. I should stand amazed at this voluntary dispensation of thine, but
that I see the susception of our humane nature, lays thee open to this
condition. It is necessarily incident to manhood, to be liable to tentations;
Thou would not have put no flesh, if thou had meant utterly to put off
this consequence of our infirmity: If the state of innocence could have been
any defense against evil motions, the first Adam had not been tempted, much
less the second. It is not the presenting of tentation that can hurt us, but
their entertainment. Ill counsel is the fault of the Giver, not of the
Refuser, We cannot forbid leudeies to look in at our windows, we may shut our
doors against their entrance; It is no less our praise to have resisted, then
Satan's blame to suggest evil. Yea, o blessed Savior, how glorious was it for
thee, how happy for us, that thou were tempted? Had not Satan tempted thee, how
should thou have ouercomne? Without blows there can be no victory, no
triumph: How had thy power been manifested; if no adversary had tried thee? The
first Adam was tempted and vanquished, the second Adam, to repay and repair
that foil, does vanquish in being tempted. Now have we not a Savior, and
High Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
such an one, as was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin; how
boldly therefore may we go unto the Throne of grace, that we may receive
mercy, and find grace of help in time of need: Yea, this Devil was for us;
Now we see by this conflict of our Almighty Champion, what manner of Adversary
we have, how he fights, how he is resisted, how ouercomne. Now our very
temptation affords us comfort, in that we see, the dearer we are unto God, the
more obnoxious we are to this trial; neither can we be discouraged by the
haynousnesse of those evils, whereto we are moved, since we see the Son of God
solicited to Infidelity, Covetousness, Idolatry; How glorious therefore was it
for thee, o Savior, how happy for us, that thou were tempted?

Where then wast thou tempted, O blessed Jesus; or whither wentest thou to meet
with our great adversary? I do not see thee led into the marketplace, or any
other part of the city, or thy home-sted of Nazareth, but into the vast
wilderness, the habitation of beasts; a place that caryeth in it, both horror
and opportunity; why would thou thus retire thy self from men, but as
confident Champions are wont to give advantage of ground, or weapon, to their
Antagonist, that the glory of their victory may be the greater: So would
thou, O Savior, in this can but with our common enemy, yield him his own
terms for circumstances, that thine honor and his foil may be the more;
Solitariness is no small help to the speed of a tentation; Woe to him that is
alone, for if he fall, there is not a second to lift him up; Those that out of
an affectation of holiness seek for solitude, in rocks and caves of the
deserts, do no other then run into the mouth of the danger of tentation,
whiles they think to avoid it. It was enough for thee, to whose divine power
the gates of hell were weakness; thus to challenge the Prince of darkness;
Our care must be always to eschew all occasions of spiritual danger; and
(what we may) to get us out of the reach of tentations.

But O the depth of the wisdom of God; How camst thou o Savior, to be thus
tempted? That Spirit whereby thou wast conceived, as man, and which was one
with thee and the Father, as God, Led thee into the wilderness to be tempted
of Satan; Whiles thou taughtest us to pray to thy Father, Lead us not into
temptation, thou meantest to instruct us, that if the same Spirit lead us not
into this perilous way, we go not into it; We have still the same conduct; Let
the path be what it will, how can we miscarry in the hand of a Father. Now
may we say to Satan as thou did unto Pilate; thou could have no power over
me, except it were given thee from above; The spirit led thee, it did not drive
thee; here was a sweet inuitation, no compulsion of violence; So absolutely
conformable was thy will to thy deity, as if both thy natures had but one
volition; In this first draught of thy bitter potion, thy Soul said in a real
subjection, Not my will, but thy will be done: We imitate thee, o Savior,
though we cannot reach to thee; All thine are led by thy Spirit; Oh teach us to
forget that we have wills of our own. The spirit led thee; thine inuin^ible
strength did not animate thee into thi^ combat uncalled, What do we weakelings
so far presume upon our abilities, or success, as that we dare thrust our
selves upon temptations unbidden, unwarranted? Who can pity the ship-wracke of
those Mariners, which will needs put forth, and hoise sails in a tempest?

Forty days did our Savior spend in the wilderness, fasting, and solitary,
all which time was worn out in temptation; how ever the last brunt, because it
was most violent, is only expressed; Now could not the Adversary complain of
disadvantage, whiles he had the full scope both of time and place to do his
worst; And why did i^ please thee, o Savior, to fas^ forty days, and forty
nights^ unless as Moses fasted forty days at the delivery of the law and
Elias at the restetution o^ the law; So thou thoughtest fit at the
accomplishment of the law, and the promulgation of the Gospel, to fulfill the
time of both these tipes of thine, wherein thou intendedst our wonder, not our
imitation; Not our imitation of the time, though of the act. Here were no
faulty desires of the flesh, in thee to be tamed, no possibility of a freer and
more easy ascent of the soul to God, that could be affected of thee, who wast
perfectly united unto God, but as for us thou would suffer death, so for us,
thou would suffer hunger, that we might learn by fasting, to prepare our
selves for tentations: In fasting so long thou intendedst the manifestation of
thy power; in fasting no longer, the truth of thy manhood; Moses and Elias,
through the miraculous sustentation of God, fasted so long, without any
question made of the truth of their bodies; So long therefore thou thoughtest
good to fast, as by reason of these precedents, might be without prejudice of
thine humanity, which if it should have pleased thee to support, as thou
could, without means, thy very power might have opened the mouth of cauills
against the verity of thine humane nature; That thou might therefore well
approve, that ther^ was no difference betwixt the^ and us, but sin; thou tha^
could have fasted without hunger, and lived without meat; would both feed,
and fast, and hunger.

Who can be discouraged with the scantnesse of friends, or bodily provisions,
when he sees his Savior thus long destitute of all earthly comforts, both of
society and sustenance. Oh the policy and malice of that old Serpent, when he
sees Christ bewray some infirmity of nature in being hungry, then he lays
sorest at him by tentations; His eye was never off from our Savior* all the
time of his sequestration; and now that he thinks he espies any one part to lie
open, he drives at it with all his might; We have to do with an adversary, no
less vigilant then malicious; who will be sure to watch all opportunities of
our mischief, and where he sees any advantage of our weakness, will not
neglect it. How should we stand upon our guard for prevention; that both we may
not give him occasions, of our hurt, nor take hurt by those we have given.

When our Savior was hungry, Satan temptes him in matter of food; not then, of
wealth or glory; He well knows both what bayts, to fish withal, and when, and
how to lay them; How safe and happy shall we be, if we shall bend our greatest
care where we discern the most danger?

In every tentation there is an appearance of good; whether of the body, or
mind, or estate; The first is the lust of the flesh, in any carnal desire,
the second the pride of heart, and life; the third the lust of the eyes; To all
these, the first Adam is tempted, and in all miscarryed; the second Adam is
tempted to them all, and overcomes; The first man was tempted, to a carnal
appetite by the forbidden fruit, to pride by the suggestion of being as God; To
covetousness, in the ambitious desire of knowing good and evil; Satan having
found all the motions so success-full with the first Adam in his innocent
estate, will now tread the same steps in his temptations of the second; The
stones must be made bread; there is the motion to a carnal appetite; The guard
and attendance of Angels must be presumed on, there is a motion to pride; The
Kingdoms of the earth, and the glory of them must be offered, there, to
covetousness and ambition.

Satan could not but have heard God say, This is my well-beloved Son, he had
heard the message and the Caroll of the Angels; he saw the Star, and the
journey, and offerings, of the Sages, he could not but take notice of the
gratulations of Zachary, Simeon, Anna; he well knew the predictions of the
Prophets; yet now that he saw Christ fainting with hunger, as not
comprehending how infirmities could consist with a Godhead, he can say, (If
thou be the Son of God;) Had not Satan known that the Son of God was to come
into the world, he had never said (If thou be the Son of God) His very
supposition conuinces him; The ground of his tentation, answers it self; If
therefore Christ seemed to be a mere man, because after forty days he was
hungry, why was he not confessed more then a man, in that for forty days he
hungered not? The motive of the tentation is worse then the motion, (If thou be
the Son of God) Satan could not choose another suggestion of so great
importance. All the work of our redemption, of our salvation, depends upon
this one truth, Christ is the Son of God; How should he else have ransomed the
world, how should he have done, how should he have suffered that, which was
satisfactory ^o his fathers wrath? how should his actions, or passion been
valuable to the sins of all the world? What marvel is it if we that are
sons by adoption, be assaulted with the doubts of our interest in God, when
the natural Son, the Son of his essence is thus tempted? Since all our comfort
consists in this point, here must needs be laid the chief battery; and
here must be placed our strongest defense.

To turn stones into bread, had been no more faulty in it self, then to
turn water into wine: But to do this in a distrust of his Fathers providence,
to abuse his power and liberty in doing it, to work a miracle of Satan's
choice, had been disagreeable to the Son of God: There is nothing more
ordinary with our spiritual enemy, then by occasion of want to move us to
unwarrantable courses; Thou art poor, steal; Thou can not rise by honest
means, use indirect; How easy had it been for our Savior, to have
confounded Satan by the power of his Godhead? But he rather chooses to vanquish
him by the sword of the Spirit, that he might teach us how to resist and
overcome the powers of darkness? If he had subdued Satan by the almighty
power of the deity, we might have had what to wonder at, not what to imitate;
now he uses that weapon, which may be familiar unto us, that he may teach our
weakness how to be victorious; Nothing in heaven or earth can beat the forces
of hell, but the word of God; How carefully should we furnish our selves with
this powerful munition; how should our hearts and mouths be full of it?
Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes; O take not from me the words of
Truth; Let them be my songs in the house of my pilgrimage; So shall I make
answer to my blasphemers. What needed Christ to have answered Satan at all, if
it had not been to teach us, that tentations must not have their way; but must
be answered by resistance; and resisted by the word.

I do not hear our Savior auerre himself to be a God; against the
blasphemous insinuation of Satan; neither do I see him working this miraculous
conversion, to prove himself the Son of God; but most wisely he takes away
the ground of the tentation; Satan had taken it for granted, that man cannot be
sustained without bread; and therefore infers the necessity of making bread of
stones; Our Savior shows him from an infallible word, that he had mislaied
his suggestion; That man lives not by usual food only, but by every word that
proceeds from the mouth of God; He can either sustain without bread, as he
did Moses and Elias, or with a miraculous bread, as the Israelites with Manna,
or send ordinary means miraculously, as food to his Prophet by the Ravens, or
miraculously multiply ordinary means, as the meal and oil to the Sareptan
widow: All things are sustained by his almighty word: Indeed we live by food,
but not by any virtue that is in it without God; without the concurrence of
whose providence, bread would rather choke, then nourish us; Let him withdraw
his hand from his creature; in their greatest abundance we perish; Why do we
therefore bend our eyes on the means, and not look up to the hand that gives
the blessing?

What so necessary dependence has the blessing upon the creature, if our
ptayers hold them not together; As we may not neglect the means, so we may
not neglect the procurement of a blessing upon the means, nor be unthankful
to the hand that has given the blessing.

In the first assault, Satan moves Christ to doubt of his fathers providence,
and to use unlawful means to help himself: in the next, he moves him to
presume upon his Fathers protection, and the service of his blessed Angels; He
grounds the first upon a conceit of want, the next of abundance; If he be in
extremes, it is all to one end, to mislead unto evil: If we cannot be driven
down to despair, he labors to lift us up to presumption; It is not one foil
that can put this bold spirit out of countenance: Tentations, like waves,
break one in the neck of another; Whiles we are in this warre-fare, we must
make account, that the repulse of one tentation does but inuit another.

That blessed Savior of ours, that was content to be led from lordan into the
wilderness, for the advantage of the first tentation, yields to be led from the
wilderness to Jerusalem, for the advantage of the second; The place does not a
little avail to the act: The wilderness was fit for a tentation, arifing from
want, it was not fit for a tentation moving to vainglory. The populous City
was the fittest for such a motion; Jerusalem was the glory of the world, the
Temple was the glory of Jerusalem, the pinacles, the highest piece of the
Temple, there is Christ content to be set for the opportunity of tentation: O
Savior of men, how can we wonder enough at this humility of thine, that thou
would so far abase thy self, as to suffer thy pure and sacred body to be
transported by the presumptuous and malicious hand of that unchaste spirit? It
was not his power, it was thy patience, that deserves our admiration, Neither
can this seem ouer-strange to us, when we consider, that if Satan be the head
of wicked men, wicked men are the members of Satan; What was Pilate, or the
Jews that persecuted thine innocence, but lims of this Devil? and why are we
then amazed, to see thee touched, and locally transported by the head, when we
see thee yielding thy self over, to be crucified by the members? If Satan did
the worse, and greater, mediately by their hands, no marvel if he do the
less and easier, immediately by his own, yet neither of them without thy
voluntary dispensation. He could not have looked at thee, without thee; And if
the Son of God, did thus suffer his own holy and precious body, to be carried
by Satan, what wonder is it, if that Enemy have sometimes power given him, over
the sinful bodies of the adopted Sons of God. It is not the strength of faith,
that can secure us from the outward violences of that evil One; This
difference I find betwixt his spiritual and bodily assaults: those are beaten
back by the shield of faith, these admit not of such repulse; As the best man
may be lame, blind, diseased, so through the permission of God, he may be
bodily vexed by that old Manslayer; Grace was never given us for a target
against external afflictions.

Me thinks I see Christ, hoysed up on the highest battlements of the Temple;
whose very roof was an hundred and thirty cubits high; and Satan standing by
him with this speech in his mouth; Well then, since in the matter of
nourishment, thou will needs depend upon thy Fathers providence, that he can
without means sustain thee, take now further trial of that providence, in
thy miraculous preservation; Cast thy self down from this height; Behold, thou
art here in Jerusalem, the famous and holy City of the world; here thou art, on
the top of the pinnacle of that Temple, which is dedicated to thy Father, and,
if thou be God, to thy self; the eyes of all men are now fixed upon thee, there
cannot be devised a more ready way to spread thy glory, and to proclaim thy
Deity, then by casting thy self headlong to the earth. All the world will say,
there is more in thee, then a man; and for danger, there can be none; What can
hurt him, that is the Son of God? and wherefore serves that glorious Guard of
Angels, which have by divine commission, taken upon them the charge of thine
humanity? since therefore in one act, thou may be both safe, and celebrated,
trust thy Father, and those thy serviceable spirits with thine assured
preservation, Cast thy self down: And why did thou not, o thou malignant
spirit, endeavor to cast down my Savior, by those same presumptuous hands,
that brought him up, since the descent is more easy then the raising up? was
it for that, it had not been so great an advantage to thee, that he should
fall by thy means, as by his own? falling into sin, was more then to fall
from the pinnacle; still thy care and suit is, to make us Authors to our selves
of evil; thou gainest nothing by our bodily hurt; if the soul be safe: Or was
it rather for that, thou could not? I doubt not, but thy malice could as well
have served, to have offered this measure to himself, as to his holy Apostle
soon after; but he that bounded thy power, tether'd thee shorter; Thou could
not, thou can not do what thou would. He that would permit thee to carry
him up, binds thy hands from casting him down: And woe were it for us if thou
were not ever stinted:

Why did Satan carry up Christ so high, but on purpose, that his fall might be
the more deadly; so deals he still with us, he exalts us, that we may be
dangerously abased; He puffs men up with swelling thoughts of their own
worthiness, that they may be vile in the eyes of God, and fall into
condemnation: It is the manner of God, to cast down, that he may raise, to
abase that he may exalt; Contrarily, Satan raises up, that he may throw down,
and intends nothing but our deiection, in our advancement.

Height of place gives opportunity of tentation; Thus busy is that wicked one,
in working against the members of Christ. If any of them be in eminence above
others, those he labors most to ruinate* They had need to stand fast, that
stand high; Both there is more danger of their falling, and more hurt in their
fall.

He that had presumed thus far, to tempt the Lord of life, would feign now
draw him also to presume upon his Deity; If thou be the Son of God, cast thy
self down. There is not a more tried shaft in all his quiver, then this; a
persuasion to men, not to bear themselves too bold vpno the favor of God; Thou
art the Elect and Redeemed of God; sin, because grace has abounded, sin, that
it may abound; Thou art safe enough, though thou offend, be not too much an
adversary to thine own liberty: False Spirit, it is no liberty to sin, but
servitude rather, there is no liberty, but in the freedom from sin; Every one
of us, that has the hope of Sons, must purge himself, even as he is pure,
that has redeemed us: We are bought with a price, therefore must we glorify
God in our bodies and spirits, for they are Gods; Our Sonship teaches us awe
and obedience, and therefore, because we are Sons, we will not cast our selves
down into sin.

How idly do Satan and wicked men measure God, by the crooked line of their
own misconceit: Ywis, Christ cannot be the Son of God, unless he cast
himself down from the pinnacle; unless he come down from the Cross. God is
not merciful, unless he humor them in all their desires, not just, unless he
take speedy vengeance, where they require it; But when they have spent their
folly upon these vain imaginations, Christ is the Son of God, though he stay
on the top of the Temple, God will be merciful, though we miscarry, and
just, though Sinners seem lawless. Neither will he be any other then he is,
or measured by any rule, but himself.

But what is this I see, Satan himself with a Bible under his arm, with a
Text in his mouth, It is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee?
How still in that wicked One does subtilty strive with presumption? Who could
not, but ouer-wonder at this, if he did not consider, that since the Devil
dared to touch the sacred body of Christ with his hand, he may well touch the
Scriptures of God with his tongue? Let no man henceforth marvel, to hear
heretics, or hypocrites, quote Scriptures, when Satan himself has not spared
to cite the^; what are they the worse for this, more then that holy body, which
he transported? Some have been poisoned, by their meats and drinks, yet either
these nourish us, or nothing: It is not the letter of the Scripture that can
carry it, but the sense; if we divide these two, we profane and abuse that
word we allege. And wherefore does this foul Spirit vrgea Text, but for
imitation, for prevention, and for success? Christ had alleged a Scripture
unto him, he re-alledges Scripture unto Christ: At least wise, he will
counterfeit an imitation of the Son of God; Neither is it in this alone; what
one act ever passed the hand of God, which Satan did not apishly attempt to
second? If we follow Christ in the outward action, with contrary intentions,
we follow Satan, in following Christ. Or, perhaps, Satan meant to make Christ
hereby weery of this weapon; As we see fashions, when they are taken up of the
unworthy. are cast of by the great, It was doubtless, one cause, why Christ
afterward forbad the Devil even to confess the truth, because his mouth was
a slander. But chiefly does he this, for a better color of his tentation: He
guilds over this falfe metal with Scripture, that it may pass current; Even
now is Satan transformed into an Angel of light, and will seem godly for a
mischeife; If hypocrites make a fair show to deceive with a glorious luster of
holiness, we see whence they borrowd it: How many thousand souls are betrayed
by the abuse of that word, whose use is sovereign and saving. No devil is so
dangerous as the religious devil. If good meat turn to the nourishment, not
of nature, but of the disease, we may not forbear to feed, but endeavor to
purge the body of those evil humors, which cause the stomach to work against
it self. O God, thou that have given us light, give us clear and sound eyes,
that we may take comfort of that light thou have given us; Thy word is holy,
make our hearts so, and then shall they find that word, not more true then
cordial; Let not this divine table of thine, be made a snare to our souls.

What can be a better act then to speak Scripture? It were a wonder if Satan
should do a good thing well; He cites scripture then, but with mutilation, and
distortion; it comes not out of his mouth, but maimed and perverted; One piece
is left out, all misapplyed; Those that wrest or mangle Scripture for their
own turn, it is easy to see from what school they come. Let us take the
word from the author, not from the usurper: David would not doubt to eat that
sheep, which he pulled out of the mouth of the Bear or Lion; (He shall give
his Angels charge over thee:) Oh comfortable assurance of our protection; Gods
children never go vnattended; Like unto great Princes we walk ever in the
midst of our guard; though invisible, yet true, careful, powerful; What
creatures are so glorious as the Angels of heaven, yet their maker has set
them to serve us: Our adoption makes us at once great and safe; We may be
contemptible and ignominious in the eyes of the world, but the Angels of God
observe us the while, and scorn not to wait upon us in our homeliest
occasions; The Sun, or the light may we keep out of our houses, the air we
cannot; much less these fpirits, that are more simple and immateriall: No
walls, no bolts, can sever them from our sides: they accompany us in dungeons,
they go with us into our exile; How can we either fear danger, or complain
of solitariness, whiles we have so inseparable, so glorious companions?

Is our Savior distasted with Scripture, because Satan mislaies it in his
dish? Does he not rather snatch this sword out of that impure hand, and beat
Satan with the weapon which he abuses; (It is written, Thou shall not tempt
thy Lord thy God;) The Scripture is one, as that God, whose it is; Where it
carries an appearance of difficulty or inconvenience, it needs no light to
clear it, but that, which it has in it self. All doubts that may arise from
it, are fully answered by collection; It is true that God has taken this care,
and given this charge of his own; he will have them kept, not in their sins;
they may trust him, they may not tempt him; he meant to encourage their faith,
not their presumption. To cast our selves upon an immediate providence, when
means fail not, is to disobey, in steed of believing God; we may challenge
God on his word, we may not strain him beyond it; we may make account of what
he promised, we may not subject his promises to unjust examinations; and where
no need is, make trial of his power, justice, mercy, by devises of our own.
All the Devils in hell, could not elude the force of this divine answer; and now
Satan sees how vainly he tempts Christ to tempt God.

Yet again for all this, do I see him setting upon the Son of God: Satan is
not foiled when he is resisted: neither diffidence, nor presumption can fasten
upon Christ, he shall be tried with honor; As some expert Fencer that
challenges at all weapons, so does this great enemy; In vain shall we plead
our skill in some, if we fail in any; It must be our wisdom to be prepared
for all kind of assaults: As those that hold towns and forts do, not only
defend themselves from incursions, but from the cannon and the Pioner; still
does that subtle Serpent trauerse his ground for an advantage; The Temple is
not hye enough for his next tentation; He therefore carries up Christ to the
top of an exceeding high mountain; All enemies in pitched fields strive for the
benefit of the hill, or river, or wind, or sun; That which his servant Balac
did by his instigation, himself does now immediately, change places in hope of
prevailing. If the obscure country will not move us, he tries what the Court
can do, if not our home, the Tavern, if not the field, our closet,; As no
place is left free by his malice, so no place must be made prejudicial by our
carelessness; and as we should always watch over our selves, so then most,
when the opportunity carries cause of suspicion.

Wherefore is Christ carried up so high but for prospect? If the kingdoms of the
earth and their glory, were only to be represented to his imagination; the
valley would have served; If to the outward sense, no hill could suffice;
Circular bodies though small, cannot be seen at once. This show was made to
both, diverse kingdoms lying round about Judea were represented to the eye; The
glory of them to the imagination; Satan meant the eye could tempt the fancy; no
less then the fancy could tempt the will. How many thousand souls have dyed
of the wound of the eye; If we do not let in sin at the window of the eye,
or the door of the ear, it cannot enter into our hearts.

If there be any pomp, majesty, pleasure, bravery in the world, where should
it be but in the Courts of Princes, whom God has made his Images, his deputies
upon earth? There is soft raiment, sumptuous feasts, rich Jewels, honorable
attendance, glorious triumphs, royal state, these Satan lays out to the
fairest show: But oh the craft of that old Serpent; Many a care attends
greatness; No creature is without thorns: High seats are never but uneasy;
all those infinite discontentments, which are the shadow of earthly
soueraignety, he hides out of the way; nothing may be seen, but what may both
please and allure. Satan is still and ever like himself; If tentations might
be but turned about and shown on both sides, the kingdom of darkness would
not be so populous. Now whenever the Tempter sets upon any poor soul, all
sting of conscience, wrath, judgment, torment is concealed, as if they were
not; Nothing may appear to the eye but pleasure, profit, and a seeming
happiness in the inioying our desires; those other woeful objects are reserved
for the farewell of sin; that our misery may be seen and felt at once; When
we are once sure, Satan is a Tyrant, till then, he is a Parasite: There can be
no safety, if we do not view as well the back as the face of tentations.

But oh presumption and impudence, that hell it self may be ashamed of; The
Devil dares say to Christ, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me; That beggarly spirit, that has not an inch of earth, can
offer the whole world to the maker; to the owner of it; The slave of God would
be adord of his Creator; How can we hope he should be sparing of false boasts,
and of unreasonable promises unto us, when he dares offer kingdoms to him by
whom kings reign?

Tentations on the right hand are most dangerous; how many that have been
hardened with fear, have melted with honor; There is no doubt of that soul
that will not bite at the golden hook.

False liars and vaineglorious boasters, see the top of their pedigree; If I
may not rather say, that Satan does borrow the use of their tongues for a time;
Whereas faithful is he that has promised; who will also do it. Fidelity and
truth is the issue of heaven.

If Idolatry were not a dear sin to Satan, he would not be so importunate to
compass it; It is miserable to see how he draws the world insensibly into
this sin, which they profess to detest; Those that would rather hazard the
furnace, then worship gold in a statue, yet do adore it in the stamp, and
find no fault with themselves. If our hearts be drawn to stoop unto an
ouer-high respect of any creature, we are Idolaters. O God, it is no marvel
if thy jealousy be kindled at the admission of any of thine own works into a
competition of honor with their Creator.

Never did our Savior say, Avoid Satan, till now; It is a just indignation,
that is conceived at the motion of a riuality with God, Neither yet did Christ
exercise his divine power in this command, but by the necessary force of
Scripture, drives away that impure Tempter; It is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: The rest of our Saviors
answers were more full and direct, then that they could admit of a reply, but
this was so flat and absolute, that it utterly daunted the courage of Satan,
and put him to a shameful flight, and made him for the time, weary of his
trade.

The way to be rid of the troublesome solicitations of that wicked one, is
continued resistance. He that forcibly drove the tempter from himself, takes
him off from us, and will not abide his assaults perpctuall; It is our exercise
and trial, that he intends, not our confusion.

Simon called.
AS the Sun in his first rising, draws all e^es to it; So did this Sun of
righteousness, when he first shone forth into the world; His miraculous cures
drew Patients, his divine doctrine drew Auditors, both together drew the
admiring multitude by troops after him. And why do we not still follow thee,
o Savior, through deserts and mountains, over land and seas, that we may be
both healed, and taught. It was thy word, that when thou were lift up, thou
would draw all men unto thee; Behold, thou art lift up long since, both to
the tree of shame, and to the throne of heavenly glory, Draw us, and we shall
run after thee; Thy word is still the same, though proclaimed by men, thy
virtue is still the same, though exercised upon the spirits of men; Oh give us,
to hunger after both, that by both, our souls may be satisfied.

I see the people, not only following Christ, but pressing upon him; even very
unmannerliness finds here both excuse and acceptance; They did not keep
their distances in an awe to the Majesty of the Speaker, whiles they were
ravished with the power of the speech, yet did not our Savior check their
vnreuerent thronging, but rather encourages their forwardness. We cannot
offend thee, o God, with the importunity of our desires; It likes thee well,
that the Kingdom of Heaven should suffer violence. Our slacknesse does ever
displease theee, never our vehemence.

The throng of Auditors forced Christ to leave the shore, and to make Peter's
ship his Pulpit; Never were there such nets cast out of that fisher-boat
before; whiles he was upon the land, he healed the sick bodies by his touch;
now that he was upon the sea, he cured the sick souls by his doctrine; and is
purposely severed from the multitude, that he may unite them to him. He that
made both sea and land, causes both of them to conspire to the opportunities
of doing good.

Simon was busy, washing his nets: Even those nets that caught nothing, must
be washed, no less then if they had sped well: The nights toil does not
excuse his days work: Little did Simon think of leaving those nets, which he
so carefully washed; and now Christ interrupts him with the favor and blessing
of his gracious presence; Labor in our callings (how homely soever) makes us
capable of divine benediction.

The honest Fisherman, when he saw the people flock after Christ, and heard
him speak with such power, could not but conceive a general and confuse
apprehension of some excellent worth in such a Teacher, and therefore is glad
to honor his ship with such a guest; and is first Christ's host by sea, ere he
is his Disciple by land; An humble and serviceable entertainment of a Prophet
of God, was a good foundation of his future honor; He that would so easily
lend Christ his hand, and his ship, was likely soon after to bestow himself
upon his Savior.

Simon has no sooner done this service to Christ, then Christ is preparing for
his reward; when the sermon is ended, the ship-roome shall be paid for
abundantly; Neither shall the Host expect any other play master then himself:
Lanch forth into the deep, and let down your nets to make a draught: That
ship which lent Christ an opportunity of catching men upon the shore, shall be
requited with a plentiful draught of fish in the deep: It had been as easy
for our Savior, to have brought the fish to Peter's ship, close to the shore,
yet as choosing rather to have the ship carried to the shole of fish, he bids
(Lanch forth into the deep:) In his miracles, he loves ever to meet nature in
her bounds; and when she has done her best, to supply the rest by his
ouer-ruling power; The same power therefore, that could have caused the fishes
to leap upon dry land, or to leave themselves forsaken of the waters, upon the
sands of the Lake, will rather find them in a place natural to their abiding
(Lanch out into the deep.)

Rather in a desire to gratify and obey his guest, then to pleasure himself,
will Simon bestow one cast of his net; Had Christ enjoined him an harder task,
he had not refused; yet not without an allegation of the vnlikelyhood of
success, (Master we have travailed all night, and caught nothing; yet at thy
word I will let down the net.

The night was the fittest time for the hopes of their trade; not unjustly
might Simon misdoubt his speed by day, when he had worn out the night in
unprofitable labor: Sometimes God crosses the fairest of our expectations,
and gives a blessing to those times and means whereof we despair. That pains
cannot be cast away which we resolve to loose for Christ.

Oh God, how many do I see casting out their netsin the great lake of the
world, which in the whole night of their life have caught nothing; They
conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity; They hatch Cokatrices eggs, and
weaue the spiders web; he that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is
trodden upon, breaks out into a Serpent; Their webs shall be no garment,
neither shall they cover themselves with their labors.

Oh ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity and follow after lies? Yet,
if we have thus vainly misspent the time of our darkness; Let us at the
command of Christ, cast out our new-washen nets; our humble and penitent
obedience, shall come home laden with blessings, (And when they had so done,
they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, so that their net brake:) What a
difference there is betwixt our own voluntary acts, and those that are done
upon command; not more in the grounds of them, then in the issue? those are
oft-times fruitless, these ever successful: Never man threw out his net at
the word of his Savior, and drew it back empty; who would not obey thee, o
Christ, since thou do so bountifully requite our weakest services?

It was not mere retribution that was intended in this event, but instruction
also: This act was not without a mystery; He that should be made a fisher of
men, shall in this draught foresee his success; The kingdom of heaven is like
a draw-net, cast into the sea, which when it is full men draw to land; The very
first draught that Peter made after the complement of his Apostleship, enclosed
no less then three thousand souls. Oh powerful Gospel, that can fetch
sinful men from out of the depthes of natural corruption: Oh happy souls,
that from the blind and muddy cells of our wicked nature, are drawn forth to
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Simons net breaks with the store;
Abundance is sometimes no less troublesome then want; the net should have
held, if Christ had not meant to ouer-charge Simon both with blessing and
admiration: How happily is that net broken, whose rupture draws the fisher to
Christ. Though the net brake, yet the fish escaped not; He that brought them
thither to be taken, held them there till they were taken, (They beckened to
their partners in the other ship, that they should come and help them;) There
are other ships in partnership with Peter, he does not fish all the lake alone;
There cannot be a better improuement of society, then to help us again, to
relieve us in our profitable labors; to draw up the spiritual draught into
the vessel of Christ, and his Church: wherefore has God given us partners, but
that he should becken to them for their aid in our necessary occasions? Neither
does Simon slacken his hand, because he had assistants. What shall we say to
those lazy fishers, who can set others to the drag, whiles themselves look on
at ease; caring only to feed themselves with the fish, not willing to wet
their hands with the nett?

What shall we say to this excess of gain? The nets break, the ships sink
with their burden: Oh happy complaint of too large a capture! O Savior, if
those Apostolical vessels of thy first rigging, were thus ouerlayd, ours flote
and totter with an vnballasted lightness: Thou, who art no less present in
these bottoms of ours, lade them with an equal freight of converted souls,
and let us praise thee for thus sinking.

Simon was a skilful Fisher, and knew well the depth of his trade, and now
perceiving more then Art or nature in this draught, he falls down at the knees
of Jesus, saying, (Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man.) Himself is
caught in this net: He does not greedily fall upon so unexpected and profitable
a booty, but he turns his eyes from the draught to himself, from the act to
the Author, acknowledging vileness in the one, in the other Majesty; (Go from
me Lord, for I am a sinful man.)

It had been pity the honest Fisherman should have been taken at his Word:
Oh Simon, thy Savior is comne into thine own ship to call thee, to call
others by thee unto blessedness, and do thou say, Lord, go from me? As if
the Patient should say to the Physician; Depart from me, for I am sick. It was
the voice of astonishment, not of dislike; the voice of humility, not of
coffeehouse: yea, because thou art a sinful man, therefore has thy Savior
need to come to thee, to stay with thee; and because thou art humble in the
acknowledgement of thy sinfulnes, therefore Christ delights to abide with thee,
and will call thee to abide with him; No man ever fared the worse for abasing
himself to his God; Christ has left many a soul, for froward and unkind
usage, never any for the disparagement of it self, and entreaties of humility.
Simon could not devise how to hold Christ faster, then by thus suing to him, to
be gone, then by thus pleading his unworthiness.

O my soul be not weary of complaining of thine own wretchedness, disgrace
thy self to him that knows thy vileness; be astonished at those mercies which
have shamed thine ill deseruings; Thy Savior has no power to go away from a
prostrate heart; He that resists the proud, hartens the lowly (Fear not, for I
will make thee henceforth a fisher of men.) Lo, this humility is rewarded with
an Apostleship: What had the earth ever more glorious, then a legacy from
heaven? He that bad Christ go from him, shall have the honor to go first on
this happy errand; This was a trade that Simon had no skill of: it could not
but be enough to him, that Christ said, I will make thee; the miracle showed
him, able to make good his word; he that has power to command the fishes to
be taken, can easily enable the hands to take them.

What is this divine trade of ours then, but a spiritual piscation? The world
is a sea; souls like fishes swim at liberty in this deep, the nets of wholesome
doctrine, draw up some to the shore of grace and glory; How much skill, and
toil, and patience, is requisite in this art? Who is sufficient for these
things? This sea, these nets, the fishers, the fish, the vessels are all thine,
o God; do what thou will in us, and by us; Give us ability and grace to take,
give men will and grace to be taken, and take thou glory by that which thou
have given.

The marriage in Cana.
WAS this then thy first miracle, o Savior, that thou wroughts in Cana of
Galile? And could there be a greater miracle then this, that having been thirty
years upon earth, thou did no miracle till now? That thy divinity did hide
it self thus long in flesh; that so long thou would lie obscure in a corner
of Galile, unknown to that world thou came to redeem? That so long thou
would strain the patient expectation of those, who ever since thy Star,
waited upon the revelation of a Messiah? We silly wretches, if we have but a
dram of virtue, are ready to set it out to the best show, thou who receiuedst
not the Spirit by measure, would content thy self with a willing obscurity,
and concealedst that power that made the world, in the roof of an humane
breast, in a cottage of Nazareth. O Savior, none of thy miracles is more worthy
of astonishment, then thy not doing of miracles. What thou did in private,
thy wisdom thought fit for secrecy; but if thy blessed mother had not been
acquainted with some domestical wonders, she had not now expected a miracle
abroad; The stars are not seen by day; the Sun it self is not seen by
night: As it is no small art to hide Art, so is it no small glory, to conceal
glory; Thy first public miracle graceth a marriage; It is an ancient and
laudable institution, that the rites of matrimony should not want a solemn
celebration; When are feasts in season, if not at the recovery of our lost
ribbe? If not at this maine change of our estate, wherein the joy of obtaining,
meets with the hope of further comforts? The Son of the Virgin, and the Mother
of that Son are both at a wedding; It was in all likelihood some of their
kindred, to whose nuptial feast, they were invited so far; yet was it more
the honor of the act, then of the person, that Christ intended; He that made
the first marriage in Paradise, bestows his first miracle upon a Galilean
marriage; He that was the author of matrimony and sanctified it, does by his
holy presence, honest the resemblance of his eternal union with his Church:
How boldly may we spit in the faces of all the impure adversaries of wedlock,
when the Son of God pleases to honor it?

The glorious bridegroom of the Church, knew well how ready men would be to
place shame, even in the most lawful conjunctions; and therefore his first
work shall be, to countenance his own ordinance. Happy is that wedding, where
Christ is a guest; O Savior, those that marry in thee, cannot marry without
thee; There is no holy marriage whereat thou art not (how ever invisible) yet
truly present, by thy Spirit, by thy gracious benediction. Thou make
marriages in heaven, thou blessest them from heaven. Oh thou, that have
betrothed us to thy self in truth and righteousness, do thou consummate that
happy marriage of ours in the highest heavens.

It was no rich or sumptuous Bridal, to which Christ with his Mother, and
Disciples vouchsafed to come, from the further parts of Galile; I find him not
at the magnificent feasts or triumphs of the great; the proud pomp of the
world, did not agree with the state of a servant; This poor needy bridegroom
wants drink for his guests. The blessed virgin (though a stranger, to the
house) out of a charitable compassion, and a friendly desire, to maintain the
decency of an hospital intertainment, inquires into the wants of her host;
pittyes them, bemones them, where there was power of redress; (When the wine
failed, the the mother of Jesus said unto him, They have no wine.) How well
does it beseem the eyes of piety, and christian love to look into the
necessities of others? She that conceived the God of mercies, both in her
heart, and in her womb, does not fix her eyes upon her own trencher, but
searches into the penury of a poor Israelite, and feels those wants, whereof
he complains not; They are made for themselves, whose thoughts are only taken
up with their own store, or indigence.

There was wine enough for a meal, though not for a feast: and if there were
not wine enough, there was enough water; yet the holy virgin complains of the
want of wine; and is troubled with the very lack of superfluity; The bounty of
our God reaches not to our life only, but to our contentment; neither has he
thought good to allow us only the bread of sufficiency, but sometimes of
pleasure. One while that is but necessary, which some other time were
superfluous. It is a scrupulous injustice to scant our selves, where God has
been liberal.

To whom should we complain of any want, but to the maker and giver of all
things? The blessed virgin knew to whom she sued; She had good reason to know
the divine nature and power of her Son: Perhaps the Bridegroom was not so
needy, but if not by his purse, yet by his credit, he might have supplied that
want; or, it were hard if some of the neighbour-guests (had they been duly
solicited) might not have furnished him with so much wine, as might suffice for
the last service of a dinner; but blessed Mary knew a nearer way; she did not
think best to lade at the shallow channel, but runs rather to the wellhead,
where she may dip, and fill the firkins at once, with ease. It may be she saw
that the train of Christ (which unbidden followed unto that feast, and
unexpectedly added to the number of the guests) might help forward that defect,
and therefore she justly solicites her Son Jesus for a supply: Whether we want
bread, or water, or wine; necessaries or comforts, whither should we run, o
Savior, but to that infinite munificence of thine, which neither denies, nor
vpbraideth any thing? We cannot want, we cannot abound, but from thee, Give us
what thou will, so thou give us contentment with what thou give.

But what is this I hear? A sharp answer to the suit of a mother? (Oh woman
what have I to do with thee?) He whose sweet mildness and mercy, never sent
away any suppliant discontented, does he only frown upon her that bare him? He
that commands us to honor father and mother, does he disdain her whose flesh
he took? God forbid: Love and duty does not exempt parents from due
admonition. She solicited Christ as a mother, he answers her as a woman: If she
were the mother of his flesh, his deity was eternal; She might not so remember
her self to be a mother, that she should forget she was a woman; nor so look
upon him as a Son, that she should not regard him, as God; He was so obedient
to her as a mother, that withal she must obey him as her God; That part which
he took from her shall observe her; She must observe that nature, which came
from above; and made her both a woman, and a mother. Matter of miracle
concerned the Godhead only; Supernatural things, were above the sphere of
fleshly relation; If now the blessed virgin will be prescribing, either time,
or form unto divine acts, O woman, what have I to do with thee, my hour is
not come. In all bodily actions his style was, O mother; in spiritual and
heavenly, O woman. Neither is it for us in the holy affairs of God, to know
any faces, yea, if we have known Christ heretofore according to the flesh,
henceforth know we him so no more.

O blessed virgin, if in that heavenly glory wherein thou art, thou can take
notice of these earthly things, with what indignation, Do thou look upon the
presumptuous superstition of vain men, whose suits make thee more then a
solicitor of divine favors? Thine humanity is not lost in thy mother-hood, nor
in thy glory: The respects of nature reach not so high as heaven; It is far
from thee to abide that honor, which is stolen from thy Redeemer.

There is a marriage, whereto we are invited, yea, wherein we are already
interessed, not as the guests only, but as the Bride; in which there shall be
no want of the wine of gladness: It is marvel, if in these earthly banquets
there be not some lack; In thy presence, o Savior, there is fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Blessed are they, that are
called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb.

Even in that rough answer, does the blessed Virgin descry cause of hope. If
his hour were not yet comne, it was therefore coming; when the expectation of
the guests, and the necessity of the occasion had made fit room for the
miracle, it shall come forth, and challenge their wonder. Faithfully therefore,
and obseruantly, does she turn her speech from her Son to the Wayters
(Whatsoever he says unto you, do it.) How well does it beseem the mother of
Christ to agree with his Father in Heaven, whose voice from Heaven said, This
is my welbeloned Son, hear him; She that said of her self, Be it unto me
according to thy word, says unto others, Whatsoever he says to you, do it.
This is the way to have miracles wrought in us, obedience to his Word. The
power of Christ did not stand upon their officiousness; he could have wrought
wonders in spite of them; but their perverse refusal of his commands, might
have made them incapable of the favor of a miraculous action: He that can
(when he will) convince the obstinate, will not grace the disobedient. He
that could work without us, or against us, will not work for us, but by us.

This very poor house, was furnished with many and large vessels, for outward
purifications; As if sin had dwelt upon the skin, that superstitious people
sought holiness in frequent washings; Even this rinsing fouled them, with the
uncleanness of a traditionall will worship. It is the soul which needs
scouring; and nothing can wash that, but the blood, which they desperately
wished upon themselves, and their children; for guilt, not for expiation. Purge
thou us, o Lord, with hyssop, and we shall be clean, wash us and we shall be
whiter then snow.

The wayters could not but think strange of so unseasonable a command; (Fill
the waterpots.) It is wine that we want, what do we go to fetch water; Does
this holy man mean thus to quench our feast, and cool our stomachs? If there
be no remedy, we could have sought this supply unbidden; yet so far has the
charge of Christ's mother prevailed, that in steed of carrying flagons of wine
to the table, they go to fetch pailesfull of water from the cisternes. It is
no pleading of vnlikelyhoods against the command of an Almighty power.

He that could have created wine immediately in those vessels, will rather
turn water into wine; In all the course of his mitacles, I do never find him
making out of nothing; all his great works are grounded upon former
existences; he multiplied the bread, he changed the water, he restored the
withered lims, he raised the dead; and still wrought upon that which was, and
did not make that which was not: What does he in the ordinary way of nature,
but turn the watery juice that arises up from the root, into wine; he will
only do this now suddenly, and at once, which he does usually by insensible
degrees. It is ever duly observed by the Son of God, not to do more miracle
then he needs.

How liberal are the provisions of Christ? If he had turned but one of those
vessels, it had been a just proof of his power, and perhaps that quantity had
served the present necessity; now he furnishes them with so much wine, as
would have served an hundred and fifty guests for an entire seast; Even the
measure magnifies at once, both his power and mercy. The munificent hand of
God, regards not our need only, but our honest affluence: It is our sin and
our shame, if we turn his favor into wantonness. There must be first a
filling, ere there be a drawing out: Thus, in our vessels, the first care must
be of our receipt; the next, of our expense: God would have us cisternes, not
channels.

Our Savior would not be his own taster, but he sends the first draught to
the Governor of the feast. He knew his own power, they did not; Neither would
he bear witness of himself, but fetch it out of others mouths; They that knew
not the original of that wine, yet praised the taste; (Every man at the
beginning, does set forth good wine, and when men have well drunk, then that
which is worse, but thou have kept the good wine until now;) The same bounty
that expressed it self in the quantity of the wine, shows it self no less
in the excellence: Nothing can fall from that divine hand not exquisite: That
liberality hated to provide crab-wine for his guests. It was fit, that the
miraculous effects of Christ, (which came from his immediate hand) should be
more perfect, then the natural. O blessed Savior, how delicate is that new
wine, which we shall one day drink with thee, in thy Fathers Kingdom. Thou
shall turn this water of our earthly affliction, into that wine of gladness,
wherewith our souls shall be satiate for ever. Make haste, o my Beloved, and
be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart, upon the mountain of spices.

The good Centurion.
EVEN the bloody trade of war yielded worthy Clients to Christ: This Roman
Captain had learned to believe in that Jesus, whom many Jews despised: No
nation, no trade, can shut out a good heart from God: If he were a Forrainer
for birth; yet he was a Domestique in heart; He could not change his blood,
he could overrule his affections; He loved that Nation, which was chosen of
God; and if he were not of the Synagogue, yet he built a Synagogue; where he
might not be a Party, he would be a Benefactor; Next to being good, is a
favoring of goodness; We could not love religion, if we utterly wanted it:
How many true Jews were not so zealous? Either will, or ability lacked in
them, whom duty more obliged; Good affections do many times more then supply
nature: Neither does God regard whence, but what we are.

I do not see this Centurion come to Christ, as the Israelitish Captain came
to Elias in Carmel, but with his cap in his hand, with much suit, much
submission, by others, by himself; He sends first the Elders of the jews,
whom he might hope, that their nation and place, might make gracious: then,
lest the employment of others might argue neglect, he seconds them in person;
Cold and fruitless are the motions of friends, where we do wilfully shut up
our own lips: Importunity cannot but speed well in both. Could we but speak
for our souls, as this Captain did for his servant, what could we possibly
want? What marvel is it, if God be not forward to give, where we care not to
ask; or ask, as if we cared not to receive? Shall we yet call this a suit,
or a complaint? I hear no one word of entreaty; The less is said, the more is
concealed, It is enough to lay open his wants; He knew well, that he had to
deal with so wise and merciful a Physician, as that the opening of the malady
was a craving of cure: If our spiritual miseries be but confessed, they
cannot fail of redress.

Great variety of Suitors resorted to Christ; One comes to him for a son,
another for a daughter, a third for himself: I see none come for his servant,
but this one Centurion; Neither was he a better man then a Master: His servant
is sick; he does not drive him out of doors, but lays him at home; neither
does he stand gazing by his beds-side, but seeks forth; He seeks forth, not
to Witches, or Charmers, but to Christ; he seeks to Christ, not with a
fashionable relation, but with a vehement aggrauation of the disease. Had the
Master been sick, the faithfullest servant could have done no more: He is
unworthy to be well served, that will not sometimes wait upon his followers.
Conceits of inferiority, may not breed in us a neglect of charitable offices;
so must we look down upon our servants, here on earth, as that we must still
look up to our Master, which is in heaven.

But why did thou not, o Centurion, rather bring thy servant to Christ for
cure, then sue for him absent? There was a Paralytick, whom faith and charity
brought to our Savior, and let down through the uncovered roof, in his bed;
why was not thine so carried, so presented? Was it out of the strength of thy
faith, which assured thee, thou need not show thy servant to him, that saw
all things? One and the same grace, may yield contrary effects; They, because
they believed, brought the Patient to Christ, thou broughtest not thine to him,
because thou believed it; Their act argued no less desire, thine, more
confidence; Thy labor was less, because thy faith was more: Oh, that I could
come thus to my Savior, and make such moan to him for my self: Lord, my soul
is sick of unbelief, sick of self-love, sick of inordinate desires, I
should not need to say more; Thy mercy, o Savior, would not then stay for my
suit, but would prevent me (as here) with a gracious engagement, I will come
and heal thee; I did not hear the Centurion say, Either come, or heal him;
The one he meant, though he said not, the other, he neither said, nor meant:
Christ ouer-giues, both his words and intentions; It is the manner of that
divine munificence, where he meets with a faithful suitor, to give more then
is requested; to give when he is not requested. The very insinuations of our
necessit^es are no less violent, then successful: We think the measure of
humane bounty, runs over, when we obtain but what we ask with importunity;
that infinite goodness keeps within bounds, when it ouer-flowes the desires of
our hearts.

As he said, so he did; The word of Christ either is his act, or concurres
with it; He did not stand still when he said, I will come, but he went as he
spoke. When the ruler entreated him for his son (Come down ere he dye) our
Savior stird not a foot; The Centurion did but complain of the sickness of
his servant, and Christ unasked, says, I will come and heal him; That he
might be far from so much as seeming to honor wealth, and despise meandness,
he that came in the shape of a servant, would go down to the sick servants
pallet, would not go to the bed of the rich rulers son; It is the basest
motive of respect, that arises merely from outward greatness. Either more
grace, or more need, may justly challenge our favorable regards, no less then
private obligations.

Even so, o Savior, that which thou offeredst to do for the Centurions
servant, have thou done for us; We were sick unto death; So far had the dead
palsy of sin overtaken us, that there was no light of grace left in us; When
thou were not content to sit still in heaven, and say, I will cure them; but
addest also, I will come and cure them; Thy self came down accordingly to
this miserable world, and have personally healed us; So as now we shall not dye
but live, and declare thy works, o Lord; And oh! that we could enough praise
that love and mercy, which has so graciously abased thee, and could be but so
low dejected before thee, as thou have stooped low unto us; that we could be
but as lowly subjects of thy goodness, as we are unworthy.

Oh admirable return of humility: Christ will go down to visit the sick
servant; the master of that servant says, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof: The Jewish Elders, that went before to mediate
for him, could say, (He is worthy that thou should do this for him; but the
Centurion, when he comes to speak for himself (I am not worthy) They said,
He was worthy of Christ's miracle; He says he is unworthy of Christ's presence:
There is great difference betwixt others valuations, and our own; Sometimes
the world vnderrates him that finds reason to set an high price upon himself;
Sometimes again, it ouer-values a man that knows just cause of his own
humiliation; If others mistake us, this can be no warrant for our error; We
cannot be wise, unless we receive the knowledge of our selves by direct
beams, not by reflection; unless we have learned to contemn unjust
applauses; and scorning the flatteryes of the world, to frown upon our own
vileness, Lord I am not worthy.

Many a one if he had been in the Centurions cote, would have thought well of
it; A Captain, a man of good ability and command, a founder of a Synagogue, a
Patron of religion: yet he ouerlookes all these, and when he casts his eye upon
the divine worth of Christ, and his own weakness, he says, I am not worthy;
Alas Lord I am a Gentile, an alien, a man of blood, thou art holy, thou art
omnipotent. True humility will teach us to find out the best of another, and
the worst piece of our selves; Pride contrarily shows us nothing, but matter
of admiration in our selves; in others, of contempt. Whiles he confessed
himself unworthy of any favor; he approved himself worthy of all. Had not
Christ been before in his heart, he could not have thought himself unworthy
to intertaine that guest within his house; Under the low roof of an humble
breast, does God ever delight to dwell; The stare of his Palace may not be
measured by the height, but by the depth: Brags and bold faces do oft-times
carry it away with men, nothing preuailes with God, but our voluntary
deiections.

It is fit the foundations should be laid deep, where the building is high; The
centurions humility was not more low; then his faith was lofty; that reaches
up into heaven, and in the face of humane weakness descrye omnipotence; Only
say the word, and my servant shall be whole.

Had the Centurions roof^ been heaven it self, it could not have been worthy
to be comne under, of him, whose word was almighty, and who was the Almighty
word of his Father, Such is Christ confessed by him that says Only say the
word; none, but a divine power is unlimited; neither has faith any other
bounds then God himself. There needs no footing to remove mountains, or
Devils, but a word; Do but say the word, o Savior, my sin shall be
remitted; my soul shall be healed, my body shall be raised from dust; both
soul and body shall be glorious.

Whereupon then was the steady confidence of the Good Centurion? He saw how
powerful his own word was with those, that were under his command, (though
himself were under the command of another) the force whereof extended even to
absent performances; well therefore might he argue, that a free and unbounded
power, might give infallible commands, and that the most obstinate disease,
must therefore needs yield to the beck of the God of nature: weakness may
show us what is in strength; By one drop of water we may see what is in the
maine Ocean; I marvel not if the Centurion were kind to his servants, for
they were dutiful to him; he can but say, Do this, and it is done; these
mutual respects draw on each other; cheerful and diligent service in the
one, calls for a due and favorable care in the other; they that neglect to
please, cannot complain to be neglected.

Oh that I could be but such a servant to mine heavenly Master; Alas, every of
his commands, says, Do this, and I do it not; Every of his inhibitions
says, Do it not, and I do it, He says, Go from the world, I run to it; he
says, Come to me, I run from him: Woe is me, this is not service, but
enmity; how can I look for favor, whiles I return rebellion; It is a
gracious Master whom we serve; there can be no duty of ours, that he sees
not, that he acknowledges not, that he crowns not; we could not but be happy,
if we could be officious.

What can be more marvelous then to see Christ marvel? All maruelling supposes
an ignorance going before, and a knowledge following some accident unexpected:
now who wrought this faith in the Centurion, but he that wondered at it? He
knew well what he wrought, because he wrought what he would; yet he wondered
at what he both wrought, and knew, to teach us, much more to admire that which
he at once knows and holds admirable.

He wrought this faith as God, he wondered at it as man; God wrought, and man
admired, he that was both, did both; to teach us where to bestow our wonder. I
never find Christ wondering at gold, or silver, at the costly and curious
works of humane skill or industry; Yea, when the Disciples wondered at the
magnificence of the Temple, he rebuked them rather: I find him not wondering at
the frame of heaven and earth, nor at the orderly disposition of all creatures
and events; the familiarity of these things intercepts the admiration; But when
he sees the grace or acts of faith, he so approues them, that he is ravished
with wonder; He that rejoiced in the view of his creation, to see that of
nothing, he had made all things good, reioyces no less in the reformation of
his creature, to see, that he has made good of evil: Behold thou art fair,
my love, behold thou art fair, and there is no spot in thee; My sister, my
spouse, thou have wounded my heart, thou have wounded my heart with one of
thine eyes.

Our wealth, beauty, wit, learning, honor may make us accepted of men, but it
is our faith only, that shall make God in love with us; And why are we of any
other save Gods diet, to be more affected with the least measure of grace in
any man, then withal the outward glories of the world? There are great men
whom we justly pity, we can admire none but the gracious.

Neither was that plant more worthy of wonder in it self, then that it grew in
such a soil, with so little help of rain and Sun; The weakness of means,
adds to the praise and acceptance of our proficiency: To do good upon a
little is the commendation of thrift; it is small thank to be full-handed in
a large estate; As contrarily, the strength of means doubles the revenge of
our neglect: It is not more the shame of Israel, then the glory of the
Centurion, that our Savior says, I have not found so great faith in Israel;
Had Israel yielded any equal faith, it could not have been vnespyed of those
all-seeing eyes; yet were their helps so much greater, then their faith was
less; and God never gives more then he requires: Where we have laid our
tillage, and compost, and seed, who would not look for a crop? but if the
vncultured fallow yield more, how justly is that unanswerable ground near to a
curse?

Our Savior did not mutter this censorious testimony to himself, nor whisper
it to his Disciples, but he turned him about to the people, and spoke it in
their ears, that he might at once work their shame and emulation: In all
other things, except spiritual, our self-love makes us impatient of equals,
much less can we endure to be out-stripped by those, who are our professed
inferiors. It is well, if any thing can kindle in us holy ambitions: Dull and
base are the spirits of that man, that can abide to see another overtake him in
the way, and outrun him to Heaven.

He that both wrought this faith, and wondered at it, does now reward it, Go
thy ways, and as thou have believed, so be it unto thee; Never was any faith
unseen of Christ, never was any seen without allowance, never was any allowed
without remuneration: The measure of our receipts in the matter of favor, is
the proportion of our belief; The infinite mercy of God (which is ever like it
self) follows but one rule in his gifts to us, the faith that he gives us:
Give us, o God, to believe, and be it to us as thou will; it shall be to us
above that we will.

The Centurion sues for his servant, and Christ says, So be it unto thee; The
servants health is the benefit of the Master; and the Masters faith is the
health of the servant; And if the prayers of an earthly master, prevailed so
much with the Son of God, for the recovery of a servant, how shall the
intercession of the Son of God, prevail with his Father in Heaven, for us that
are his impotent children and servants upon earth? What can we want, o Savior,
whiles thou suest for us? He that has given thee for us, can deny thee
nothing for us, can deny us nothing for thee; In thee we are happy, and shall
be glorious; To thee, o thou mighty Redeemer of Israel, with thine eternal
Father, together with thy blessed Spirit, one God infinite, and
incomprehensible, be given all praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever.
AMEN.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. lin. 7 for where, read when. page 14. lin. 3. for the, read he. p 29.
l. 16. for of, r. or. p. 30. l. 16 for virtue, r. wealth. p. 32. l. for foe, r.
foil. p. 42. l. 9. for desection, r. deiection. p. 44. l. 15. for with, r.
without. p. 74. l. 6. for to, r. then to. p. 75. l. 5. for not him, r. not to
him. p. 78. l. 9. for destroyer, r. disease. p. 147. l. penult. for cessatum,
r. cessation. p. 150. l. 7. for unto, r. into. p. 196. l. 2. for we, r. he. p.
205. l 5. for gentliest, r. goodliest. p. 234. l. 2. for estate. r. state. p.
234. l. 11. for wore, r. more. p. 302. l. 5. for whom, r. who. p 341. l.
penult. for careless, r. carelessness. p 342. l. 5. for dissertion, r.
desertion. p. 349. l. vlt. for contents, r. contents himself. p. 363. l. 17.
for satisfy, r. sanctify. p. 371. l. 7. for by them, r. by whom. p. 378. l.
4. for no, r. on. p. 380. l. 5, for Devil, r. Duel. p. 382. l. 1. for can
but, r conflict p. 402. l. 11. for unchaste, r. unclean. p. 410. l. for not to
bear, r. to bear. p. 419. l. vlt. for collection, r. collation. p. 425. l. 2.
for creature, r. crown. p. 443. l. 4. for again, r. gain. p 443 l. 10. for
he, r. we. p. 467. l. 17. for out, r. ought. p. 481. l. 9. for light, r. life.


