THE HONOR of the Married CLERGY, Maintained Against the malicious Challenges
of C. E. Mass Priest: OR, The Apology written some year, since for the
marriage of persons Ecclesiastical, made good against the Cauils of C. E.
Pseudo-Catholik Priest.

In three Books. By Ios. Hall, D. of Divine. Deane of Worcest.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for H. Fether. 1620.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, AND MY MOST HONORED Lord, GEORGE, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
MOST REVEREND FATHER, and no less honored Lord,
IT was my desire and hope to spend the residue of my Time and thoughts in
sweet and sacred Contemplation. Satan envying me this happiness, interrupts
me by the malice of an importune Adversary. Twelve years ago I wrote a little
Apologeticall Letter for the Marriage of persons Ecclesiastical; and now thus
late, when I had almost forgot that I had written it, a moodie Mass Priest
drops out a tedious and virulent Refutation; through my sides striking at the
most Honorable, and flourishing Clergy of the whole Christian World;
laboring not so much for my disgrace (what would that avail him?) as the
dishonor and scorn of our holy Profession, in the eyes of our people. I could
contemn it in silence, if the Quarrel were only mine; Now my wrong cannot be
distinguished from thousands: God and his Church are engaged in this cause,
which in my foil could not but sustain loss; neither may I be now silent
with safety, without misconstruction. Let this hand and Tongue be no longer
mine, then they may serve my Master in Heaven, and his Spouse on Earth. That
which I wrote in some three hours, he has answered in three quaternions of
years; and what I wrote in three leaves, he has answered in no fewer Pages
then 380. Should I follow him in this proportion, he might after some
Centuries of years expect an answer in Tostatus-hydes; whose first word should
be, Quis leget haec? Or if my patience would delay my reply to the just paces
of his answer, this Volume of his would perhaps* be vanished into Grossers
shops for waste Paper in thuris piperisue cucullos; and would no more need
answer then now it deserves one. But hearing of the insultation of some
Popishly affected, who gloried and triumphed in this ACHILLES pro Catholicis, I
addressed my self to the Work, with no little indignation, and no less
speed: That my selfe-conceited Adversary, and his seduced abettors may see how
little a well-ordered Marriage is guilty of deadding our spirits, or slacking
our hands; at the beginning of this Summers Progress, when it pleased his
sacred Majesty to take notice of this sorry Libell, and to question with me
concerning it, I had not so much as read it over; so newly was it come to my
hands, ere his happy return, (be it spoken to the only glory of him that
enabled me) I had not only finished this Answer, but twice written it over
with my own hand; and yet made this but the recreation of the weightier
businesses of my Calling, which now did more then ordinarily urge me.

It was my purpose to have answered (as beseems the person a quo, not ad
quem) mildely, according to my known disposition, but upon better
deliberation, I found the insolency of my Refuter such, that I could not
favor him, and not be cruel to my cause. If therefore for many (it is his
own art and word) railatiue Pages, he receive from my unwilling and enforced
Pen now and then, though not a Relative to such an Antecedent, yet perhaps some
drop of sharper Vinegar, then my Ink uses to be tempered withal, he may
forgive me, and must thank himself: What needed this cause so furious an
Inuectiue? As if the Kingdom of Heaven, and all Religion consisted in nothing
but Mayden-head, or Marriage? Cardinal Bellarmine, when he speaks of the
Greek Church, wherein a married Clergy is both allowed and required, shuts up
moderately; That if this were all the difference betwixt them, and the Roman
Church, Si errorem alium non haberent, ^acile pax concederetur, Bell. de
Cleric. l. 1. c. 21.
they should soon be at peace. If my Refuter had so thought, this had not
been his first Controversy: Both estates meet in Heaven. John the Virgin
rests in the bosom of married Abraham; This inordinate heat therefore of
prosecution rises from faction, not from holy Zeal: Hence it was that my
Adversary cunningly singled out this point from many others, ranged in my poor
Discourses, as that wherein (by Bishop Jewels confession) he might promise to
himself the likeliest advantage of Antiquity; and how gloriously does he
vaunt himself in the oftentation of Fathers and Councels! which vain flourish
how little it auayles him, the process shall show; where it shall appear upon
what grounds no small piece of Antiquity was partial to Virginity, and
ouer-harsh to Marriage, B. Rhenan. Arg. lib. de exhor^. Castit. Tertull.
as Beatus Rhenanus, a learned and ingenuous Papist confesses. But this we
may boldly say, that if those holy men had out-liued the bloody Times, and
scene the fearful inconveniences which would (after a settled peace) ensue
upon the ambition, or constraint of a denied Continency, they had doubtless
changed their note; Eneas Syluius. Panormitan. Disrandus. Peresius. Mantuanus.
Erasmus, etc.
and with the moderate and wisest spirits of the later times, pleaded for that
liberty which the Reformed Church now enjoys. The universal concession
whereof (after the private Suffrages of worthy Authors) came to a public
treaty in the Roman Church, Che Coll' introductione del matrimonio de' Preti
si farelle, che tutti voltassetto l' affetto and am^r loro alle-moglie,
a'figli, and per consequenz^ alla ca^sa, and alla patria: onde cesserebbe la
depen denza stretta che l' Ordine Clericale ha con la sede Apostolica, and
tanto sarelbe. Conceder ill matrimonio a Preti, quanto distrugger la Hierarchia
Ecclesiastica, and ridur il Pont. che non f^sse piu che Vescouo di Roma*
Histor. Council. Trid. page 662. Troppo feste, troppo test, troppo tempeste.
Vid. Dallingt. obseru. upon Guieciard. Doctor Mart. against Pr. M^^r.
amids the throng of their late Tridentine Council, and it is worth the while
to observe on what grounds it received a repulse. If Priests should be allowed
Marriage (say those wily Italians) it would follow that they would cast their
affections on their Wives and Children, and consequently on their Families, and
Countries, whereupon would cease that strait dependence, which the Clergy has
upon the Sea Apostolic; In so much as to grant their Marriages, were as much
as to destroy the Hierarchy of the Church, and to reduce the Pope within the
mere bounds of the Roman Bishopric. This was the plea of the Clergy; their
thriftie Laity, (together with them) enemies to the blessing, (or, as they
construe it, the curse) of fruitfulness, are wont to plead, Troppo test: our
Gregory Martin of old computes the prejudicial increase that might arise from
these Marriages to the Commonwealth. It is not Religion, but wit that now lies
in our way. Fond men that dare thus offer to control the wisdom of their
Maker, and will be tying the GOD of Heaven to their rules of state. As it is,
no Church in the whole World (except the Roman) stands upon this restraint,
whereof the consequences have been so notoriously shameful, that we might
well hope, experience would have wrought, if not redress of their courses, yet
silence of ours. And surely, if this man had not presumed that (by reason of
the long discontinuance of Popery) time had worn out of men's minds the memory
of their odious filthinesses, he durst not thus boldly have pleaded for their
abominable Celibate; The question whereof, after all busy discussions, and
pretenses of age, must be resolved into no other then this, How far the
Tradition of a particular Church is worthy to prevail against Scripture: yea,
and against other Churches. A point, which a very weak judgment will be able
to determine.

In this return of my Defense, I do neither answer every idle clause, nor
omit any essential: This length of mine is no less forced then my Adversaries
continency: wherein yet my Reader shall not sigh under an irksome loquacitie.
I presume to dedicate this unworthy labor to your Grace, whom this famous
Church daily blesses, as her wise, faithful, and vigilant Ouerseer, as a
renowned Pattern of holy Virginity, and Patron of holy Marriage. The GOD of
Heaven (whose watch you carefully keep) preserve you long to his Church; and
make us long happy in your Grace, and you ever happy in his plentiful
blessings. Such shall ever be the Prayers of

Your Graces most humbly devoted, IOS. HALL.

THE ANSWER TO the Advertisement.
THE man begins with a threat, I may not but tremble; He frights me with an
universal Detection of my errors. It is almost as easy to find faults, as to
make them. Perhaps the Time had bin as well spent in tossing of his Beads: How
happy a man am I that shall see all my ouersights? My comfort is, that if my
Tree were fruitless, there would be no stone thrown at it. In the mean
while, how well does the title of a Detector become him that hides himself? If
he be not afraid or ashamed of his cause, let his name be known that his
victories may be recorded. It is an injurious and base advantage to strike and
hide; and after a pitched Duel to gall a fixed Adversary out of loop-holes. If
his person be upon some treasonable act obnoxious, it is hard if some of his
names be not free: But if I must needs be matched with the shadow of a
Libeller, I will so take him, as he deciphers himself: C. E. Cauillator
Egregius; and under this true style of his, am ready to encounter him, and do
here bid Defiance to an insolent, and unjust Adversary: And first let me tell
my Cauiller, this order is preposterous. If all my errors be at the mouth of
the Press, how is it that two or three of them are thus suffered to out-runne
their fellows? Was his malice so big with these, that it could not stay the
time of the common delivery? Needs must they be notorious falsehoods, that are
thus singled out from the rest. Let them appear in their own shapes, ugly,
(doubtless) and prodigious. Ex Decad. Ep. 3. Epist. 5. Reckoned out of Pappus
his Enumeration; My Peace of Rome makes up 103.
The first is, That most shameless assertion that Bellarmine under his own
hand acknowledges, 237. Contrarieties of Doctrine amongst his Catholics. Could
the man but have patience, he should find above three hundred: What says my
Detector to this? He has not seen the seuerals, yet (like a brave man at
Arms) he professes to kill his enemy ere he can appear; and tells us those
237. Contrarieties, are nothing but 237. lies in one assertion. That there are
in them so many untruths I easily grant; for in Contradictions one part must
needs be false; and Truth is but single: They are untruths then, (lies are too
broad a word) but their own. My assertion shall only justify that they are
told; let him take care for the rest: But they are not in points belonging to
Faith and Religion, Object.
only in matters undecided, and disputable; The sequel shall try that shift;
Sol.
Why do we fore-stall our Reader? Who knows not that there cannot be so
many points fundamental? Let him take them as they are, I aggrauate nothing;
It is but only in such light chafe, as this; In the number and extent of
Books Canonical, wherein DRIEDO, ERASMUS, GENEBRARD, CAIETAN, SIXTVS SENENSIS
are acknowledged to oppose the rest; In the Popes infallibility of judgment,
wherein GERSON, ALMAYNE, Pope ADRIAN, ECKIVS, HOSIVS, PIGHIVS, WALDENSIS are at
quarrel; In the reach and original, of spiritual jurisdiction, wherein
ABVLENSIS, TVRRECREMATA, FRAN. A VICTORIA, ALPHONSVS DE CASTRO, etc. proclayme
to differ: what should I instance in more? It is but in the Popes power in
Temporalties, in the inerrablenesse of Councels, whether particular confirmed
by the Pope or General; in the authority of Councels above Popes, in the
force of Vows, in the worship due to Images, and the like. These and such
other are the slight Trifles (since all cannot be weighty) impertinent to
faith, wherein the Romish Doctors vary.

Neither does my assertion of their discord gall him more, then of our Unity:
O the forehead of Heretics! I said that we in our Church differ only in
Ceremonies, they in substance. Let him give leave to the contra-diuision of
these two, and I will take leave to maintain the indiuision of the Church of
England, in the dogmaticall points of Faith.

This boldness, together with my eminent ignorance, makes him admire the
scarcity of learned men in our Country, that could find no better Doctors to
send to Dort-Conference then Master HALL. To your grief, Sir, it was a Synod,
and that noble and celebrious; Neither was it out of want that your silly
Adversary was sent thither. This happy Island (which has no blemish but that
it yields such Vipers as your self) abounds (as you too well know) with store
of incomparable Divines; such as may set your Rome to schole. So, as the
Messengers of PYRRHVS long since called your Italy, a Country of Kings, (...).
and Egypt was wont to be called the Country of Physicians, so may this
blessed Island of ours justly merit the title of The Region of DIVINES. For me,
I can be content to be base enough in mine own eyes, but if my disparagement
shall redound to my betters, I dare tell him it is my comfort, that I was sent
thither by a judgment no less infallible, then of PAVL the Fifth. Let himself
or any of his Eaues-dropping companions (to whom that place stood open) say
wherein I shamed those that sent me. It was my just grief, that the necessity
of my health, Necessitate propellente, proditio est ea lacere quae quis
stu^ios^ perfecerit. Chrysostom. in i^la: vtinam tolerassetis, etc.
yea of my life, called me off immaturely; but since either death or departure
must be yielded to, others shall judge whether I went away more laden with
infirmity, then (howeuer unworthy) with approbation.

But that second lie of mine is so loud, that all my Brethren of Dort must
hear it, and they which were lately the Witnesses of my sincerity (gracing me
with the dear Testimony of their approofe) are now made the Judges of my
impudency. What Monster of falsehood will come forth? In my censure of Travel
glancing at the Jesuitical brag of their Indian Miracles (whereat their very
friends make sport) I charge Cardinal Bellarmine for an auoucher of these
Coozenages, who dares auerre that his fellow Xauier, not only healed the Deaf,
Dumb, and Blind, but raised the Dead, to which I add (whiles his Brother
Acosta, after many years spent in those parts, can pull him by the sleeue, and
tell him in his ear, so loud that all the World may hear, Prodigia nulla
producimus.) This is my Indictment; Let me come to my Trial: Cast me, if ye
can, ye reverend heads; I crave no favor. Where lies this so lewd lie, and
malicious abuse? That BELLARMINE says thus of the Jesuit XAVIER is not
denied; That ACOSTA says thus of himself, and his fellow Jesuits, is
granted; The first lie yet is, ACOSTA was never in the East Indies at all, nor
XAVIER in the West; and how then could ACOSTA spend many years in those parts?
A perilous Plea! Who ever, I beseech you, mentioned either East or West? I
spoke of the Indies in common; so did his BELLARMINE, from whom I cited this,
Bell. de notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 14.
Claruit etiam in Indijs omni genere miraculorum, etc. Here is not one of the
Indies mentioned, but both or either; If both lived in the Indies, though not
in one Town, in one Country, in one Indie; wherein have I offended; whiles
speaking of the Indies in general, I said that XAVIER and ACOSTA lived there?
Yet this is one lie (he says) and that so long a one, as that it reaches as
far as it is from the East to the West, from the Artick to the Antarctick Pole;
wherein I doubt not but your reuerences will easily mark the skill of this
learned Cosmographer. Some parts of those instanced Indies differ not so far;
not to speak of the small strait of Anian; the mentioned Region of Mexico is
not above foure-score degrees from Iapan: Either your construction must favor
him, or else this must go into the Book of ouersights.

The second lie is, that ACOSTA pulled BELLARMINE by the sleeue in this
assertion, as if he denied those Eastern Miracles, which he elsewhere
confesses. Indeed, this saucines were dangerous. The red Hat (you say) is
fellow to a Crown. But shall I confess where I erred? My dull head could not
conceive that God should be the God of the Mountains; and not of the Valleys;
Of the East Indies, not of the West; and yet be the Jesuits God in both:
Especially, Ios. Acosta l. 2. de sal. Ind. c. 9.
since the reason that JOSEPH ACOSTA fetches from the persons (which should be
the subject of those Wonders) holds as equally for both Indies, as an Almanac
made for the Meridian of one City, serves the Neighbors.

Hitherto then the Prologue of my infamous falsehoods, such, as if all my
Writings could have afforded any equally heinous, these had never been chosen
out to grace the front of his Detection; There must needs be much terror in
the sequel.

The rest of this storm falls upon our learned Professor, Doctor COLLINS; one
of the prime ornaments of our Cambridge; the partnership of whose unjust
disgraces does not a little hearten my unworthiness. The World knows the
eminency of that man's Learning, Wit, Judgment, Eloquence; His Works praise
him enough in the Gate; Yet this Malapert Corner-creeper does so basely vilify
him, for ignorance, silliness, prattling, rusticitie, lying, as if in these
only he were matchless. Indeed whom does the aspersion of that foul hand
forbear? Vilium est hominum alios viles facere? I appeal to all the Tribunals
of Learning through the World, whether all Doway have yielded ought comparable
to that man's Pen: whether he have not so This Book of Doctor Coll. C.E.
falsely insinuates to have been suppressed. All Stationers shops can convince
him of a lie: Nothing ever fell from that learned hand, without applause.
coniured down his CACO-DaeMON IOANNES, that he never dares to look back
into the light again; whether his EPHATHA be not so powerful, that if his
Adversary were any otherwise deaf then the block which he worships, it might
open his ear to the Truth: It angers C. E. to hear that Kings should not dye,
or perhaps, that they whose heads are anointed, should dye by any other then
anointed fingers; The sentence of his Cardinal and Jesuits both de facto, and
de iure, of deposing and murdering Kings, is now beside our way; Only we may
read afar off in capital Letters, Arise Peter, kill and eat: He knows the
word, with shame enough. I will not so much wrong that worthy Provost, as to
anticipate his quarrel; rather I leave the superfluity of this malice to the
scourge of that abler hand; from whom I doubt not but C. E. shall smart and
bleed so well, that he may spare the labor of making himself his own
Whipping-stock on Good-Fryday.

By reason of my necessary absence from the Press, many Errata have passed,
whereof these are more obuious to my Reader, which I desire him to correct.

Errata.
PAge 29. Marg. Beatit. tit for filij. p. 31. l. 13. Ad, redundat. p. 35. l.
21. And, redundat. p. 49. l. 20. for Scholar read Schole. p. 52. Marg. (...).
r. (...). p. 53. l. 9. affectly r. affectedly. p. 54. l. vlt. pacem r. parem.
p. 70. l. 18. Theu r. the. p. 76. l. ^. was r. uses. p. 81. l. penult. there r.
thee. p. 85. Marg. prius r. p^ius. p. 97. l. 16. vigilantius, r. vigilantius:
p. 101. l. 2. dare r. clear* p. 103. l. 17. now r. ^ow. p. 107. l. 21. (...)
r. (...). p. 138. (...) r. (...). p. 1^9. l. 10. (...). r. (...). ibid. l. 2^.
(...) r. (...). p. 150. l. 11. justly r. unjustly. p. 157. l. vlt. prosecuted
r. persecuted. p. 160 l. 12. somewhat r. somewhere. p. 164 l. 21. the redu^dat.
p. 165 l. 2. Ochius r. Ochi^s. Ibid. l. vlt. holy water r. hot water. p. 170
(...) r. (...). p. 184. l. 27. not redu^dat. p. 204. l. 10. ^^tting r. sitting.
p. 243. l. 16. Missa r. Missam. p. 246. l. 5. Moreover, r. How-euer. p. 277. l.
4. apostare, r. apostatare. p. 309. peremptore r. peremptory. p. 325. F
re^dundat. p. 335. interpraetabuitur r. interpretabitur.

THE HONOR OF THE MARRIED CLERGY maintained, etc. The first Book.
SECT. I.
Neither* my Charity, nor my Leisure, nor my Readers Patience, will allow me
to follow my Detector in all his Extrauagancies, nor to change idle words of
Contumely with a Babbler. Declamationes ambitiosorum opera, otiosorum cibi
sunt. Scal. Exer. 307.
His twelve first Pages, are but the light froth of an impotent Anger; wherein
he accuses my bitterness, and professes his own. For me, I appeal unto all
Eyes; if my Pen have been sometimes zealous, it was never intemperate: Neither
can he make me believe, that my Passions need to appear to my shame, in
calling Rome Prostitute, Prostituta illa Ciuitas.
or himself shameless; or in citing from the Quodlibet of his own Catholic
Priests, the Art of his Jesuits, in The particulars of this History he shall
receive in due place.
Drurying of young Heirs. There is neither Slander, nor Shame in Truth. For
himself, he confesses to have sharpened his Pen, and to have dipped it (perhaps
too deep) in Gall: But where his Ink is too thick, he shall give me leave to
put a little Vinegar to it, that it may flow the better. In the mean time he
shall go away with this glory, That a fouler Mouth has seldom ever wiped it
self upon clean Paper.

After those waste flourishes, his thirteenth Page begins to strike; Refut. p.
13.
wherein he charge me with odious baseness, and insufficiency, in borrowing
all my proofs from Bellarmines Objections, dissembling their Solutions. The
Man were hard driven, that would go to borrow of an Enemy. If all my Proofs
be fore-alledged and foreanswered by his Bellarmine; to what purpose has this
Trifler blurred so much Paper? There (he says) shall the Reader see all my
Scriptures answered, the Doctrine of Devils explicated; there, that other, Let
him be the Husband of one Wife, and, Marriage is honorable: Answered indeed;
but as he said ((...)) answerlessely. Such clear Beams of Truth shine in the
face of these Scriptures, that all the Cob-web Vayles of a Jesuits subtlety
cannot obscure them.

Their very Citation confutes their Answer. And where had we this Law, That if
a Jesuit have once meddled with a Scripture, all Pens, all Tongues are barred
from ever alleging it? If Satan have mis-cited the Psalm (He shall give his
Angels charge over thee) for Temptation, may not we make use of it, for the
comfort of Protection? Briefly, let my Cauiller know, that it is not the
frivolous illusion of any shuffling Jesuit, that can drive us from the firm
Bulwark of the holy Scriptures. In this, they are clearly ours, after all
pretenses of Solution (as he shall well feel in the Sequel) and shall secure
us against all humane Opposition. Before the disquisition whereof, somewhat
must of force be premised, concerning the state of our Question.

SECT. II.
WHere, that all Readers may see, how learnedly my wise Adversary has
mistaken me, and himself; I must tell my Detector, That all his tedious
Discourse sits beside the Cushion: Refut. p. 12.
For thus he writes of my Epistle (so as his whole Scope is to disprove the
single life of Catholic Priests, and thereby to impugn our Doctrine in that
behalf) upon which conceit, he runs into a large proof of the strong
Obligation of Vows, the necessity of their Observation, the penalty and
danger of their Violation, the praise of Virginity, the possibility of
keeping it; and upon this very ground builds he the tottering Wall of his whole
ensuing Confutation: insomuch, as ( Page 130.) he says, That Marriage all
times, without contrary Iniunction, was lawful, is not denied; nor will it be
proved in haste, That Priests, or such as had vowed the contrary, might use
that liberty: and we say not, that Virginity is violently to be imposed on
any, for it comes by free election; but where the Vow is free, the
Transgression is damnable. Thus he.

Now let all indifferent Eyes see, whether the only drift of mine Epistle be,
not to justify our Marriages, not to improve their Singleness; to defend the
lawfulness of the Marriage of our Clergy, not to justify the Marriages of
the Romish; to plead for the Marriage of our Ecclesiastiques, not of Popish
Votaries.

In express terms, I dis-auowed it. The interuention of a Vow makes a new
state. Let Baal plead for himself. What is it to me, if the Romish Clergy may
not be Husbands? or if, according to the French Proverb, They have a Law not
to marry, and a Custom not to live chaste? Let it be their care whom it
concerns; only I will have leave to speak for our own. Neither did I ever
derogate ought from sacred Virginity, or lay it level (whether absolutely, or
in all circumstances) with holy Matrimony; neither did I ever conceive of an
impossibility of Continence in some persons: Take away these three Grounds,
(which I utterly disclayme before God and Men) together with his petulant
Raylings, and idle Excursions; and what is become of the Volume of my great
Adversary? Those three vast Paragraphes are shrunk into so few sheets of
Paper, that a Mouse may as soon run away with his Book, as with his God.

My Masters of Doway, if ye be the Superiors, under whose permission this
worthy Work sees the light; for shame keep up your lavish Unthrifts of good
time, and send us such Antagonists, as may not saine Occasions to empty their
Note-Bookes. One dash of a Pen might thus justly answer the most part of this
bloughtie Volume; wherein, like a Drunken Man, he makes a Fray with his own
shadow, and like an idle Whelpe, runs about after his own Stern. But, that
he may not complain to be cast off too contemptuously, he shall receive a
fair account or Particulars.

SECT. III.
THe Theme of my Epistle is plainly no other, then our Marriage censured; he
answers, of Theirs. I would there were such cause of familiarity and
entireness, that what is said of one, might agree to both: But the World
knows we are two. If I say our Clergy is heartily loyal to their King; will
he straight take it, of theirs? If, that our Clergy is willingly subject to
more then the directive Power of their Sovereign, will he challenge this to
theirs? The very Point which I purposely declined, he follows in hot chase.
Even moderate Papists (they are the words of my Epistle) will grant us free,
because not bound by Vow, not so far as those old Germans, pro posse and
nosse: And yet all my Detectors refutation still drives at the supposition of a
Vow. What have we to do with Votaries? Our Clergy is free, whether as
Clergy, or as ours: First, as persons Ecclesiastical (qua tales) For, Holy
Orders, whether as Orders, or as Holy, are no hindrances of Matrimony, as
Cardinal Caietan truly, and with him, the whole School. That which may be
pretended for Impediment, is either a Vow annexed, or an Ecclesiastical
Statute.

Ordini sacro debitu^ Continentiae non est essentialiter annexu^. Dom. Soto. l.
7. q. 4. de Iure and Instit.
As for the Vow, it is so far from being essential to holy Orders, as that
it is made by Vide Caietan. Opus^. de Castit. Act. Conc. Trid. Alia est causa
Monachi, alia Clerici. Extr. de Voto, etc. Plura profitendo promittit Monachus,
quam recipiendo sacrum Ordine^ Clericus.
some learned Papists a difference betwixt the Obligation of their Religious,
and their Priests, That their Religious are bound by a solemn Vow to single
life in the very intrinsecall nature of their Profession; their Priests only
by a Church-Constitution, without Vow. And those that go further with their
famous Cardinal, and teach, That it is expressly forbidden to Bishops, to
ordain any, without the promise of single life, ground this but upon an
Epistle of Pope Gregory Did. 28. Greg. Petr. Diacon. l. 1. ep. 42. Caiet. vbi
supra. Polyd. Virg. etc.
, a late and weak foundation; and besides hold, that their Vow is but
semi-solemne, and accidentally incident into this Profession: for so much as
here is neither a direct Exhibition of the Body to this purpose in the Offerer,
nor a direct Consecration to this end in the Admitter; both which make up the
solemnity of the Vow: upon which reason, according to them, a Religious Order,
because it yields over the Body unto an estate repugnant to Matrimony, does of
it self, in it own nature, both hinder Marriage, and nullify it; not so the
Ecclesiastical. To which we may add, That according to their own Maldonat.
sum. q. 15. art. 17. Ite^ Voti solennitas ex sola constitutione Ecclesiae est
inuenta, Matrimonij vero vinculum ab ipso Ecclesiae capite, rerum omnium
condit^re, etc. Extra. Item, vinculum voti solennis, and solutio eius est ex
statuto Ecclesiae. Antonin. Simplex votum apud Deum non minus obligat quam
solenne. Celest. extr. qui Clerici, etc.
Doctors, Solemnity and Simplicity make no difference of the Vow before God,
though before the Church. A distinction too slight, too newly vpstart, to
ouerturne an ancient and well-grounded Institution. Neither need we any
better, or other proof of the inconnexion of this Vow with holy Orders, then
that of their own Dominicus a Soto, Non est de essentia Sacerdotis seruare
castitate^ quandoquidem. Graeci etiam ab Ecclesia Latina permittuntur in
coniugij foedere permanere. Dom. Sot. l. 7. de Iure. q. 4.
Non est de essentia Sacerdotis, etc. It is not of the essence of a Priest
(says he) to keep single; for that the Grecian Clergy are permitted even by
the Roman Church to continue in the estate of Marriage. What can be more
clear? If there were a necessary and inseparable connection of a vowed
Continency, with holy Orders, then would not, neither could the Roman Church
acknowledge a true Priesthood, where it finds conjugal Society? Their act of
allowance to the Greek Church, implies a fair independencie of these two,
which some of their clamorous Clients plead to have indiuisibly coupled. So as
now all the strength of this necessary Celibate is resolved into the power of a
Church-Statute; and of what Church, but the Roman? All other Churches in the
World, P. Venetus. Brocard. Lud. Vertomannus. Ios. Indus. of the Christians in
India and Cathaia, etc.
as of Armenia, Grecia, Syria, Ethiopia, Russia, the Georgians, etc. allow the
conjunction of Ministry, and Marriage; and are so far from requiring a Vow
of necessary Continency, that they rather erroniously prerequire a necessity
of Marriage in the persons to be ordained.

Non si quid Turbida Roma eleuet, accedas. Pers.
It is only the Church of Ecclesia statuto, nec vniuersalis, sed Latinae.
Espenc. l. 1. de Cont. c. 13.
Rome, the great and imperious Mistress of the World, that imposes the yoke of
this Vow upon her Vassals. Imposes it, but ad libitum; so as her great Paramour
(in whose vast Bosom that whole Church lies) may dipense with it as he lists.
Hear that irrefutable discourse of Cardinal Caietan: His words bear weight,
and are not unworthy the eyes of my Reader. Idcirco cum summus Pontifex possit
ad libitum, etc. Caiet. Opusc. de Castitate.
Therefore (says he) since the Pope may at his pleasure loose the Bond of that
Statute, it follows necessarily, that if a Priest of the Western Church shall
marry by the Popes leave, without any reasonable cause, that such Marriage of
his is a true Marriage, and the parties married are true Husband and Wife, and
their Issue truly legitimate; although in so marrying, both the parties should
sin mortally, in doing this act against the Vow of Chastity, without a
reasonable, Dubia causa.
or at least a probable cause of their so licencing; and consequently, neither
should the Pope himself be excused from mortal sin: But if there be any
reasonable cause of dispensing with this Vow of Chastity; then the party thus
marrying, and dispensed with, may both safely marry, and live in Marriage. And
hereupon it appears, That since a reasonable cause of dispensing with this Vow
of Chastity, may be not only the public Utility, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, but any other greater good then the observing of that
Chastity; it justly follows, that the Pope not only may, but with a safe
Conscience may dispense with a Priest of the Western (or Roman) Church, that
he may marry; even besides the cause of a public benefit. And therefore the
determination of some has been too presumptuous, in affirming, That
absolutely, and without such cause, the Pope cannot dispense: whereas (as we
have showed) the Pope may do it without any cause, though in so doing he
should sin; and with any reasonable cause, without sin: and in both, the
Matrimony stands firm. Thus he.

Words that need neither Paraphrase, nor Inforcement. And how Seeds
clementissima quae nulli deesse consueuit dummodo albi aliquid vel rubei
intercedat. Matthew. Paris. Alius abusus est in Dispe^sationibus cum Constitutis
in Sacr. Ord. etc.
usual the practice of this Dispensation has been (that we may not rest
only in Speculation) appears enough by the ingenuous complaint of their
Council. Selector. Card. Si Sacerdotes non matura deliberatione se astrinxerunt
videat Romans Pont. qui circa haec solet dispensare quid sit agendum in
particularius. Mart. Peresius, etc.
selected Cardinals, to Paul the third: Who cry down the abuse of these
ouer-frequent Grants, which they would not have yielded, but upon public and
weighty Causes; especially (say they) in these Times, wherein the Lutherans
urge this matter with so much vehemence. Neither is it long since our kind
Apostate M. Carier gave us here in England (from bigger Men then himself) an
ouerture of the likelihood of this liberal Dispensation, from his holy Father
of Rome, upon the conditions of our re-subiection. Would we therefore but
stoop to kiss the Carbuncle of that sacred Toe, our Clergy might as well
consist with holy Wedlock, as the Grecian. Oh, the gross mockery of Souls,
not more ignorant, then credulous! Will his Holiness dispense with us for our
sin? We can be dispensed with at home for his Dispensation. It is their
Sorrow, that the World is grown wiser, and finds Heaven no less near to
Douer-Cliffe, then to the Seuen-Hills.

And ere we leave this Point, it is very considerable, what may be a reasonable
cause of this Dispensation: For those very His votis astrictus, non potest
Matrimonium absque Dispensatione i^ire, quam uis vehementissimis carnis
stimulis vrgeatur, etc. Sanc^. l. 7. de Matr. Imped. Disp. 11.
Jesuits, which hold the power of this Vow such, That the vehementest
tentations and foyles of the flesh may not be relieved with an arbitrarie
Matrimony, since the matter of this Vow is so important, and carries so much
danger in the violation, as that it is not to be left to the power of a private
Judgment (though morally certain) whether Matrimony (all things considered)
be in this particular expedient (for that may be fit for a man as a singular
person, Authoritas superioris dispensantis expectanda est.
which is not fit for him as part of the community) yet they grant, Communis
illa regula Doctorum and nominatim Caietani, nimiru^ quando ei q^i vouit,
constat aliquid esse melius praeterita voti materia posse propria authoritate
recedere. Sanch. de Matr. l. 7. de Impedim. Disp.
that this extreme perplexednesse and violence of carnal motions, is a just
cause of dispensation. What need we more? Though some Angel. Matr. 3. Imped.
5. in fine vera cruz. 1. part. spec. art. 15.
Casuists be more favorable, and grant that in such cases, we may not only
allow, but persuade Matrimony to the perplexed Votarie: As Cardinal Aen. Syl.
Epist. 307. So Benedict. 12. gave Dispensation to Petrarch, Archdeacon of
Parma, to marry, his Laura (too near him in blood, as it is thought) and, ex
vberiore gratia, that he should keep all his Promotions, and receive yet more,
on condition, that the said Benedict might have the use of Petrarchs Sister,
Matthew. Parker. Defens. of Pr. Mar. ex Fasciculo Temp. and Platina, and vita
Petrarchae, etc.
Aeneas Syluius (who was never less Pius, then when he was Pius) gives this
hearty advice to his friend John Freiind, a Roman Priest, that he should
(notwithstanding his Orders) help himself by Marriage; yet the former will
serve our turn. If therefore those Superiors, which have all lawful and
spiritual authority over us, shall have thought good, upon this reasonable
cause, to give a generality of dispensation to all such of our Clergy, as
shall not after all careful and serious endeavors, find themselves able to
contain; allowing them by these lawful remedies to quench those impure
flames: What can any Jesuit or Devil except against this? This is simply the
clear case of them whose cause I maintain.

And yet further, Put case this had not been; if without the thought of any
Romish Dispensation, the Occidentalis (non Orientalis) Ecclesia castitatis
obtulit votum, in Did. 31.
Eastern Church never held it needful to require the Vow of single Life in the
Ministers of the Altar, (they know the words of their own Gloss) why should
not our Church challenge the same immunitie; for (that from the general
consideration of Ecclesiastiques, as such, we may turn our eyes to our
Ecclesiastiques, in special) no Church under Heaven kept it self more free
from the bondage of those tyrannous Impositions.

The Vid. postea. Epist. Girard. Eboracens. Arch. ad Anselm.
Clergy of this Island from the beginning, never offered any such vow, the
Bishops never required it, for more (if any credit be due to Histories) then a
thousand years after Christ. The great Champion of Rome, Huntingd. Fabian.
Polydor. Virgil. vid. post. lib. 3.
Master Harding, was driven to say, They did it by a Beck, if not by a
Dieu-gard, but could never prove it done by either. Neither is it more worth my
Readers note, then my Adversaries indignation, that the wise Providence of God
so pleased to contriue it of old, as that from the beginning of the first
Conversion of this happy Island, it rather conspired with the Greek Church,
then with the Roman; After the Grecian account we kept our Easter, in so much,
as Beda tells us, that Pope John the fourth (about the year 637.) was feign to
require of the English, that they would keep their Pasch after the Roman
fashion; a difference (as it was then taken) of no small importance. The story
of Saint Aidanus and Colmannus, may be herein an abundant witness: And for the
Britons, Beda left them in the Cloze, both of his Life and History; fast to
Greece, loose from Rome.

After the Grecian form we celebrated the Sacrament of Baptism. After the
Grecian Liberty we continued the Marriages of persons Ecclesiastical
(through so many Centuries of years) without the scandal, without the
contradiction of the Christian World; so as now we are but repossessed of the
ancient right of our Forefathers, which the interposition of the Romish
tyranny, for a while, injuriously debarred. Our Adversaries have wont to brand
us for the uncharitable censures of our Forefathers, and can they think the
successions of many Generations so faithless, that they made solemn Vows,
for no other purpose, but only to break them? It was the question of the rich
and precious Jewel of England, to which his hardy Adversary had never the
face to reply. My Refuters forehead is stronger, with a weaker wit; Let him
try here the power of his audacitie. And if the Church of this Island, in the
days of her forced servitude to the Roman See, maintained this liberty (as we
prove in the sequel) and derived it to Posterity, how much more free shall it
be for us to renew and enjoy it, after the just excussion of that servile yoke?

Let now C. E. go waste good hours, and mar clean Paper in disprouing the
Marriage of Romish Votaries; and in the mean time come as near my Question,
as Thames is to Tiber: What is this but to mock the Reader, and abuse
himself? How much wiser is he grown in the process of his discourse, where
he graunts our Marriage, and denies our Clergy? from which weak and witless
Hold, if we beat him not, in the due place, we suffer not enough from that
rude Hand.

SECT. IIII.
Having then hitherto detected no error, Refut. p. 17.
no ignorance but his own; he now descends to untruths, and finds here so
many mistakings, lies, falsifications, that a Reader would wonder, by what Art
I could couch so many of them in so small a room; and might verily think that
I could out-lie the Legends, and out-iuggle a Jesuit. But ere I have done,
these shall appear to be but the fictions of a passionate fugitive, the Man
shall be cooler, I shall be innocent, and my Reader shall say, that if that
forehead had not been so often crossed, it could not have had so little shame.

My first untruth is, that I avouch Saint Paul to call the single life of
Priests, A Doctrine of Devils. Reader, Is my Detector awake? I said, That to
maintain the unlawfulness of the Marriage of the Ministers of God, is,
according to Saint Paul, A Doctrine or Devils; and now he would persuade the
World, I said thus of the single life of his Priests. What can we make of
this? That single life is a Doctrine? If not truth, yet let him learn to
speak sense. But, that he may not always refute what I never affirmed; I must
guess at what he meant: He would elude this charge, with that stale shift,
worn out with the Pens of his Predecessors, that Saint Paul is to be
understood according to Theodoret, of those which call Marriage execrable:
Nuptias execrabiles, etc.
according to Saint Austin, that say, Marriage is evil, and of the Devils
making: according to Clemens Alexandrinus, Of those that abhor Marriage: Of
Manichees, and other Heretics, as Ambrose and Epiphanius, from which
Catholics are so far, that they approve it for a Sacrament.

First, the words of Saint Paul are ((...)) forbidding to marry, not condemning
Marriage. Then, we know well, what the Tacians, Ebionites, Encratites,
Montanists, Marcionites, Manichees, Adamites, and Apostoliques held of
Matrimony. The Apostle brands them here: But what? Them only? Whiles he
condemns them, does he free those that partake with them? The Act is one,
Forbiddance of Marriage; whether to some, or to more, or to all, S. Paul
expresses not: The number does not vary the quality. And if one be a part of
all, then to condemn Marriage in some one kind of Men, can it be other then
the partaking of an universal condemnation of it? This then only he has
gained, that some others have been deeper in this evil, then themselves.
Object.


But our Apostle speaks of them which condemn Marriage as evil in it self.

We take what he gives: Answ.
No man's mouth shall condemn my Refuter, but his own. What was he that
accused Marriage of Vnholynesse, out of Sancti estote; Be ye Holy. All things
are clean to the clean.
of Uncleanness, out of Omnia munda mundis; of Contamination with carnal
concupiscence: Was it not his own Pope Innoc. Exuperio Tolos. Episc. Epist. 3.
c. 1. Did. 82. Proposuisti.
Innocentius? Who was he that interprets of Marriage, the Text Romans 8.8.
Those that are in the flesh cannot please God, that called the married Man no
less then the Whoremonger, Sectatorem libidinum, Praeceptorem vitiorum; A
follower of Lust, a teacher of Vice; that said, Marriage was a loosing the
reins to Luxury, an inhiation after obscene lusts, was it not his Pope Ead.
Did. c. Plurimos ad Himersu^ Tarraca, Ep. 1. Semoue namque differentia^
peruersi nominis Connubij, vnam candemque rem effecisti Adulterij and coniugi^,
Laur. Valla, Canon. Eccl. Later. l. 1. de Volupt.
Siricius, the first Founder (if we may believe their now defaced Gloss) of
forced Continency?

Who was it that called Marriage a defiling with unclean society, and
execrable contagion? Was it not his Council of Vxorum aut quarumcunque
foeminarum immanda societate, and execrabi^i contagione turpari, Couc. Tol. S.
c. 5. cit. a C. E. p. ^31.
Toledo?

Who was it that called Marriage (Spurcitias immundas) filthy beastliness? Was
it not his Vide Regist. Eccl. Wigo^niensis, postea. l. 3.
Saint Dunstan and Oswald? Let him construe this, and then tell me, what it is
(if this be not) to condemn Marriage as Essendo il matrimonio un stato
Carnale: Pleaded in the Council of Trent, Histor. Council. p. 662.
evil. Yet more, his own example shall convince him: He pleades out of Saint
Austin, that this Text amongst others, intends to strike at the Manichees; Now,
the Manichees allowed Marriage to their Auditors, that is (Analogically) their
Laity, forbad it to their Electi, that is, their Clergy; So far approving it
in their Layick-Clients, that no modest Pen may write August. de Haeres. ad
Quod-vult-Deum.
whence they fetched their Sacramental Bread: Either then the Manichees must
be excluded, or Papists must be taken in for company into this Doctrine of
Devils. It is true, they mis-call Marriage a Sacrament; So as we may well
wonder at these two extremes in one Doctrine: and study in vain how the same
thing should be Sacred in a Ceremonious inchoation, and in the real
consummation morally impure, how a Sacrament should be incompatible with a
sacred Person: These Sphyngian Riddles are for better Heads: With what Brow
then can my Detector add, Refut. p. 19.
That with Saint CHRYSOSTOM and Saint AUSTEN, they do but compare marriage,
they do not condemn it; Only teaching Marriage to be good, Virginity better;
with Fulgentius not so comparing Virginity to Corn, that they count Marriage
Cockle? In this where should they find an adversary? But, if Luxury,
Filthiness, Uncleanness, Contagion, Beastliness, Vice, Obscenity, be the
styles of good, we can well allow them to the honor of C. Es. Virginity, and
are content our Marriages should pass; for evil.

SECT. V.
MY second untruth (he says) is, That I make the single Life of Priests the
brand of Antichristianisme. Shameless Mouth! Where did I ever say so? My words
are; Refut. p. 19, 20.
Were it not for this opinion, the Church of Rome would want one evident brand
of her Antichristianisme. The life is one thing, the opinion another. Single
life is good, the opinion of the necessity of single life, and the
unlawfulness of the Married, is Antichristian. What can be more plain; yet
this wilful Slanderer tells the World, that I make the profession of
Continence, Antichristian: Whereas we do willingly profess, that true
profession of true Continency is truly laudable; that the forceable imposition
of it, as necessary to some state of men, savors strongly of that Man of
sin: Now, let my Reader judge, whose untruths my Adversary has hitherto
detected.

Neither can I eat that word of mine, unless I would renounce the Apostle;
who seems purposely to decipher our Romanists by these lines. For, having
immediately before described the condition of Bishops, and Deacons, with their
Wives and Children (allowing them indifferently with others a married estate)
he presently (as foreseeing that Point which would be most subject to
contradiction) fore-tells, that the seducing spirits of Antichristianisme would
forbid marriage; and this he fore-prophesies shall be done in the latter, or
(as their Vulgar and Rhemists turn it) in the last Times; And if (...) may
agree to all the Ages of the Church after Christ, yet most to the last, and
that other addition seems to strengthen this sense.
and that by them, which shall speak lies in hypocrisy. Neither of which can
so exactly agree to those first Heretics; who, as they were early in time, so
also gross in their Doctrine; wherein there was more open impiety, then
secret dissimulation.

SECT. VI.
IN vain therefore does my Refuter bring in Saint Paul, as an a-better of his
forced Continence; whiles he says of younger Widows, that, Refut. p. 21.
When they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, having
damnation, because they have forsaken their first faith. In which place
(boulted before to the Bran by many Controuersers) mine Adversary has learned
of his Bellarmine, to triumph above measure. This first faith (says he) all
the Fathers, without exception, understand to be a Vow, or Promise, made to God
of Continence, in the state of Widdowhood. It is a wide word (All the Fathers.)
I had thought I had read in holy L. 6. de Trinitate de Beat. tit. Dei ad
Theophilum. Et instrumenta libertatis semel concessa per iterationem infirmatis.
ATHANASIVS, Vae vobis qui primam fidem baptismi coelitus institutam irritant
facitis; Woe to you that make void the first faith of Baptism ordained from
heaven. I had thought Non sunt digni fide qui primam fidem Baptismi irritam
fecerunt, Marcionem loquor and Basilidem. Hier. Prooem. in Epist. ad Tit.
Hierome had somewhere said, They are not worthy of belief, which have voyded
their first belief, MARCION I mean and BASILIDES; whom yet I never found
condemned for the breach of any Vow of Continence. I had thought, the Author
of the Interlinear Gloss, would not have crossed all the Fathers, in
expounding it, Fidem baptismi; The faith of Baptism, which is indeed the first
Faith; and the Apostle says (The first) not (the former;) as for that other,
which he imagines, a Vow of continued Viduitie, it was neither Faith nor First;
let him instance (if he can) where our Apostle takes Faith for a Vow. Rather,
as if he meant to expound his own word in this very Scripture, and this
occasion, he cleeres this doubt, whiles he speaks of the wilfully improuident
Man, that he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel; and now in
the same Context, he speaks of these perverted Widows, that they have
forsaken the Faith.

Much less is it the First, whether in Time, or Dignity: For, they could not
have been Church-widdowes, if not Christians; and they could not be
Christians, if they should have valued the Vow of their Widdowhood above the
vow of their Christendom; yea, so far was this from the first Vow, (if it
had been one) as that it was the last of all; for according to them; their
first Faith must be to their Husband, their second to Christ, in their
initiation to Religion; their last in the vow of Widdow-hood; So as here is a
feigned vow made Faith, and last made first; and all to uphold a crazy conceit
of our Romanists, which has no other ground but this one ambiguity. Refut. p.
20.
Chrysostom indeed calls it ((...)) ad Pactum; a covenant; but what covenant,
or with whom, he expresses not; whether of Christianity, or of Widdowhood, or
of Ministration; Some of the others that followed him, spoke according to the
Gloss which the corrupt conceit of the Times had set upon him.

But what need my Refuter stand upon particular Authors (he says) when he may
bring 214. Refut. p. 21.
Bishops all sitting in Council at Carthage, all agreeing in this exposition,
poynting us to the fourth Council of Carthage ( Canone vlt.) His Gratian had
wont to tell us (for the more Grace) that it was in the third Council of
Carthage, Can. 4. Now he is taught to change his note; So does C. E. with his
Binius, tell us it was the fourth Council and the last Canon. We have reason
to suspect it was in neither; The very style and manner of discourse so
different from the rest of those brief Canons, and the fashion of those Times,
carry in it open likelihood of Bastardie: It was an easy fraud to patch it to
the end of those Canons; neither (which learned Iunius taught me first to
observe) is it found among the Greek; then which there cannot be a worse sign.

But that I may at once answer this vaunt of Actiquitie, and stop the mouth of
this Cauiller; Let me ask him whether those Fathers, whom he cites for this
sense, do not take those young Widows for Votaries? If they do (as he
cannot deny) how can these two stand together, That they should have damnation
because against their vow, they would marry; and yet that the Apostle should
wish them to marry? Can he imagine that Saint Paul would advise them to incur
wilful Damnation?

And if in this I should have dissented from the interpretation of much
Antiquity, I should but take to my self the liberty of his Masters the
Jesuits, with whom this is no nouelty; for instance, his not unlearned, and
bold Maldonat. in Matthew. 19.11.
Maldonate (as we shall see afterward) upon a Text of this very Question,
confessing the current of the stream of Antiquity, can come in, at last, with
a Doctorly wipe of Adduci non possum vt sequar; I cannot go with them: This
privilege is for none but the Fathers of the Society, (...).
to control the Fathers of the Church.

The state then of these Widows was shortly this: They being for their
poverty sustained by Church-alms, upon De his agit quae ad Ecclesiae stipem,
vel ministerium recipiebantur eius sumptibus alendae, Espenc. de Cont. l. 4. c.
1.
condition of attendance on the Saints, whether sick or traveling, were to
dedicate themselves to this service; but, some of the younger sort being
inueigled by Infidell-Louers, were drawn to leave, not their Station only of
their ministration, but their profession of Christianity: These had damnation
most justly, for casting off their first Faith. Their marriage was accidentally
faulty, because it forced them from their holy employment; Their Apostasy was
absolutely and damnably sinful, in that they left Christ, and followed after
Satan.

Refut. p. 21, 22.
The inextricable Dilemma then of my Detector is easily answered; (I demand now
of Master Hall, whether these young Widows, in breaking their Vows, did
sin, or not; If they did not; why shall they have damnation; If they did
sin (as indeed they did) then how is the Vow unlawful? how the brand of
Antichristianisme?) Nothing can be more base then to beg the Question; What
do we dispute, but whether any Vow were made? and if any, whether of
Continence, or of Service? But why then shall they have damnation? for waxing
wanton against Christ, not merely for marrying. If to marry, were to wax
wanton against Christ, why would the Apostle have advised it them? in a word,
for abandoning both their Office and Religion.

Lastly, Who can but wonder at the face of our Adversaries, that dare bring
forth so plain a witness against themselves? For; if the Vow of Continence be
the first faith here spoken of, then may not any Woman by the Apostles charge
make this Vow, till she be threescore years old; which, how is it at this
day practiced in the Romish Church? since, Bellar. de M^nachis, l. 2. c. 35.
Can. 13.
and as the Caesar-Augustane Council, and the Agathense abated it to forty
years, and the third Council of Carthage yet lower to five and twenty; so
Pope Gregory fell yet lower to eighteen; Greg. l. 1. Epist. 48.
and some other Councels yet lower to twelve; Although the Trent-Conference
very liberally rise up to whole sixteen: Sess. 25. c. 15.
Either therefore let them grant that our Apostle speaks not of Votaries, or
else let them follow his rule of the age of Votaries, that the World may think
they have honest Nunneries; and let them confess their change presumptuous.

Thus, I hope, This Gordian knot, that requires more strength then Master HAL^S
learning, and a sharper edge then ALEXANDERS sword to dissolved, or cut, is
proved more easy then the knot of a Friars girdle, which a very dull Whittle
may cut asunder; and C. Es. appeal to all Scholars, proclaymes him ignorantly
confident.

SECT. VII.
Impossible. Unlawful.
IF it had not been for two poor words of mine (both yet missevnderstood) I
wonder how C. E. Refut. p. 23, 24.
could have discovered to the World his dexterity, in serving out his
oftsodden Cole-worts; the refuse of his Bellarmine, and Coccius. From page 26.
vsque ad 90.
Threescore and four Pages, or more, has he bravely spent in the vindication
of Virginity, which never honest and wise man opposed. Let their Shauelings (I
said) speak for themselves, upon whom their unlawful Vow has forced a
wilful and impossible necessity. The man is angry that I meddled with his
crown; but if his hair had not been longer then his wit, this deep offense
had never been; For, if he had taken my words, Cum grano salis, in the sense
which they will only well bear: (Let such of their Shauelings, as upon whom
an unlawful Vow has forced an impossible necessity, speak for themselves)
(none other need speaking for) he had found the sentence so particular, that
it might have spared him both much spleen and work; since, neither was it in
my heart ever to affirm the observation of this Vow impossible to any man,
neither will he (I hope) hold that it is kept by all: It is not in the power
of the Razor, together with the Hairs, to cut off inordinate affections; some
Vow which cannot contain: Upon this supposition only, I called this
necessity impossible, and this Vow unlawful; I cannot therefore but pity my
passionate Detector, that he has set himself all on a froth, in running this
Wild-Goose chase alone, following nothing but his own fancy, whiles he
pursues a certain Chimericall Monster, that holds Continence utterly and
universally impossible. And that he may the better repent him of this witless
waste, and prevent the spoil of good Paper hereafter, let him know at once
(which perhaps has not hitherto been allowed him) what we hold concerning
this Point. We do therefore from our hearts honor true Virginity, as the
most excellent estate of life, which is incident to frail Humanity; Gerson
has taught us not to call it a Virtue, but it is Cousin-German to a Virtue;
Neither do we think that the Earth affords any thing more glorious, then
Eunuchisme for the Kingdom of Heaven; which is therefore commended by our
Savior, not as a thing merely arbitrarie, by way of advice, but of charge to
the able. Qui potest capere, capiat; In this we can gladly subscribe to Saint
CHRYSOSTOM, Bonum est Virginitas, etc. Virginity is good, I yield it; and
better then Marriage, I confess it. Secondly, every man therefore (not
Ecclesiastiques only) should labor, and strive to aspire unto this estate, as
the better, using all holy means both to attain, and to continue it: Neither
do we think it any other then blameable, that young Persons (not so much as
aduising with their own abilities) without all endeavor and ambition of so
worthy a condition, leap rashly into the bands of Wedlock. Thirdly, though
every man must reach for it, yet every man cannot catch it; since it has
pleased God to reserve this as a peculiar gift for some persons, not intending
it as a common favor to all Suitors. Fourthly, those then, which are upon good
trial conscious to themselves of Gods call to this estate, and his gift
inabling them unto it, may lawfully make profession thereof to the glory of the
Giver, and (if need be) may vow (God continuing the same grace unto them) an
holy perpetuation thereof to their end; the observation whereof, if they
through their own neglect shall let fall, they cannot be excused from Qui
statuit firmus in cord suo non habens necessitatem, potestatem habens suae
voluntatis, and vouerit continentiam Deo, debet eam vsque ad finem tota mentis
solicitudine custodire, Aug. de sid. ad Pe^r.

Solutio voti mala, Coniugium tamen bonum.


sin, or freed from censure: But those, which after all serious endeavors
find nothing but weakness and vncertaynties in this behalf, shall sin, if
they absolutely vow; shall not sin if they marry, in what condition of life
soever; not sin in marrying, how ever their marriage may have faulty
circumstances.

Now, my Detector by this time in our assertions sees his own folly; if
against this he can except ought, he knows where to find an adversary: In the
mean time, he needed not to take it so highly, that in the Romish use of
vows, I made mention of unlawfulness, of impossibility; unlawfulness in the
making, impossibility in keeping; I am ready to maintain both, in respect of
the indisposition, yea incapacitie of the Votaries.

SECT. VIII.
But in speaking of the impossibility of some men's continency, it was not
possible for my Refuter to contain himself from a scurrill inuectiue against
Luther, Pelican, Bucer; and it becomes him well. His Fathers, Refutat. p. 25*
26, 27.
like Sepulchrall dogs, tore up the graves of Gods Saints, and gnawed upon
their dead bones, and now this Whelpe of theirs commingit cineros, Bedribbles
their ashes.

The heroical Spirit of Luther (for I cannot be flouted out of that word)
hated the brothelry of their Cloisters; and chose rather (which galls them to
the heart) to be an honest Husband, then a fornicating Friar. What did he
other in this, then the holy Fathers have advised him, yea then he learned in
their own School? for casting, perhaps, his eye upon the Index of their
Aquinas, Votum Vergens in periculum personae, debet frangi secure, si
dispensatio non possit haberi. lnd. 3. in Ag. voce votum.
he found there, Votum Vergens, etc. A vow tending to the danger of the person,
may be securely broken, if a dispensation cannot be had: What other then all
their more ingenuous Casuists would think fit to give way unto. If Luther
would have still kept on his Cowle, and but have paid the fees of a Concubine,
he had lived and dyed an holy Augustinian: but now all his crimes sink down
out of sight, vna vxor supernatat (as that Father said) his wife only floteth:
and poor honest Katherine Bora has made more noise in their Papers, Plus
habet hie luxuria quam castitas. Gloss. extrau. de Bigam. c. Hieron. ad Ocean.
Et Lupanaria thalamis praeferentur. Beatus vi^ cui non imput^uit dominus
vxorem. Refut. p. 28.29.
then ten thousand of their Curtizans. Neither needs this man any other
Inscription on his grave to make him odious, then this, Here lies the man that
held marriage better then fornication. If now Doctor Luther in a vehement
detestation of the impuritie of their holy Stews, after the homely plainness
of a blunt German liberty, used some ouer-broad speeches to express his own
freedom, and their abominations; what is this to us? If we honor the man, must
we hold his pen impeccable? This is enough to maintain in their Vice-god of
the Seven hills. For us, we have sworn into the words of no Master, but that
One in heaven, the eternal Word of his Father. But this we dare say, that this
Adversaries Truth is no more in fathering all these reports upon Luther, then
in fathering Luther upon an Incubus.

One of them tells us, that a Devil begot him: Cocbleus.
Another tells us, that (by his own confession) a conference with the Devil
begot his opposition to the Mass: Another, Peter Frarin. Louan. out of
Stoltius in Somn. Luth.
that he was in league and favor with Solomon the great Turk, who by his
instigation was drawn to war upon Christendom: Another, Io. Fowler in the
Translat. of Frarines Inuectiue. Marg.
that Luther would have been a King alone, and that from him sprang the
rebellion of Muntzer: Another, Vide Fulk. ag. Frar. 16.
that Leonard Knoppen was his Bawd, and that his Katherine, for two years
together after her stealing away, was debauched by the Scholars of
Wittenberge: And now lastly, comes in that malicious Apostate (which should
rather have changed the false name of Iustus, Iustus Baronius, formerly called
Caluinus.
then the ouer-worthy name of Caluinus) and auouches, forsooth, that LVTHER was
yesterday a Monk, to day contracted, to morrow an Husband, the next day a
Father. Go on, ye brazen-faced Parasites of Rome, Lies and Blood may bring
you into the Calendar.

But this last, my Detector countenances by the testimony of Erasmus, who, in
a Letter of his to his friend Daniel Mauchius of Vlmes, delivers the same
Story in more words. Reader, be entreated to look over that large Volume of
Erasmus his Epistles, and if there be no such man found there (as there is not)
no such Letter, judge what to think of these men's fidelity. Yea to the plain
contrary, Tom. 2. Lat. Colloq. Tit. de morbis Lutheri.
my Detector (having not memory enough for a true Liar) in the Page 173. Upon
another occasion, contemptuously citing Luthers brood out of his own Works,
confutes this spightfull Fiction. Anno 1525. Iunij 12. vxorem duxi, etc. In the
year, says he, 1525. on the 12. of June, I married; In the year 1526. my
eldest Son JOHN was borne: In the year 27. my daughter ELIZABETH, and so the
rest. Either then my man has a new Calendar of his own, which contrary to
the Gregorian begins the year on June 13. or else Luther was not a Father the
next day after he was an Husband. But what do I trouble my Reader with this
idle Scoganisme? Scolds or Iesters are only fit for this combat.

As for those excessive speeches of comparison, Refut. p. 28.29.
whereby Luther points forth the necessity of carnal actions, they are spoken
only of such persons, as have not the gift of continency; Lib. 3. contr. Gent
c. 126. Omnibus animalibus per^ectis in^st naturalis inclinatio ad coniuncti
n^m carnalem. Item, Cum muliere semper esse, and illam non cognoscere, maius
est quam mortuum suscitare. Joan. de sanct. Geminiano. Simil. l. 2.10.27.
whom natural inclination (by which they are led) carries (without an higher
restraint) importunately unto these desires: wherein he says not much other
then their own Saint, AQVINAS, Omnibus animalibus, etc. In all perfect living
creatures there is a natural inclination to carnal conjunction.

But when Luther speaks of men blessed from above with this gift, C. E. might
have heard him in another strain; pleading both the possibility and
worthiness of this condition. As in his Commentary upon the Luth. in Ps. 128.
verse. 3. Vnus idemque spir. etc.
Psalm 128. verse. 3. (to give one for all) thus he says, For one and the same
spirit has distributed his gifts to some after one manner, and to some after
another, etc. Let them therefore, to whom it is given to receive this, abide in
their single life, and let them glory in the Lord: On the other side, let them
that are not so strong, but know and feel their infirmity, that they cannot
live both chaste, and out of Matrimony: Let these, I say, consider more their
own infirmity, then the discommodities and troubles that belong unto
Matrimony. Thus he gravely and holily.

SECT. IX.
NOw to follow my Adversary in particulars: Whereas all the world sees, that
the unlawfulness of their vow depends upon the inability of performance;
Refut. p. 29.
he, like a true Artist, begins first with the unlawfulness. It is well that
all these sheets of Paper which he has spent in this point, may serve for some
necessary use; this which he has put them to, is foolishly superfluous.

Refut. p. 30.
If the vow of Chastity be unlawful (he says) it must be either in respect
of the vow, or the matter vowed; Not the first, because vows in general are
lawful; which he will prove out of Scripture, and Fathers. Idle head! Who ever
denied it, but the exploded Lampetians? His own Cardinal could have taught
him, Bell. l. 2. de Monachis c. 15. Ad negotia buius vitae expeditius peragenda
aut ad vitanda peccata, aut ad alios bonos fines. Refut. p. 32, 33, 34, vsque
ad 42.
that Luther and Calvin approve the vowing of things commanded, first; and then
of things not commanded too, to the avoiding of Sin, or other good purposes;
Not the second, which he will prove by many arguments; some of them from the
Fathers, extolling virginity, and comparing it with the state of Angels, and
preferring it before marriage: And who eeuer thought otherwise, except
Iouinian? and perhaps not he: And at last, after some severe examples of
penance enjoined to fornicating vow-breakers, by Chrysostom and Basil, to
incontinencie and rape, Refut. p. 43. vsque ad 48. and page 54. vsque ad finem
Parag. 1. Refut. p. 45.
by the civil Laws (as if these concerned us so much as themselves) he
descends to this challenge; Let Mr Hall (if he be able) produce us some proof,
although but one classical authority of any one ancient Writer, where he has
ever persuaded such as have solemnly vowed chastity, to use Marriage as a
means to overcome temptations, and he shall have some excuse for calling it a
filthy vow; and his heroical LVTHER for terming it a diabolical thing: So
he. I take him at his word; only let him not fly forth upon the shift of
solemnity, which their Scholar lately hatched; That were to seek gray hayres
in infancy; First, I bring forth that famous place of Saint Cyprian in his
Epistle written both in his own name, and his fellow-Bishops to Pomponius,
concerning some vowed Virgins which were found in bed with men, whereof one was
a Deacon; of which Virgins he with his Brethren pass this sentence, Epist. l.
1. Epist. 11.
Quod si se ex fide Christo dicauerunt, etc. If they (says he) have
faithfully dedicated themselves unto Christ, let them without all deceit
persevere in the course of Chastity, Pudice and cast sine vlla fabula
perseuerent.
and so courageously and constantly expect the reward of their Virginity; Si
autem perseuerare nolunt, vel non possunt, etc. But if either they will not, or
cannot persevere, it is better that they marry, Melius est vt nubant, quam in
ignem delicijs suis cadunt.
then by their wantonness fall into the fire; Let them give no scandal to
their Brethren and Sisters. What could Luther or Calvin write more directly? So
that Erasmus notes in the Margin, Etiam virginibus sacris permitit nubere;
Here CYPRIAN permits even holy Virgins to marry. Lib. 2. de Monach. c. 34.
BELLARMINES shift hereof is ridiculous, That Cyprian, by occasion of some
Virgins which after their vow behaved themselves dishonestly, advised others,
that if they had not a firm purpose of perseuering, they should not vow, but
marry; whom we remit to the check of his own Pamelius, of his conscience;
Indeed, what is this but to mock both the Author, and the Reader? For does
Cyprian at all vary the persons of whom he speaks? Does he not speak
plainly of Virgins devoted to Christ? And what perseuering could there be but
in that which they had undertaken? And what had they undertaken, but a
dedication of themselves to Christ? What is this, Reader, but willingly to try
his oars against the stream of Truth?

To the same purpose is that noted sentence of Hierome, ( Hieronymus impendio
semper virgini^ati fauens, and ob id nuptijs, iniquior. Erasm.
though otherwise none of the best friends to marriage) who speaking of
Virgins, ascribed by their vow into the celestial Family, adds, Quibus aperte
dicendum, etc. See the Scholia of Erasmus upon the place.
Whom we must openly charge that either they would marry, if they cannot
contain, or, that they would contain, if they will not marry. We know the
elusion of this place also; That Hierome speaks of Virgins in purpose, not in
vow; But whose name, I beseech you, was defamed by their lewdness? or, what
was the heavenly and Angelical Family, whose glory was blemished herewith? Was
it of any other then professed Virgins? Or could the act of a purposed Virgin
only, shame Virgins professed? To the same purpose is the advice of Basil. l.
de virg.
Basil and Epiphan. Here Is. 61. Melius est (...) pe^ca^ habere qu^a (...).
(...). (...) I would have the ve^g^r Widows to ma^rie. Refut. p. 51.
Epiphanius.

Add to these an elder then they all, Tertullian, and with him all those
Fathers, which interpret Saint Paul's (vo^o iuniores nubere) of vowed widows;
All which must needs hold, that our Apostle allows marriage for the lawful
remedy of unable Votaries.

Let not this malicious Mass Priest then turn us over to his Tyberianus, or
Iouinian, for the first founders of our opinion, and practice, which we
received from no other then that divine Arch-heretike, that sat at the feet
of Gamaliel; from no other, then the holily-hereticall Fathers and Martyrs of
the Church; As for those two mis-alledged Authors, to whom he ascribes us, his
skill does palpably fail him in both: For Tyberianus, he being suspected of
Priscillianisme, wrote affectly against that heresy, at last foulely fell to
that, which he disclaymed; whereon it was that Hierome says, Canis ad
vomitum, not upon the marriage of his daughter. And for that particular fact,
it is no less mis-taken. Hierome says only, He married his daughter, being a
Virgin dedicated to Christ.
Filiam virginem Christo deuotam, matrimonio copulauit; but Sophronius (who it
seems well know the Story) turns it ( Coegit vt nuberet. Vide Erasm. Schol.
in Hier. Catalog. Scriptor. Eccle. So Syagria in Greg. Epist. mar^to violenter
sociata.
(...);) compelled his daughter (a consecrated Virgin) to marry. A foul fact,
which we detest no less, then the contrary practice of those Romanists, who
compel their daughters (which would marry) to be consecrated Virgins. It is
then no less false that Tyberian gave beginning to us, then it is true that
Tyburne has given a just end to some of them. For Iouinian, what is he to us?
when neither our practice was his, nor his opinion ours. Not our practice; for
he lived and dyed a single Monk. Not his opinion; How can we be said to admit
marriage to an equal share of merit with virginity, when we deny merit in
either? Again, that Eunuchisme (not in it self, but) for the Kingdom of
Heaven, is better then it we doubt not; But when Quamuis vniuersaliter dicatur
hamini melius esse continentiam seruare quam matrimonio v^i, tamen alicui hoc
melius est. Thum. l. 4. Contr. Gent.
these two are reduced to their subjects; their value is according to their
use. Chrysostom could say (...). Chrysostom. ad Hebr. (...).
(...), etc. Use marriage with meet moderation, and thou shall be the first in
the Kingdom; And Gregory Nazianzen (besides that he says of his Sister
Gorgonia) when he commends the children of Bazil the elder, Greg. Naz. Orat. In
laudem Basilij Or. 22.
tells us, some of them so used their marriage, that it was no hindrance to
them, quo minus ad pacem virtutis gloriam aspirarent; that they might not
aspire to an equal glory of virtue with the Virgins; and made these two
rather different kinds of life, then manners of living. Saint Chrysostom then,
and Nazianzen, shall usher us into the Schole of Iouinian. Hier. l. 2. in Iouin.
And if Iouinian were Formosus monachus, crassus, nitidus, etc. A fair, fat,
spruce Monk (as he says;) Me thinks he should rather have hoped to match
him in their Sybariticall Cloisters, where they abound with meat, and drink,
and ease, then in our laborious Clergy; Resut. p. 52.
It is happy for us, and for that reverend Archbishop Marcus Anton. de Dominis,
that this rayler can object nothing to him but an harmless lode of
corpulencie. It moves their spleen enough, that this learned Prelate has
honored our Island with a Dalmatian Pall; Their cause feels that he can
(notwithstanding) pass into the Pulpit: What speak they of this? when, to
their sorrow, they see he could pass over the Alps to leave Rome. This
Beagle, and his balling Beyerlinck, and the kennel of Sorbon, may bay at him,
but not one of their Bandogs dare fasten.

But why do I suffer this babbler to lead me out of my way? The residue of
this Paragraph is spent in the Canon and Civil Laws against vow breakers.
Quid ad Rhombum? Refut. p. 54, 55, 56.
What is all this sleeuelesse discourse to a man that never said, never thought
every vow of this kind unlawful, nor every breach of such vow sinlesse? When
he takes me with this Tenet, let him load me with authorities; Till then, his
now-friuolous papers may serve for any honest use.

SECT. X.
NO less wise and proper is that other discourse of Impossibility: For, to
make short work; Refut. p. 57, 58, 59.
That no man can contain (though it be given him) I never said; That any man
may contain (though it be not given him) either he will not say, or if he
do, he has Christ for his Adversary. Why do we blot Paper? How the
performance of this Vow is not possible only for all, but Maius miraculum est
de propria carne fomitem eradicare luxuriae, quam expellere immundos spiritus
de corporibus alienis, Joan. Brom. sum. Praedic. cap. Castit.
facill also, (which he contendeth) the issue proves too well, and the World
blushes to see it. Let it not be too much burden to his patience, that I said,
Some of their Shauelings cannot hold; He knows what their Gloss upon Gratian
said of old (though now they have pulled out that tongue for blabbing)
Distinct. 81. Maximianus.
Communiter dicitur, etc. It is commonly said that a Clerk ought not to be
deposed for simple fornication, Cum pauci sine illo vitio inueniantur; Since
there are but a few found without that vice. This they have wiped out of the
Book, but the Margarita Decreti (as happy is) holds it still: And their honest
Consult. Art. 23. And Bellarm. Qui continent quos notum est non esse multos, de
Monach. l. 2. c. 3.
Cassander* yet more plainly, Vix centesimum inuenias, you shall scarce find
one of an hundred free: And, if need were, I could tell him out of our old Io.
Bromiard. sum praedic. voce Luxuria.
Bromiard, what the voice of a Ghost said to a Priest of theirs, but I will
not; only thus he shut up; That there came daily such store of Priests to Hell
for their Luxury, in plain English, Lechery, that he had not thought there
had been any left upon earth. And to these I could add the ierks of their
zealous Preacher, Zelantissimus Praedicator. Tit. Concion.
Friar Menot, who fetches the threefold shame of their Clergy out of the Aue
Mary; The second whereof (though the first in mischief) is, In Mulieribus. But
what should I fill Carts with such stuff, as I easily might, when the
salacitie of the Romish Clergy, Cauda salax sacripculorum in prouerbium abyt.
is grown to be the Proverb, and scorn of the World? Let not my Refuter
scare us with the threat of recriminations, we know that in all Professions,
there may be found lewdness enough. But, when all is done, we shall justify
that which worthy B. Jewel said long ago, Scortum apud nos modestius viuit,
quam apud vos PENELOPE; Our Strumpet is their Penelope. What needed he
therefore to vpbraid us with that frumpe of ERASMUS (Que malum est ista tanta
salacitas, etc? Refut. p. 61.
) when he knows how easily we can ouer-pay him in this Coin? Was it not
Erasmus, whose word it was (which Master Doctor Collet, Deane of Paul's, was
wont to have familiarly in his mouth.) Erasm. Apolog. pro declam. Matrimonij.
Ibidem Erasm. Englished thus,

And I would they were gelded indeed; which hide their vicious courses with the
glorious name of Eunuchisme; more freely following their filthy lusts, under
the shadow of chastity. Neither will my modesty suffer me to report, into
what shameful courses they fall many times, which resist nature, etc.

Ex vita Sacerdotum palam dedecorosa, palam contemnitur eorum doctrina; and
inde perit fructus verbi Dei. Quod si ijs qui non co^tinent concederetur
matrimonium, and ipsi vi^erent quietius, and populo cum authoritate
praedicarent verbum Dei, Ad Christoph. Epis. Basil.


Nunc is est rerum ac temporum status, vt nusquam reperias minus inquinatam
morum integritatem, quam inter coniugatos?

Now such is the state of the times, that you shall never find less corruption
of manners and life, then amongst the married. Was it not Erasmus that said*
Atque vtinam vere castrati sint, quicunque suis vitijs magnificum castrationis
praetexunt titulum, sub vmbra castitatis turpius libidinantes, etc. Neque enim
mei pudoris esse puto commemorare, in quae dedecora saepe prolabantur qui
naturae repugnant, etc. This is enough to let my Detector see, we need not die
in his debt for Erasmus.

SECT. XI.
But it is no arguing from the Act to the possibility. These did not contain,
but they might. What? whether it were given them or no? So seems mine
Adversary to hold, whiles he censures Luther, for saying, that this is Gods
gift; Refut. p. 60.
and that here we can only take, and not give. Yea, but if they had asked, it
would have been given them. Ask, and it shall be given: so says my Refuter,
Refut. p. 74.
out of Origin, none of the best Interpreters; so his Masters the Jesuits;
Sufficit promissio generalis, says Bell. l. 2. de Mon. c. 31.
Bellarmine. By this Rule, if the Cardinal should but pray for the Popedom,
the three Crowns must come tumbling upon his Head; and if C. E. should but
pray for a red Hat, it would have Mercuriall wings and come flying to Doway; I
would he had but prayed for Wit, he had then perhaps been silent: Not
considering, that Virginity, and Honor, and degrees of Wit (though excellent
in their kinds) yet are such things, as without which we may enjoy God, and
go to Heaven, and therefore that perhaps God sees it best for us to ask them,
and go without. What can be more plain then that of Hieron. aduers. Iouin. l.
1.
Hierome; If all might be Virgins, Christ would never have said, Qui potest
capere, capiat; Neither would the Apostle so timorously have persuaded to
Virginity; Could he ever suppose that Virginity might be had without prayers:
and yet he says, If all might be Virgins, etc.

Who would not have thought, that this one Text of our Savior, should have
stopped all mouths? His Disciples had said; If thus, it is good not to marry: He
replies; All men cannot receive this Word, save they to whom it is given; and
concludes, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. Yet here, see the
forehead of a Jesuit: Maldonate upon the place dares say thus: Mald^n Mat.
19.11. Omnes fere, etc.
That he says, all men do not receive this Word, all Interpreters (almost)
do so expound it, as if the sense were; All men cannot perform this which you
say, that is, Want a Wife, because all have not the gift of Chastity, but
only those to whom it is given; for which he cites only Origin, Gregory
Nazianzene, Ambrose, concealing the rest of his, Almost all; yet after, in the
same Page (forgetting himself) solus D. Augustinus, etc. Only Saint Austin
uses (says he) to teach, that this gift of Continency is not given to all,
but to some only. It is happy yet that herein we are granted to err with
Saint Austin; and yet, ere long, we take in Origin, Nazianzene, Ambrose,
Hierome, and at last, overtake, Fere omnes; so as we need not fear
solitariness in this error. But what says the Jesuit to this good company?
Adduci non possum vt sequar; I cannot be persuaded to follow them.
No marvel: Mark, how well the Jesuits follow JESUS himself: JESUS says,
All men cannot receive this: The Jesuits say, Omnes continere posse si velint,
Bellar. l. 2. de Mon. c. 31.
All men may receive it. JESUS says, It must be given from God; The Jesuits
say, Et donum Dei esse and tamen in potestate, and arbitrio hominis positum,
ibid. Qui potest habeat secum aurum hoc Virginitatis; Qui minus nuptiarum
argentum excipiat, Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. 4.
It is so the gift of God, that it is in the power of Man. How can we look to
escape their Opposition, when they dare thus contradict their Savior? For me,
I shall be still in this Heresy, That all their Priests, and Monks, and Nuns
cannot contain: And his Bonauen. in Opusc. de processu Relig. p. 120.
Sumptuosa Turris est, and verbum grande quod non omnes capere possunt, Bern. de
Contempt. Mun. Nam si generale esset, quod ^o^est vnus, and omnes possunt,
Primas.
Bonauenture shall bear me out, who teaches me, that to the third degree of
Chastity (requiri priuilegium singular) there is a singular privilege
required; for that it seems to be above the pitch of natural possibility, to
live in the Flesh, and not to feel the faults of Flesh.

SECT. XII.
AS for his holy Sisters at Bruxells, the touch of whom has so much enfired
his Ghostly zeal; I intended no quarrel to them in particular; Refut. p. 60,
61.
They may be as honest, as their Champion is malicious. What I said, was out
of the supposition of the common frailty; And if he have been so much in
their bosom, as to know they never repented them, it is well known, that
others have; whose Song has been in the hearing of those I know: What shall I
do, shall I die, and never married be? Like unto those Vestals, Faelices
nuptae, moriar nisi nubere dulceest. As for the mischief following hence, the
visible monuments of so many murdered Infants (if not in Gregory's Ponds) in
the very place where I now live and Vid. Histor. Radulphi Bourne Augusta^ensis
Eccl. Abbatis, qui testatur se vidi^e, in quadam ^n^ in Mo^iali^ Ab^tia, quae
Pro^nes d^c^batur, mul^a ^a^rum ossa, i saque corpo^a integra ibi
reper^ebantur, Antiq. Brit. Reu^c. Clem. 5. Papae, ex ^dam. Murim.
elsewhere, conuinces it too much. But Refut. p. 61.
my example (ywis) shall clear his Vestalls of Bruxells, and all other
Votaries. Master HALL was absent (some three Months) in France; Flesh is
frail, Temptations frequent (add to these his body sickly, and well-neere to
death) yet both then, and before his marriage, he would take it in great
scorn (as well he might) to be suspected for dishonest. True, and might defy
Men and Devils in that challenge. What of this? It follows then: If Master
HALL could for so long together live a chaste life, why no more? Why not
always? Demonstratiuely concluded: As if a man should say, C. E. does speak
some wise words, how can he at any time write thus foolishly? A Christian has
sometimes grace to avoid a Temptation, why not always? Why does he not keep
himself ever from sinning? A good Swimmer may hold his breath under the Water
for some portion of a Minute, why not for an Hour? why not for more? A devout
Papist may fast after his Breake-fast, till his Dinner in the afternoon,
therefore why not a Week? why not a Month? why not so long as Eve the Maid of
Meurs?

The Spirit of God (if at least he may be allowed for the Author of
Continency) breaths where, and when he lists; and that God which makes
marriages in Heaven, either auerts the heart from these thoughts, or inclines it
at his pleasure. Shortly, The great Doctor of the Gentiles had never learned
this Divinity of Doway, whose charge is, 1. Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one another, except with consent for a season, that ye may give
your selves to Fasting and Prayer: And again, Come together, that Satan tempt
you not through your incontinency: He only wanted my Monitor, to jogge him on
the Elbow, as here: What needs all this fleshlinesse? if they can safely
contain, whiles they give themselves to extraordinary devotion, why not more?
Why not always? It is pity, that no man would advise the Apostle, how great a
gap this Doctrine of his opens to all lasciviousness. R^fut. p. 65.
Let me but have leave to put Saint Paul's Name in stead of mine, into this
challenge of my Refuter, and thus he argues.

If Saint PAVL say that (...), Refut. p. 65.
for a while they are able to live chaste, but not for any long while; I ask
again, How long that while shall endure? and what warrant they have therein
for not falling? seeing it may so fall out, that in the while appointed, they
may be more tempted then they shall be again in all their lives after: How
saucy would this Sophistry be? how shameless? The words are his; only the
Name is changed; what the elect Vessel would answer in such a case for
himself, let C. E. suppose returned by me.

SECT. XIII.
THe Refuter has borrowed some Weapons of his Master Bellarmine, and knows
not how to wear them. It would move any man's disdain to see, how absurdly
those poor Arguments are blundred together; We must distinguish them as we may.

Refut. p. 63.
First, Saint Paul condemns the Young Widows mentioned; therefore he
overthrows this impossibility of containing. I answer: Saint Paul aduises the
young Widows to marry, and admits none into the Church-book, under threescore
years* therefore he establishes in some, this impossibility.

Refut. p. 63, 64.
Secondly, Saint Paul aduises Timothy to live chaste. Reader, tell him the word
is ((...)) which their own vulgar, 1. Tit. 8. turns, Sober; and in 2. Tit. 5.
Prudent; But, to grant him his own Phrase; Can my Detector descry no
difference betwixt Chaste and Single? Did he and his Fellows never hear of a
conjugal Chastity? So they have still wont to speak, as if Chastity were only
opposite to Marriage, as if no Single life could be unchaste. His Espencaeus
might have taught him that Verse in VIRGIL, Casta pudicitiam seruat domus: and
he might have heard of that Roman law of Vestals, Castae ex castis, purae ex
puris sunto; yea, his Erasmus might have taught him yet further, Eras. Apol.
pro declam. Matr. Secundas gradus Virginitatis est Matrimonij casta dilectio,
Opus Imperf. in Matthew. Refut. p. 64. Ab his duabus Columnis creed mihi
difficile duellor. Ibid ex Bernardo C. E.
E diuerso nihil prohibet in coniugio Virginitati locum esse; that even in
Marriage there may be Virginity.

Thirdly, The Fathers exhort to Virginity; especially Saint Ambrose and Saint
Austin. Let him tell this to them that know it not, to them that dislike true
chastity in Virgins, not to them that condemn unchasteness in a pretended
Virginity.

To what Virtue do not the Fathers exhort? yet never supposing them to be
within our lure. Lastly, where is the shame of my Refuter, that cites Austin as
the Man on whom he depends for this universal possibility of Continency: when
his own Maldonate professes that Saint Austin is the only enemy to this
Doctrine?

Fourthly, Refut. p. 64.
Where there is impossibility or necessity, there is no sin, no counsel; as
no man sins in not making new Stars, in not doing Miracles. A stale shift,
that often sounded in the ears of Austin and Prosper from their Pelagians; The
natural man in this deprauednesse of estate cannot but offend God, therefore
he sins not in sinning: Counsel given shows what we should do, not what
we can. Aug. l. de Not. and Great. c. 43.
Iubendo admonet, etc. says Austin; In commanding, he admonishes us both to
do what we can, and to ask that which we cannot do. In Continency then our
endeavor is required for the attayning of that which God will give us; God
never employed us in making of Stars; Though my Refuter is every day set on
greater Work, then making of him that made Stars. Lastly, it is true, there
is no sin in marrying, there may be sin (after a vow) in not using all
lawful means of Chastity: The Fathers therefore supposing a Post multam
deliberationem and considerationem, etc. Basil.
pre-required assurance of the gift, and calling of God in those, whom mature
deliberation, and long proof had covered with the veil of Virginity, do
justly both call for their continuance, and censure their Lapses.

Fifthly, Refut. page 65.
Upon this ground the Father cannot blame his Child for incontinence; To
contain implies impossibility. Ask him wherefore serves Marriage? Yea, but to
provide an Husband or a Wife, is not a work of an hours warning; in the mean
time what shall they do? Sure, the man thinks of those hot Regions of his
Religion, where they are so sharp set, that they must have Stews allowed of
one Sex at least; Else what strange violence is this that he conceiues? As our
Iunius answered his Bellarmine, in the like, Hic homo sibi videtur agere de
equis admissarijs ruentibus in venerem, and de hippomane, non de hominibus
ratione praeditis; he speaks as if he had to do with Stallions, not with Men,
not with Christians, amongst whom is to be supposed a decent order, and due
regard of seasonablenesse, and expediency: A doughty Argument, wherewith Master
HALL is sore pressed. Marg. of the Refut. p. 65.
(They may contain till they marry, and therefore they may ever contain and
not marry.) How easy is it for me to take up this lode, and lay it upon my
Savior, which said, All Men cannot receive it; and upon his great Apostle of
the Gentiles, who has taught us an ((...)) a proper gift, 1. Cor. 7.7.
which God has bestowed on some, not on others, and supposes a necessity,
that may be, of giving a Virgin in Marriage?

Refut. p. 65.
Sixthly, The Husband and Wife are separated upon discord, or disease: What shall
they do? To live continent with this man is impossible. I answer; If only
their will sunder them, that must yield to necessity; Dissension may not
abridge them of the necessary remedy of sin. If necessity, that finds
relief in their prayers; If they call on him who calls them to continency by
this Hand of his, he will hear them, and enable them to persist. And why not
then in the necessity of our Vows? This is a necessity of our own making;
that is of his; He has bound himself to keep his own promises, not ours.

SECT. XIIII.
WHiles his Fellow, Refut. p. 66.
or Master, Maldonate, talks of confuting Austin in this very point, by Austin
himself, this man will confute us by him; whom he no otherwise cites for
himself, then his Ancestor Pelagius cites Lactantius, Hilarie, Ambrose,
Hierome, and Austin in this case. The thing (says he) is in our power, and
though it require the assistance of Gods grace, which still preuenteth our
will, yet that hinders not, but that we may (if we list) live chaste all the
days of our life, as we may upon the same terms believe in God, and love
him. What impudency is this, to make him the Patron of the power of our
Free Will to God, whom all the World knows to have been Malleus
Pelagianorum? and who in so many Volumes damnes this conceit to the Pit of
Hell; evermore so establishing the natural faculty and use of the Will
against Stoicall necessity, as that he abandons any power of the act, or
exercise of it unto good (without grace) against humane presumption. When he
speaks of this, here is not a cold and feeble prevention, but an effectual
inoperation, yea a powerful creation.

Since my Refuter then will needs be paralelling our ability of containing,
and of believing, let him hear that holy Father say, Aug. de Not. and Great. 25.
Non solum Deus posse nostrum, etc. God does not only give, and help our power
to good, but works in us both our will and working of good.

And elsewhere; Cont. duas Epist. Pelag.
He is drawn to Christ, to whom it is given to believe in Christ: Power is
therefore given unto them to be made the sons of God, which believe in him,
when this is given them to believe in him. And so far is he from saying with
my Detector and his Bellarmine, that who lists may believe when he lists, that
he reasons thus? Quid mihi ostendis, etc? Aug. l. 4. cont. ^ul. c. 6. Qui
igitur facit oues bomines, ipse ad obedie^tiam pietatis humanas liberat
voluntates: sed quare istos homines oues facit, and istos non facit, apud quem
non est acceptio personarum? Respondet Apost. O homo.
What do thou tell me of thy Free Will; which can never be free to do good,
except thou be a Sheep of God? He therefore that makes men to be his sheep,
frees the wills of men to the obedience of Piety: But why does he make these
men sheep, and those not, since with him is no respect of persons? The Apostle
answers, O homo! etc. Thus he. Either therefore let him never cite S. Austin
against us in this point, or else we must be forced to countercite him once
more then we meant. Ibid.
Plane possumus dicere frontem haereticorum non esse frontem: And if there
could be any more on that holy Fathers score, Father Maldonate has paid it
for us. To conclude therefore for him; Arbitrium humanae voluntatis nequaquam
destruimus: We know no man does well against his will; God was not to make
Virgins by force; and the same goodness that gives Chastity to the married,
continues Virginity to the single: Refut. p. 69.
What of all this? Therefore (says he) it is as well in the power of al single
persons to be always continent, as of the married to keep conjugal
Chastity: An illation and conclusion worthy of my Refuters Logike and
Divinity; As if he argued thus for himself; The same God that disposes of
Orders, disposes of the Popedom: therefore I may as well look to wear three
Crowns, as one shaven. Or the same God gives both Life, and Grace, and Glory.
Therefore all those that live the natural life, may also live the spiritual,
and glorious. Who sees not the reason of these unlike? Conjugal honesty is
absolutely commanded of God to all married persons; perpetuation of Virginity
(he grants) was never commanded; The breach of conjugal honesty, is of it
self, a sin to all; Marriage is not so. Against the one therefore, we may
absolutely pray in Christi erit si fides aderit qua impetrat a iuuente quod
iusserit, Aug. de adult. con. l. 2. c. 19 Refut. p. 71.72.73.
faith, against the other but with condition; God has promised to deliver us
from our sins, not from our Marriage.

As for Saint Ambrose, we easily grant him large in the praise of Virginity:
But no one word of all his cited authorities touches our Assertion: The helps
of the Church, the service of Angels, the merit of the Prayers of our Savior
we yield to be good means of continence, where it is intended; but that it is
meant to all comers, we deny; Let the success speak.

Neither do we tax the Vow for any improbitie in it self, but for the
incapacitie of the persons: The Vow were good, if the men were not either
evil, or unfit. And here Refut p. 71.
by the way; whereas C. E. like a masterly Monitor wishes Master HALL to read
the divine Works of AMBROSE, concerning this subject; Master Hall is bold (in
requital) to tell C. E. that he knows not Ambrose; and to teach him (since he
has not learned it of other Masters) that the Book which he so often, and so
solemnly cites for AMBROSES, Cited four times by C. E. upon weighty
occasions. Refut. p. 3^.43.48.50.
Ad Virginem lapsam, is a noted Counterfeit, a true Nouatian; which his grave
ignorance might have heard from his Bellarmine and Posseuine.

And how much better is that other Tract which he P. 41. Refut.
cites from AMBROSE, Epist. 82. wherein mention is made of Vide Censur. Rob.
Coci. p. 129.
Venice; which was not extant till Ambrose was not? And the Comentarie of
Ambrose, upon 1. Tim. 3. whence he fetches his forceablest P. 94. Refut.
Testimony for forced Continency; slit in the Nose, and bored in the Ear
long-since by Censur. Coci. p. 133.
Salmeron, Baronius, Bellarmine, and Francis Lucas. Of the same stamp (that
the Reader may here see once for all how he is gulled by this false Priest with
foysted Authorities) is his AUGUSTINE, De bono Viduatis, Refut. p. 20.49.68.
thrice by him here quoted, not without great Triumph; branded by Erasmus,
Hosius, Lindanus: as likewise Refut. p. 40.
his AUGUSTINE, de Eccles. dogmat. confessed counterfeit by Bellarmine, and his
Friends of Louaine: and P. 80. Refut.
the Sermons, de Tempore; cashiered by Erasmus, Mart. Lypsius, the Louanians:
Whereto let us add the Book of Great ATHANASIVS, de Virginitate, Refut. p. 35.
produced in great state by C. E. not without great wrong and shame fatherd
upon that Saint, as (if Erasmus and Nannius did not show) the ridiculous
precepts therein contained would speak enough. To follow all were endless: Of
this kind, lastly, is his CYPRIAN. de Discipline. and bono Pudicitiae, not more
magnificently Refut. p. 36.
brought forth by C. E. then fairly eiected by Erasmus, and Espencaeus. These
are the glorious Testimonies which grace the swelling Pages of mine Adversary;
These are the pious frauds wherewith honest Readers are shamefully coozened. It
shall suffice thus in a word to have thanked my Reverend Monitor for his sage
advice, and to advise my Reader to know whom he trusts.

Vid. supra.
For Origin; we have already answered; My Detector could not have chosen a
better man for the proof of the facility of this Work, then him, who
(according to the broad Tralation of his rude Rhemists) gelded himself, and
made himself no man for it.

Refut. p. 74.75.
That all graces are derived to us from the Fountain, or rather the full Ocean
of Christ's Merits and Mercies (which he shows from Saint HIEROME) we
willingly teach against them; so far are we from being injurious to the
Passion of our Dear Redeemer; But if he will therefore infer, that every
man may be a perpetual Virgin, he may as well hope, that therefore every
Scribbler may write all true. Our Savior himself, which said I will draw all
men unto me, yet said, All men cannot receive this; not, I cannot give it, but
they cannot take it.

As for that practice which he cites from Saint Austin, Refut. p. 78.
of forcing men both into Orders, and Continency, it shows rather the Fact
then the Equity; what was done in a particular Church, rather then what should
be; The Refuter himself renounceth it in the precedent Page; (For the Church
forces none thereunto) neither is it any other then a direct restraint of
that, which the Council of Nice determined to be left free.

Lastly, Page 79.
that there may appear to be no less impossibility of honest Truth in some
men, then true Chastity, he cites one place for all, out of Saint AUSTIN:
Lib. 2. c. 19. de Adulter. Coniug. vid. sup.
Let not the burden of Continency affright us, it will be light if it be of
Christ, it will be of Christ if there be Faith, that obtaynes of him which
commands the thing which he does command. See Reader, with what fidelity, and
by this esteem the rest; Saint Austin speaks thee of persons divorced each
from other, whom necessity (as he supposes the case) calls to Continency;
The Detector cites him for the power of voluntary Votaries; The very place
confutes him. It will be Christ's Yoke (says AUSTIN) if there be faith that
obtaines of him which commands the thing which he does command: There can be no
Faith where is no command. Now C. E. will grant there is no Neque enim sicut
non maec^aueris, non occides ita ^^ci potest, non nubes Aug. de Virg. Sanct. l.
sing. c. 30
command of single life to all; Therefore all cannot ask it in Faith, therefore
all cannot think it the Yoke of Christ, all cannot bear it.

SECT. XV.
Refut p. 80. vsque ad 87.
NOw at last (like some sorry Squib that after a little hissing and sparkling
ends in an unsavory crack) my Refuter, after all these Flourishes of their
possibility, shuts up in a scurrilous Declamation against our Ministry;
granting it indeed impossible, amongst us, to live chaste; and telling his
Reader that we blush not to blaze in Pulpits, and printed Books, this brutish
Paradox, that Chastity is a virtue impossible to all, because so it is to such
lascivious Illud dixerim tantum abfuisse, vt ista coacta castitas illam
coniugalem vicerit, etc. (says Polydor Virg.) This I may say that it is so
far off, that this compelled Chast^tie excelled the Conjugal Chastity, that
no crime of any offense could bring more hatred to the state of Priesthood, or
more disgrace to Religion, or more sorrow to all good men, then the blemish of
the unchaste life of Priests, etc. Polyd. l. 5. c. 4.
Libertines, sensual and sinful people, as Heretics are, and here are
sordes, dedecora, scabies libidinum: the brutish spirit of Heresy, fleshly and
sensual. Impure mouth! How well does it become the son of that Babylonian
Strumpet, to call the Spouse of Christ Harlot? How well does it become lips
drencht in the Cup of those Fornications; to utter blasphemous Slanders (
Spumam CERBERI) against Innocence? By how much more brutish that Paradox is, so
much more Deuillish is the unjust imputation of it to us; Which of us ever
blazed it? Which of us does hate it less, then the lie that charges it upon
us? How many Reverend Fathers have we in the highest Chaires of our Church; how
many aged Divines in our Universities, how many grave Prebendaries in our
Cathedral Churches, how many worthy Ministers in their rural stations, that
shine with this virtue in the eyes of the World? If therefore the proper place
of Chastity be the Church of God, (as this Cauiller pleades) it is ours in
right, Hier. l. 2. in Use. Quicunque amare pud^citiam se simulant, vt
Manichaeus, Marcion, Arrius, Tatianus, and instauratores veteris haereseos
venena^o ore mella promittunt caeterum iuxta Apostolum quae secre^o agunt,
turpe ^st dicere. Minut. Fael. Octau.
theirs in pretense: And so much more noble is this in ours, for that in ours
it is Inuiolati corporis virginitate fruuntur potius, quam gloriantur.
free, in them, Talis castitas quia non est spo^ta^ea, non ^ab^^ magnam
ret^ibutionem. ^ran. Carthus. O mysieria, O mo^es, vbi necessitas imponitur
castitati, authoritas datur l^bidini: Itaque (...) casta est quae metu cogitur,
n^c, etc. Illa pudica quae these tenetur. Ambros. ^. 1. de virg.
forced; Infida custos castitatis necessitas, as that Father said; Neque opus
passeri fugere ad montem; in them, as CHRYSOSTOM said long since (...); The
grace of Virginity is lost: (...): The world makes sport with such
Mayden-head. For the rest; The God of heaven judge betwixt us and our enemies;
To him we appeal how we desire to serve him in chaste Wedlock, whom they
dishonor with unclean and false Virginity.

Not to put my Detector in mind how honorably he now speaks of marriage, how
dares he talk of our fleshlinesse, and their chastity? as if he had to do
with a world that were both deaf and blind. Do not their own Records fly
in their faces? and tell him there are but a few of them honest? Did not their
own Council. Delect. Cardin. Paul. 3. Exhib. Alius abusus turbat populum
Christianum in Monialibus, etc. Vbi in plaerisque monasterijs fiunt publica
sacrilegia cum maximo omnium scandalo.
select Cardinals complain, that the most of their Nunneries were justly
scandalized with sacrilegious incontinencies?

Do not our Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. Hen. 3 p. 1085. Et quod indignum est
scribi, ad domos religiosarum veni^ns, facit exprim mammillas earundem, vt sic
phyfice, etc.
Histories tell us that in the reign of Henry the third, Robert Grosthead the
famous Bishop of Lincoln, in his Visitation, was feign to explore the
virginity of their Nuns by nipping of their dugs, indignum scribi, as Matthew.
Paris? Do not the In hac etiam vrbe meretrices, etc. Council. del Card.

Prius est quam maecha^i continentiam, ducere criminosam. de singul. cler.


forenamed Cardinals find it a common greeuance, that their Curtezans rode in
state through Rome it self, attended even at noonday with the retinue of
their Cardinals, and with their Clergiemen? Does he find the Church of England
to maintain Stews? and to raise rents from professed filthiness? Can he
deny the unnatural beastliness that reigns in his Italy? But what do I
stir this puddle? Let me hear no more brags of their chastity, no more
exprobrations of our lasciviousness.

SECT. XVI.
Refut. p. 88.
AS if my Refuter had vowed to write no true word, he challenges me for
translating Isidores Turpe votum, a filthy vow: I turn to my Epistle, and
find it not englished by me at all. His own conscience, belike, so construes
it; or if some former Impression of mine (which I believe not) had so turned
it, here is neither ignorance, nor unfaithfulness. Whersoeuer is sin, there
is filthiness: And if a lawful vow be property de meliore bono, can there not
therefore be an unlawful vow? What was that of Iepthaes, or that of Saint
Paul's forty Conspirators? But the word there (says he) signifies a promise;
As if every vow were not a promise; and if Isidore take votum for promissum,
Did. 28. ^reg. Petro diac. l. 1. Ep. 42.
Gregory takes (by his construction) promissum, for votum, in this very case
we have in hand.

This vow of theirs therefore is metonymically filthy, because it makes them
such. In one word, (that he may rave no more of Epicures, Turks, Pagans) Their
vow is in profession glorious, filthy in effect. And now for a conclusion of
this point, I must out of all these gross and ignorant passages of his (though
improperly, yet) truly vow to the world, that a truer Bayard did never stumble
forth into the Press.

SECT. XVII.
HE has done with their own vows, and now descends to us, whom he confesses
vowlesse; Refut. p. 89.
His scorn cannot strip us of the benefit of that Truth, which he confesses;
Thus then he writes; I freely with other Catholics grant, that our English
Ministers, according to their calling, make no vows; I grant their marriage to
be lawful; I grant that every one of them may be the husband of one wife, etc.
And why did not this liberality of my wise Detector tie up his Tongue in his
purse all this while? No more was required, no less is yielded; whereto is all
this iangling? But, that his grant may prove worse then a denial, thus he
proceeds: But we deny them to be truly Clergymen, or to have any more
authority in the Church, then their wives or daughters have, and this, because
they want all true calling and Ordination; For, they entered not in at the door,
like true Pastors, but stole in at the window like thieves; We deny their
ministry (I say) to be lawful, because they did run before they were
sent, took their places by intrusion, etc. Let Master HALL disprove this, and
I will say, Tu Phyllida solus habeto. Thus he.

A deep crimination, and such, as if it could be proved, would rob our
question of the State, and us of our duely-challenged honor. Reader, this
vehemence shows thee where his shoo wrings him: It is the gall of Romish
hearts that we prosper, and are not theirs; Where they have presumed upon
credulity, they have not stuck to say, we are not men like others, but more
frequently and boldly, that we are no Christian men; and here most
peremptorily, that we are no Clergymen: There is no Church, no Christianity,
no Clergy not theirs; Neither can we be in Orders, whiles we are out of
Babylon.

The man dreams of the Naggeshead in Cheap Side, where his lying Oracle
Tradition has not shamed to report, Jewel, Sands, Horn, Scory, Grindall, and
others in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time (being disappoynted of the
Catholic Bishop of Landaff) to have laid hands mutually on each other; and
that from hence have flowed our pretended Orders. This our shameless, Alias,
Halywell the Jesuit.
Sacrobosco heard of some good old folks, and they had it of one Neale,
Professor Ebrius in Oxford; Kellison took it of Sacrobosco, and C.E. of him.
Concordat cum Originali; Diabolus est mendax and pater eius. And is not this a
worthy engine to batter down the walls of a whole Church, to blow up all our
Ordination? Is it possible that any Christian face should be so graceless, as
to bear out such an apparent and ridiculous falsehood, against so many
thousands of witnesses, against the evidence of authentical Records; against
reason, and sense it self? For can they hope to persuade any living man, that
these having at that time a lawful Archbishop of their own Religion, legally
established in the Metropoliticall Chair, by an acknowledged authority, the
sway of the times openly favoring them, when all Churches, all Chapels gladly
opened to them, that they would be so mad as to go and Ordain themselves in a
Tavern? He that would believe this, may be persuaded that their adored blocks
can weep, and speak, and move; that their Cake is his God; Never truth could
be cleared, if not this; No less then the whole Kingdom knew, that Queen
Mary died in the year 1558, November 17; and her Cardinal (then Archbishop of
Canterbury) accompanied her soul in death, the same day. The same day was
Queen Elizabeth's Initium Regni; her Coronation January 15. following. That
leisure enough might be taken in these great affairs, the Sea of Canterbury
continued void above a year. At last, in the second year of Queen Elizabeth
1559. December 17. was Matthew Parker legally consecrated Archbishop of
Canterbury, by four Bishops: William Barlow formerly Bishop of Bathe, then
elect of Chichester. John Scory before of Chichester, now elect of Hereford.
Miles Couerdale Bishop of Exceter. John Hodgeskins Suffragan of Bedford. Matthew
Parker thus irrefragably settled in the Archiepiscopall See, with three other
Bishops, in the same Month of December, solemnly consecrated Edmund Grindall,
and Edwin Sands; The public Records are evident and particular, relating the
Time, Sunday morning after Prayers; The place, Lambeth-Chappell; The manner,
Imposition of hands; The consecrators; Matthew Cant. William Chichester, John
Hereford, John Bedford; The Preacher at the Consecration, Alexander Nowell,
afterward the worthy Deane of Paul's; The Text, Take heed to your selves, and
to all the flock, etc. The Communion, lastly administered by the Archbishop.

For Bishop Jewel, he was consecrated the Month following in the same form
by Matthew Cant. Edmund London, Richard Ely, John Bedford.

Lastly, for Bishop Horn, he was consecrated a whole year after this, by
Matthew Cant. Thomas S. David's, Edmund London, Thomas Couentry and Lichfield;
The Circumstances, Time, Place, Form, Preacher, Text, severally recorded. The
particulars whereof, I refer to the faithful and clear relation of Master
Francis Mason; whose learned and full discourse of this subject, might have
satisfied all eyes, and stopped all mouths. What incredible impudency is this
then, for those which pretend not Christianity only, but the Consecration of
God, wilfully to raise such shameful slanders from the pit of Hell, to the
disgrace of truth, to the disparagement of our holy calling?

Let me therefore challenge my Detector in this so important a point, wherein
his zeal has so far outrun his wit, and with him all the Brats of that proud
Harlot, that no Church under Heaven can show a more clear, eeuen,
uncontrollable, untroubled line of the just succession of her sacred Orders,
then this of ours; If his Rome, for her tyrannous Primacy, could bring forth
but such Cards, the World would be too strait for her. He shall (maugre) be
forced to confess, that either there were never true Orders in the Church of
England (which he dares not say) or else that they are still Ours. The Bishops
in the time of King Henry the eight, were undoubted; If they left Rome in some
corrected opinions, their Character was yet, by confession Quis ignorant Cathol.
etc. and similiten Ordinatos vere e^e Ordinatos, quando Ordinator vere
Episcopus fuerat and adbuc erat, saltem quantum ad characterem, Bellar. de Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 10.
, indeleble. They laid their hands according to Ecclesiastical constitution,
upon the Bishops in King Edwards days; And they both, upon the Bishops in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth; They again, upon the succeeding Inheritors of
their holy Sees, and they lastly upon us; so as never man could show a more
certain and exquisite Pedigree from his great Grandfather, then we can from
the acknowledged Bishops of King Henry's time, and thence upwards to hundreds
of Generations. I confess indeed, our Archbishops and Bishops have wanted
some Aaronicall accoustrements, Gloves, Rings, Sandals, Miters, and Pall, and
such other trash; and our inferior Orders have wanted Greazing and Shauing,
and some other pelting Ceremonies. But let C. E. prove these essential which
we want, or those Acts and Forms not essential, which we have, Et Phyllida
solus habeto. In the mean time, the Church of England is blessed with a true
Clergy, and glorious; and such a one, as his Italian Generation may impotently
envy, and snarle at, shall never presume to compete with, in worthiness and
honor; And (as Doctor Tailor, that courageous Martyr, said at his parting)
Blessed be God for holy Matrimony.

SECT. XVIII.
Refut. p. 90, 91.
MY Cauiller purposely missetakes my rule of Basil the Great, and my Text of the
Great Apostle; whiles from both I resolve thus; I pass not what I hear Men or
Angels say, while I hear God say, Let him be the Husband of one Wife; he will
needs so construe it, as if I took this of Saint Paul's for a command, not for
an allowance; As if I meant to imply from hence, that every Bishop is bound to
have a Wife: Who is so blind as the wilful? Their Leo Leo. ep. 87. ahas. 85.
Ta^ sacra semper est habita ista Praeceptio.
calls these words a Preception, I did not: If he knew any thing, he could not
be ignorant that this sense is against the stream of our Church, and no less
then a Grecian error. Who knows not the extremes of Greece and Rome; and the
Track of Truth betwixt them both? The Greek Church faith, He cannot be in
holy Orders that is not married: The Romish Church faith, He cannot be in
holy Orders that is married: The Church Reformed says, He may be in holy
Orders that is married, and conuertibly; Some good friends would needs fetch us
into this idle Grecisme, and to the society of the old Frisons Espenc. lib. 1.
de Contin. c. 1.
, and (if Saint Jerome take it aright) of Vigilantius, Espenceus, and
Bellarmine and our Rhemists free us. There is no less difference betwixt them
and us, then betwixt May and Must; Liberty and Necessity. If then ( Let him
be the Husband of one Wife) argue that a Bishop may be a married man, I have
what I would, and pass not for the contrary from Men and Angels. We willingly
grant with Luther, Refut. p. 91, 92.
that this charge is negative: Non velut sanciens dicit, says Chrysostom; But
this negative charge implies an affirmative allowance; we seek for no more: As
for the authorities which my Detector has borrowed of his Uncles of Rhemes,
they might have been well spared; He tells us, Saint Jerome says, Qui vnam
habuerit, non habeat; He who has had one Wife, not he that has one; I tell
him Saint Paul says Tit. 1.6.
((...)) If any man be the Husband of one Wife, not, If he have been: Let
Chrysostom. in 1. Tit. homil. 2.
Saint Chrysostom therein answer Hierome, and Epiphanius, and all other
pretended opposites: Obstruere pro^sus intendit haereticorum ora, qui nuptias
damnant, etc. He purposed in this to stop the mouths of Heretics, that
condemned marriage, showing that that estate is faultlesse, yea, so precious,
that with it a man might be advanced to the holy Episcopal Chair. Thus he;
Whom their learned Esp. vbi supra.
Bishop Espencaeus seconds; and by the true force of the Text cleereth this
sense, against all contradiction. Nec enim Paulini de Episcopis, etc. For
(says he) those places of Saint PAVL concerning Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
cannot be so eluded, as that they do only belong to men that have been
sometimes married, and are now Widdowers and single; but the Text does plainly
note out Husbands; and those that are now found in the present estate of
marriage; which is employed, both by the word esse, and by vnius vxoris vir;
that is, having one Wife, not (as some have understood it) which has had one;
for (as CHRYSOSTOM has noted) the Apostle would by the society of Marriage
and Priesthood stop the mouths of Heretics that condemned Marriage; whereto
add, That the Apostle amongst the virtues of a Bishop reckons up this, That he
does govern his own house well, not, that he did govern it. Thus he. Unto
which let me yet adioyne this other consideration, that the Apostle describes
what manner of Wife a Bishop should have; which as in other professions he has
not done, so in this would have been vselesse, if he had only aimed at an
estate past, and not present.

Where it is a cunning trick of the Rhemists, and their Vulgar, in stead of
Their Wives, to read, The Women, quite beside the Scope and Context of the
Apostle: As to the same purpose; Whereas their Leo in the forecited Epistle
says, that this Precept of a Bishop to be the Husband of one Wife, was always
so sacred, That the same condition is to be understood of her that is to be
chosen for the wife of the Priest.
vt etiam de muliere Sacerdotis eligenda, eadem intelligatur seruanda conditio;
BELLARMINE, and his Mates would needs face us out, that the Copyes are
corrupted, and contends to have it read Sacerdotis Eligendi; of the Priest to
be chosen, not, of the Wife; Whom our industrious and worthy Doctor James has
refelled both by the Press, and the Pen; by the Coleine Edition, and
Manuscript authority.

Refut. p. 92, 93.
As for that he cites from Hierome against Vigilantius, he might have found the
Salve together her with the Wound; Our Rhemists dare us from the imputation of
his opinion. For the rest. Nothing is more plain, then that our Apostle
(according to the just interpretation of Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact,
and others) alludes to the loose fashion, as of the Greeks, so especially of
the Jews, with whom Polygamie and re-marriages, after unjust divorces, were in
ordinary use; These the Apostolical Spirit finds unfit for the Man of God,
whom he therefore charges to be only, The Husband of one Wife.

Neither does it argue too much wit in my Refuter, Refut. p. 94, 95.
to bring two Fathers upon the Stage for his purpose, and then to set them
together by the ears with each other, Ambrose (I mean) and Hierome; who in
this which he cites them for, confute one another; Hierome (though otherwise a
back-friend to Wedlock) censuring the opinion of Ambrose, as sauouring too
strongly of Cainisme, and superstition: Howeuer, even the more vehement of the
two, out of this place does hold Marriage compatible with holy Orders, which is
the only thing I required: Refut. p. 95.
So as still, This one word shall confirm me against all impure mouths;
Impure, Not for preferring Continency, as my Cauiller will take it, but for
deprauing of Marriage, by the foul titles of Fleshlinesse, and Sensuality;
such as his own; a worse we need not: Neither does S. Ambrose at all control
me herein, Ibid.
whiles he teaches that the Apostle does not here inuit us to beget children
in the Priesthood; Habentem enim dixit filios, non facientem; we did not
challenge hence any command, we challenge an allowance, which we have and
proclaim: That I may not say, some Copies of Ambrose run (according as I have
learned of our eminent Doctor Fulke) Habentem filios, aut facientem; Having
children, or begetting them: The difference is not worth standing for; Let it
pass after his own reading. I could stop his mouth with the ingenuous answer
of his ESPENCaeVS: Habentem enim, etc. Espenc. l. Praecit.
For he said, Having children, not begetting them; Debellatum hic esset, etc.
This Field were won, if either this were the Text and not the Gloss, or they
that thus interpret it were Apostles, as they are not. Thus their own Bishop.
But I need not call for any aid. The words of Ambrose do plainly drive
against an inuitation, or command, which we do willingly disclayme.

SECT. XIX.
NOw unhappy is this man that still shoots his Arrows quite besides the Butt?
Refut p. 96.
He proves, forsooth, with great zeal, that the Fathers never understood a
positive command in our Apostles words, which I never thought so much as in
dream: and then he bends his Forces against Bygamie, which I no where
avouched. The Man of valor loves to play his prizes alone.

Here is no command then (says he) but a permission; How much are we bound to
him for this favor? Permission? Thus much he, with his holy Father, yields to
their Stews. No, here is a direct allowance. Let him be the Husband of one
Wife; Not, He may be so: But this was only for a time, he says, because of
the paucity of single Clergymen: Let him show me the Apostles limitation, and
I am satisfied; otherwise, this misse-grounded conceit (what countenance soever
it may find in a private humane authority) shall pass with us as a Gloss of
Bordeaux, Refut. p. 96.
that marres the Text. But how shamelesly, how fraudulently, how like himself,
does my Refuter cite CHRYSOSTOMES Castigat impudicos, Chrysostom. in Tit. Hom. 2.
etc? He checketh the incontinent (says that Father) whiles he permits
them not after their second marriages, to be preferred to the government of
the Church, and dignity of Pastors; and there my Refuter stops, with, So he;
whereas, if he had gone forward, the place had answered him, and it self: For
(says CHRYSOSTOM) he which is found not to have kept his benevolence toward
his wife, which is The word is (...), by them translated falsely, Defunctum.
gone from him, how should he be a good Teacher to the Church? Plainly showing
us, that he intends this to those unchaste Husbands, which after an unjust
divorce of their former wives, have married also a second; not after the death
of the first.

The like Priestly fidelity he uses in the place of Chrysostom, Hom. 2.
upon Job; the poor man had taken up some scraps of quotations upon trust,
having never seen the Authors; For, Chrysostom never wrote any Homilies upon
the Book of Job; only he has five Homilies of the Patience of Job; whereof
this cited, is the second; wherein his errori ignoscebat, has reference rather
to, sine crimine, which he opposes to irreprehensibiles, then, to vir vnius
vxoris, as the sequel plainly shows.

Refut. p. 97.
As for Bigamie, it is out of our way; but since his loquacitie will needs roue
thither, let him show that before Montanus infected the World with a prejudice
against second Marriages after decease, they were held unlawful for any
calling, or person, and we will grant him clamorous to some purpose.

Refut.. p 98.
To prove this opinion and practice of the Church, like a wise Master, he
brings in Tert. Exhort. ad castit. c. 7.
Tertullians authority, in his Book which he wrote in the time of his
Heresy; whiles he was over the ears in Montanisme; where he tells us he has
known some eiected for second Marriages. But if he had ever read the Book
following, of Monogamie, he might have found his Tertullian (then Montanizing)
to vpbraid the true and Catholic Church, which he calls Psychicos, with the
usual practice and allowance of the second Marriages of their Bishops. Tert.
De Monogamia, c. 12. Quot enim and digamipraesident apud vos, insultantes
vtique Apostolo, etc? Miror te vnum protraxisse in medium, cum omnis mundus bis
ordinationibus plenus sit, non dico de presbyteris, ad Episcopos venio, quos si
sigillatim voluero enumerare, tantus numerus congregabitur, vt Ariminensis
Synodi multitudo superetur, Her. ad Ocean. de Carterio Hisp. Ep. digamo, etc.
Refut. p. 99.
Quot enim and digami, etc. For how many Bishops are there amongst you twice
married? But who-euer was matched with so vain a Babbler? I proved from S.
Paul, that a Bishop might have one Wife: he proves by Councels and Fathers,
that he may not have two. It is pity that his Masters the Jesuits have no
more Trees for him to set with the Roots upward: Any thing rather then to
weary the World with this foolish clacking.

Out of this indiscreet and odious verbositie (lest he should want noise) he
stumbles upon the Council of Constantinople before it come in his way, and
spends a whole leaf only to tell us, that he will talk of it hereafter.
Hereafter he shall receive answer enough; What needs this disorderly
anticipation? To conclude then, this place of our Apostle stands for us
unshaken, by any the impotent blasts of his frivolous Elusions, and shall
warrant us against Earth and Hell, that a Bishop may be the Husband of one
Wife.

SECT. XX.
Refut. p. 100.101.
MY next place, of the honorablenesse of Marriage amongst all, he smoothes over
with a pretended concession; professing with Fulgentius, and Hierome, to give
all high Titles to that state, only preferring the rule of a better life;
praising Marriage, but more extolling Virginity: But who ever made the
comparison? These are fair Nets to catch Fools; Whiles he heaps up all the
reproachful terms that spite can devise, against the very state of Marriage,
in some callings, not so much as prejudiced by Vow; how does he grant Marriage
honorable amongst all? If the comparison be the matter he stands upon, let
him say, Marriage is good, and lawful for all conditions; Virginity is
better; he shall have no Adversary. And whereas (to call him to reckoning for
arrerages) he turned off this place (when it was) with a scoff out of
Bellarmine, That Marriage is honorable amongst all, Refut. p. 13.
yet not between Father and Daughter, etc. the man alluded sure to their great
and good Alexander the sixth, and his chaste Lucrece, of whom he knows the
Riddle, Here lies Lucrece in name, Thais in life, The same Popes Daughter,
Lemman, and his own Sons Wife.
Filia, Sponsa, Nurus.

For us, that it is honorable in all estates of men by Apostolical warrant, is
sufficient assurance, that to no calling, or estate it can be dishonorable
and unlawful. But to untie Bellarmines trifling knot: I say, Marriage is
honorable, (...), but not, (...): in all, but not between all: That is, every
man may marry with a woman, but not with any woman whatsoever: as with his
Mother, or Sister. So Father and Daughter may marry, but not one the other. See
now what a worthy Mess of Sophistry is laid in Saint Paul's dish by these
Caruers, and how easily ouer-turned: So as I might very well proclaim to all
the World (which I do now confidently second) that if God might be judge of
this Controversy, it were soon at an end. Refut. p. 102.
If my Refuter make faces at this, their whole School shall bear me out in
it. Et Espenc. l. 1. de Cont. c. 3. Caiet. Opus. de Castit.
sane communis est scholae resolutio, etc. And in truth it is (says their
ESPENCAEVS) the common resolution of the School, that if we insist only in
those things, which were spoken by Christ, and written by the Apostles, in the
Canon of the New Testament, (secluding the Laws of the Church) holy Orders,
neither as Orders, nor as holy, are any hindrances of Matrimony. Thus he. And
said I any more? any other?

Ibid. p. 102.103.
By their confession then, GOD never imposed this Law. My proof was, that even
in the time of that legal strictness, he allowed Wedlock to the Ministers of
his Sanctuary. Herein, how am I refuted? If he mean (says my Detector) that
for purity and perfection of life, the Law of MOSES was more strict then the
Gospel, the untruth is notorious; To which he adds out of Hierome, that the
greater perfection of the Evangelical Sacrifice exacteth greater Holiness;
and concludes, that the permission of Wives in the Aaronicall Priesthood,
argues evidently the imperfection of that Law. So he. Surely, God wanted this
Counselor upon Mount Sinai; he could have advised him better Rules of his
mis-contriued Priesthood.

Would my Refuter make himself so ignorant, as not to know; that
notwithstanding the rather greater perfection of Morality required under the
Gospel, yet that Leuiticall Law placed impuritie in many of those creatures
and actions, wherein the Evangelical finds none? Did not the touch of some.
Vessels or Garments make a man legally unclean? Did not the lawful act of
Conjugal Benevolence? Did not the accidents of the holiest Childbed carry in
them an expiable impuritie? If he be not a Jew, he will not say it is still
thus under the Gospel. How justly therefore might I infer, that if our holy
God, unto whose Wisdom it seemed good to stand of old, upon such points of
outward uncleannesses, did notwithstanding allow Wedlock to his Priesthood,
much more (at least no less) under the Gospel, does he allow it, when as all
those imputations of impuritie are vanished.

SECT. XXI.
Ref. p. 103.104.
I Produced the Testimony of their Pope, their Cardinal, their Doctor. Basils
Rule is a sure one, that the Witnesses of Enemies are most conuictiue. Their
Cardinal was Panormitan, Their Pope Pius the second. Their Doctor, Gratian.
For Panormitan; My Refuter likes his words so well, that like a saucy Fellow
he dare pull off his red Hat, and trample it in the Floor; denying his
Cardinall-ship, and charging him With participation of the Schism.

But first, he cannot (I hope) deny him to have been their Abbot, then their
Archbishop; As for his red Hat, it never came from Wittenberge nor Geneua; it
was of their own dying; FOELIX the false Pope (he says) gave it him. Reader,
the famous Council of Basil, consisting of no less then four hundred
reverend Persons; Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors, gathered and
allowed at first, by Pope Martin, then by his Successor Eugenius the fourth,
afterward was upon some Politic considerations called off by Eugenius; The
Fathers of the Council finding their own strength, stood upon the right of
their Superiority, and (as they well might) censured the Pope; he proceeded
to obstinacy; those brave spirits (upon ripe consideration) justly deposed
him. In the room of this Eugenius, (otherwise called Gabriel Condulmarius) was
by just number of voices elected Amadeus the Devout Duke of Sauoy, and named
Foelix the Fifth, a man too good for that See; neither had he ever any so great
blemish in all his life, as the name of a Pope: Volateran can tell us, what a
Kennell of Hounds he shoued to the Ambassadors, namely, whole Tables of poor
souls daily fed by him; All Histories speak of his Devotion, and Piety; This
man called from his intended retyrednesse, must carry the Keys. He makes
choice of Archbishop Panormitan for one of his Cardinals: What offense is here?
But he was a false Pope. If the Council of Basil were a true Council, then
was Foelix a true Pope. It is in my Readers choice whether he will believe
four hundred Divines representing the whole Church, or a Popes Parasite. But
Panormitan dyed in the Schism against Eugenius. The World knows that the
greatest blot Panormitan ever had, was his violent plea for Eugenius; against
the Bishop of Argens, against eloque^t Segouius, against the whole stream of
that Council; This is the thank he now carries away, FOELIX scelus virtus
vocatur; If Eugenius had not dealt underhand with the Dolphin of France, and
Frederick of Austria, (then ambitious of the Empire) and tried all his wits,
both to make new Cardinals, and to divert the Neutralls, Eugenius had not been
foelix; and Foelix had been still Eugenius, the true and undoubted Successor
of Peter: How-euer, if th^se points should be strictly stood upon, Rome would
be at a loss, which many a time has bin to seek for her head. But what
though it were granted that Panormitan was Cardinalated by an intruding Pope?
Can this call down the authority of his judgment and Writings? especially
those which he wrote before he was Cardinal or Archbishop, being only Abbot:
And yet may be cited by us under the name of Cardinal: as Bellarmines
Dictates and Composures elder then his red Hat, yet are fathered upon that
Title.

Once, this I am sure of, that Bell. de Cleric. lib. 1 c 19. Cat^olicum
al^oquia and doctum authorem.
Cardinal Bellarmine doubts not to style Panormitan a Catholic and learned
Doctor. This is the man that stands with his Hat off to this worshipful Clarke
of Doway, and tells him that Continency is not of the substance of Order, nor
by Divine Law annexed to it; whereto, he shuffles out a miserable and
desperate answer, as we shall see in the sequel.

But in the mean time, see the cunning of my Catholic Cauiller; This is not
the sentence I stood upon, of Panormitan; it was not this, whereto I proclaimed
mine Oyez, but another, which he slily smothers, not daring so much as to
repeat it, lest his Romanizing popular ignorant Readers should hear and see
and smell, that the sacred Celibate of Priests did stink an hundredth years
before Luthers time. I will therefore here supply for him, and, hoping he will
in his next take notice of the sentence, will represent it here again.

The words are these: Melius foret, Abb. Panorm. de Cleric. coniugat. Cap. Cum
olim.
et pro bono and salute animaru^ salubrius, si and vniuscuiusque voluntati
relinqueretur, it a vt non valentes aut non volentes continere, possint
contrahere; Quia experientia docente experimus contrarium effectum sequi ex
illa lege continentiae, cum hodie plerique non viuant spiritualiter, nec sine
mundi, sed emaculentur illicito coitu cum ipsorum grauissimo peccato, vbi cum
propria vxore esset castitas. That is, It were better, and more wholesome for
the good and salvation of souls, if it were left to every man's will; so as
they which either cannot, or will not contain, might marry. For we find by
experience a contrary effect to follow upon that Law of Continency; since the
greatest part of (our Priests) at this day live not spiritually, neither are
chaste, but are defiled with unlawful copulations, not without their most
heinous sin; whereas, with their own Wives it should be Chastity. Thus he.
A sentence worthy of that Epiphonema of mine, (Is this a Cardinal think you
or an Huguenot?) With this, my Detector deals, as their Inquisition does with
a misnamed Heretic; he chokes it up in secret, or, if he bring it forth, it
is not without a gag in the mouth: All his answer is, Refut. p. 107.
We tie not our selves to every man's opinion; and, This sentence is censured
by BELLARMINE as erroneous; As if Panormitan were every body, and Bellarmine
an Oracle. It is enough for us, that one of their own greatest, learnedest,
zealousest Prelates iustifyeth our Marriages, and wishes them in use rather
then their Continency.

To that other Testimony of Panormitan, he answers by a grant, yielding us
freely, that if we take divine Law for that which is expressly determined in
Scripture, it must needs be said, that there is no evident proof set down
of continency in Ecclesiastical men by the Apostles; yet, that it is so
insinuated, and the observation of it has been so ancient, Refut. p. 105.
as BELLARMINE notes, that it may be truly termed Apostolical; Thus he. And
even for this are we beholden to him; All his friends would not have been so
liberal. His Ioannes Mayor, his Clictouaeus, his Torrensis, and all their
rigorous Clients would not have said so: As, on the other side, the old Gloss
was not so wise, that could only say (which is now expunged) Apostoli
docuerunt exemplo, The Apostles taught this by their example. But what are
these so pregnant insinuations? Good wits have found them out; One was, that of
Decret. p. 1. did. 28.
INNOCENTIVS 2. That these men are the vessels and Temples of God, therefore
they may not Cubilibus and immunditijs seruire, serve for chambering and
wantonness. Ywis, no Layman is such; Therefore he may be allowed to be
filthy. Another was, of Franc. Luke 21.
Torrensis, Take heed lest your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life: Whereof Bishop Esp^nc. de cont. l. 1.
Espencaeus is so ashamed, that he answers it with an Absit; God forbid (says
he) that we should think that the Lord, which is the author and Sanctifier of
Marriage, should hold it in the same rank with surfeting and drunkenness.
Another was of the same Author ( Tit. 2. Si quis legilimam commixtionem and
filiorum recreation^m, corruptionem and ^^tiaquinationem vocat, ille habet
cohab^tatorem d^monem Apostatam. ^gnat Epist ad Philadelph.
teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts:) us, of the Clergy;
belike the rest need not; And who knows not the witty and learned
insinuations of their good Siricius, Those that are in the flesh, cannot please
God? These, and such like are the forceable insinuations of this imposed
continency, which even very boys and Idiots can hiss out of the Schools.

SECT. XXII.
FRom Panormitan, he descends to my alleged Gratian, Refut. p. 105.
who because he speaks these words (by way of explication) in a continued
tenor with a sentence of Austin, is (to my mortal sin) cited by me as
speaking from Austin. The position and the inference of the words is such, as
might deceive any eye that would trust a Gratian; What might the price be (trow
we) of such a crime in the Apostolic chamber? In my next Shrift, he shall
hear, mea culpa; The words are Gratians, that Copula Sacerdotalis vel
consanguincorum, The marriage or (as this Clerkly Grammarian translates it) the
carnal copulation of Priests, or kinsfolks is not forbidden by any Legal,
Evangelical, or Apostolical authority, but by Ecclesiastical Law it is
forbidden. We could not hyre a Proctor to say more. But herein C. E. has
detected two foul faults of the citation; The one, that I trusted his Gratian
so far, as to make him speak out of Austin, which (I trust) a little
Holy Water may wash off; The other, Refut. p. 106.
That I concealed the marriage of kinsfolk, within the prohibited degrees;
which (says he) although only forbidden by Ecclesiastical Law, yet dares
not Master HALL (I think) transgress it; so as this Law has greater force
then he supposes it to have. So he* Plainly, my Refuter knows not what he
says, else he would never thus palpably plead against himself; For what ever
thing was there in all the constitutio^s of his Church, more subject to
variation, then the legal supputation of the forbidden degrees? which was a
long time confined to the third degree inclusiuely; another while extended to
the fourth; and sometime to the seventh. Let him herein reconcile his Pope
Nicholas and Gregory, with Pope Innocent; Whereof the one left all free that
were without the pale of the fourth degree, the other restrained all to the
seventh; And when he finds an vnalterablenesse in the determination of these
degrees, let him plead for an equally-fatall necessity of his Ecclesiastical
continence; in the mean time, let him take it patiently to be beaten with his
own rod.

No divine Law then (he grants) has enjoined this Celibate, but an
Ecclesiastical. What is this other then I said? God never imposed this Law of
continency; Who then? Espencae. ex Test. Abb. l.. 1. c. 3. Facerat igitur
Ecclesia Boni medici instar, medicinam quae obsit magis qua^ prosit tollentis.
The Church should therefore do like a good Physician in removing the medicine
which it sees to do more harm then good. Refut. p. 107.
The Church. And why may not I go on, to ask, Whether a good wife would
gainsay what her husband wills? Flourishing will not answer this. All the
praises of beauty and fidelity which are given to the true Church, argue Rome
to be the false. Whereas therefore the Priest shuts up thus bravely; (And this
Minister who would make the one to gainsay the other, should bring some place
or sentence to show the same, (which he may chance to do the next morning
after the Greek Calends) or else never avouch so unchristian a Paradoxe. He
shall understand that his Greek Calends are past. The Spirit of God says, A
Bishop may be the Husband of one wife: The Church of Rome says, A Bishop may
not be the Husband of any wife at all: Whether is this a contradiction? The
Spirit of God says, Marriage is honorable amongst all men: The Church of Rome
says, Marriage is dishonorable to some. The Spirit of God says, To avoid
Fornication, let every man have his wife: The Church of Rome, like a
quick-huswife, says, Some order of men shall not have a wife, though to avoid
Fornication. Let my Mass Priest show these to be no contradictions (which he
may chance to do at the Greek Calends) or else grant this to be neither
Paradox, nor unchristian.

SECT. XXIII.
FRom Cardinal Panormitan I ascended to Pope Pius the Second, Refut.. p 108.
whom I vshered in, with this Preface, Let a Pope himself speak out of PETER'S
Chair, PIUS the second; as learned as has sit in that room this thousand
years. Two things my Cauiller snarles at in the Preface, two in the authority
it self.

My first manifest untruth is, that PIUS the Second spoke this as out of the
Chair. A witless misprision. I hope he sat in PETER'S Chair that spoke it;
if he spoke it not as from the Chair, I care for no more. Is not this
sufficient to win respect from a Catholic Priest? Otherwise, whether it were
Stool, or Chair; or if a Chair, whether the consistoriall, or the
Porphyrychayre, wherein he sits before his first Triumph, Lib. sacr. cerem.
tanquam in stercoraria, it is all one to me. Themselves must first agree what
it is to speak as from the Chair, ere I can affirm that Pius the Second so
spoke this. Id Populus curet, I referred the chair to the man, not to the
speech: In the mean time C. E. is not so good a Groom to the Chair, as
Gregory of Valence, who attributes infallibility to a Popes sentence, though
it be Vid. Romans Irrecon.
sine cura and studio. My second wrong is the superlatiue lashing (so he calls
it) of other Popes learning in comparison of this. I cry him mercy; I did not
know what sin it was to commend a Popes learning; That is not it (I confess)
that carries away the Crowns and the Keys: But the comparison offended;
Perhaps C. E. has known that chair more learnedly furnished: It may be, he
thinks of Boniface the Ninth, called before Peter de Thomacellis, a
Neapolitan, Theod. Niem. lib. 1. c. 6.
who could neither write, nor sing; hardly understanding the propositions of
the Advocates in the Consistory; insomuch as in his time, Inscitia fere
venalis facta fuit in ipsa curia; Ignorance was grown valuable. Or it may be
he thinks of those ancient ferule-fingred Boy-Popes; one of the Benedicts, a
grave Father of ten years old; or John the Thirteenth an aged Stripling of
nineteen. Or perhaps, he alludes to those learned times (within my compass)
which were acknowledged in the Council of Rhemes; where when offer was made of
requiring the Popes judgment, it was publicly replied, that besides the
exposednesse of that City to sale, Romae iam nullum fere esse qui literas
didicerit, There was scarce a man at Rome, that could spell his Letters.

Heu quam perfatuae
sunt tibi, Roma, togae!
If I should here add out of Alphonsus de Castro, that some Popes were such
great Clerks, Alphons. contra here is. li. 1. cap. 4. Edit. Colon. ann.. 1543.
vt Grammaticam penitus ignorent, That they had no skill in Grammar, C. E.
would tell me that my Book is not of a corrected edition, though it was
printed at Coleine. Such bran has bin cast out in their later sifting and
shifting of Authors.

SECT. XXIIII.
IN the authority it self, his Cauils are childish; Where Pius said, Marriage
upon g^od reason was forbidden to Priests, but upon greater reason seems fit
to be restored. Refut. p. 109.
Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias, maiore restituendas videri; My
first fault, is that I turn Sacerdotes, The Clergy, instead of Priests; which
word is of a larger extent, including also Bishops: The silly man sees not that
I translated it to his advantage, against my own; For, every Sacerdos is
Clericus, not every Clericus, Sacerdos. Very frequently are Bishops
comprehended under the name of Sacerdotes, as well as of Clerus; and no less
usually under the name of Clerici, the superior Orders are not comprehended.
He is not worthy to write himself Priest, that understands his Orders no
better.

My second error is, That I turned the last Clause of the Sentence, (Is to be
restored) whereas the words are, Restituendas videri. Here could be no fraud,
whiles I set the Latin words in the Margin. The Man thinks of his ((...)) or
his, Videtur quod sic; probatur quod non; but if his Grammar had not been ill
learned, he had known that (Videri) does not always signify a doubtful
probability, but sometimes a certain evidence, as, Visum est Spiritui Sancto
and nobis; and, Qui videbantur columnae; Or (if his Logike had fully taught him
the Distinctions of Sunt and Videntur) this quarrel had been spared. This
Seeming was Being; Or, if this lawless Lurker had ever had any taste of the
Civil or Canon Law, he might have been able to construe that Maxim, Quod
quis per alium facit, per se facere videtur: and that judged Case, Qui nomen
debitoris legatum viuens exegerit, legatum ademisse videtur. In this style
spoke this learned Pope, which my unlearned Adversary cannot reach unto. For,
if Pius, or Syluius, may have leave to Comment upon himself, when the Question
was of suffecting Amadeus, Duke of Sauoy, a married man, in the room of
Eugenius; Ex quo constat (says he) etc. It is apparent that not only he,
which has been married, but he that is married, may be assumed to the
Popedom; and a little after: Fortasse peius non esset, etc. And perhaps it
were not worse if more Priests had wives, for many would be saved in a married
Priesthood, which now in a single Priesthood are damned; he says directly,
Damnantur, They are damned, not, They seem to be damned. And therefore to
prevent this real damnation, Marriage is really to be restored to them, not
that it should only seem to be restored. To conclude, take Videri, for bare
Seeming, surely, it must be construed, Videtur mihi; I Pope PIUS think, or
judge, that it were fit that Priests should have the liberty of marriage
restored again to them; which together with sublatas implies, that in former
times Priests were married, and as the case now stands ought again so to be.
Which is the very state of this question, which we avouch.

And in his Epistle to John Freund, Credimus te non insulso vti consilio; I
think it is no ill counsel for thee (since thou can not contain) to seek
for a Wife; although that should have been thought of, before thou did enter
into holy Orders; but we are not all Gods, that we can foresee future things;
since it is comne to this, that thou can not resist the Law of thy Flesh, it
is better for thee to marry, then to burn. Thus he. For which advice,
doubtless, he found good cause in his own experience; who having been
employed formerly in this Island of ours, left two Bastards behind him, the one,
begotten of an English woman, the other, of a Scottish; The one whereof he
commends to his Father Syluius, a Citizen of Syenna; the other he confesses to
his friend P. de Noxeto: But this indeed was before his Priesthood; Afterward,
Whiles he was Cardinal, he had his Concubine; to whom at last he gave
threescore Florens for her Dowry, Epist. 361.
it is strange what he confesses of himself in his 92. Epistle: Mihi hercle
parum meriti est in castitate; I cannot boast of any merit in my chastity, for
to tell the truth (Magis me Venus fugitat, quam ego illam horreo) Venus does
rather fly from me, then I abhor it. It was not therefore out of
speculation, but sense, not out of seeming, but certainty, that Syluius passes
his Restituendas videri.

So now to shut up this point, the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, and (in his
Attendance) Panormitan, Gratian, and Pius (in their clear suffrages for us)
are fully acquitted from the vain cauils of my Detector; and God is on my
side, the Church of Rome, on his. Let Sincerity judge which Scale of the
Balance is heavier.

SECT. XXV.
FRom the lawfulness of our Marriages, Refut. p. 110.
I descended to the Antiquity; where my Refuter takes an ignorant exception. I
said, Some things have nothing to plead for them but Time, Age has been an old
refuge for falsehood* Then I lay for my foundation Tertullians Rule; Rectum est
quodcunque primum, adulterinum quodcunque posterius. Tert. de Praesc.
That which is first, is truest; My Detector finds here a flat contradiction,
and cries out, Do these men wake or sleep when they write? There are none of
his wise friends which will not be ashamed of this gross stupiditie; For
whether of these two Sentences can he dislike? and if both be allowable, how
can they be contradictorie? neither am I his Adversary herein, but Tertullian.
What surer way could there be, then to control the pretenses of a secondarie
antiquity by the first? And what contradiction is in this? The first is true,
all under the first is obnoxious to error; The puisne posthumous Antiquity
has been a refuge for falsehood, the Primigenious Antiquity (which proceeded
from the ancient of Days) is certain. Let this Trifler go learn to spell
English, ere he presume to Divinity. This Antiquity is the touch, whereby we
desire all truth to be tried; which easily finds all the gilded Coins of
Romish innouations, shamefully counterfeit.

Not to go back so far as Paradise (though I well might) where God made the
first wedding in perfect innocence. I began with Moses and his Leuiticall
Brotherhood; to which my Refuter replies; Refut. p. 111.
That yet in eating their Paschall Lamb they had their loins girt. Justly
concluded! All the Jews did eat the Paschall Lamb with their loins girt,
for the expedition, or moment of their flight, therefore their Priests and
Levites did not converse with their Wives. If his Superiors of Doway do not
blush at this Logike, his wit and their shame are gone together.

But, They abstayned (he says) from their Wives, whiles they did minister in
the Sanctuary; What if we yield this? Their ministration was by courses, and
had intermissions. There is an holy and decent modesty in all those which are
worthy to serve at the Altar, which teaches them to give God his due times,
with respect even of outward purity; which is all that Eusebius. de praep. Euang.
l. 1. c. 9. (...),.i. Sacra facientibus, they turn it, Sacratis, etc.
Eusebius by them misse-translated; and misse-alledged by him, requires. But
what will my Refuter say to the High Priest himself; which was bound every day
to a morning and evening Sacrifice, who yet was not restrained from a conjugal
society? That Bone has troubled, blunted, and broken better Teeth then his.
Refut. p. 112.


But (says he) The figure of the eternal Priesthood of Christ (to wit)
MELCHISEDECK, i^ not read to have had any wife at all; What of this? He, whom
he prefigured was only a spiritual Husband to his Church. If this Man be not
read to have had a Wife; no more is he read to have had Father or Mother. Nay,
he is read to have had neither. Why do they not thence infer that Priests ought
to have neither, but to be begotten and borne of Angels, not of humane kind?
which is as good for an inference, as that fopperie is for a Legendarie fable,
that Luther was begotten by an Incubus. Yet had the Literal (not mystical)
Melchisedec both Father and Mother: and if Sem were Melchisedec (as wiser men
then mine Adversary have upon good probabilities thought) he may pass, I
hope, for a married man.

As for the perfection of the new Law above the old, it only bars those
institutions which had in them an imperfection, not those which God thought fit
for Paradise it self. So as the practice of the Jewish Church, founded by God
himself, is an all-sufficient warrant for the marriage of his Evangelical
Ministers.

SECT. XXVI.
FRom Moses and the Prophets I descend to the Apostles. What did they? C. E.
answers roundly: They did not marry; Refut. p. 112.
and they who were married before, did leave their Wives. I urge Saint Paul's
report of the rest of the Apostles, and the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas,
that they not only had Wives, but 1. Cor. 9.5.
carried them along in their Travels. He answers, They were not Wives, but
other devout Women, which followed them to administer maintenance to them. A
likely tale, if they could all agree in it; That the Apostles would cast off
their own Wives, and carry about strange Women with them, upon what-euer
pretense. Credat Iudaeus apella, Non ego. Yet my shameless Refuter cries out
of my pride and ignorance in not allowing this, which he dares proclaim for
the received exposition of all the Fathers, and all that ever wrote in the
Greek and Latin Church. When he knows that his Clem. Recognit. l. 7.
Clement in his Recognitions, and his own Pope in their Canon Law, has
expounded it contrarily, of Wives, not of strange Women. Did. 31. Omnino.
Leo the ninth, against the Epistle of Nicetas the Abbot; where he directly
affirms that the Apostles did carry about their Wives, Vt de mercede
praedicationis sustentarentur ab ijs; That they might be maintained by the
reward of their preaching; making the force of the word to lie in
circumducendi, non amplectendi: Either therefore his Pope erres in a deliberate
exposition of Scripture, or else I have not erred; And either his Popes are no
Fathers, or C. E. has no forehead.

Refut. p. 113.
Nothing can make the Rhemists ((...), a Sister, a Woman) not ridiculous; not
that Visor of Age, which my Refuter pleases to fasten upon it. There wants an
Article (he says.) Our Apostle should have comne to Cardinal Bellarmine and
him, to learn when, and where to use it.

That our last accurate Translation of the English Bible, has Woman in the
Margin, is a poor advantage; who sees not that it is the manner of that
exquisite Edition, to set all the Idiotismes of either Language, and diverse
readings in the Margin? Every Schole-Boy knows that the word signifies both;
but whether of them is fit to be received into the Text, our Text it self
shows; How wittily is Saint PAVLS, A Woman, a Sister, paralelled with Saint
PETER'S, Viri Fratres; Men and Brethren.
Ye Men which are Brethren, is a meet predication, but, Ye Sisters which are
Women, is absurd; Neither does Saint Peter say ((...)) Brethren men, as Saint
Paul says, (...), A Sister Woman. As for the authority of Hierome, well may
we appeal from his judgment as incompetent, whom his own Doctors accuse as
partial, and censure as A Title given to Gregory, also in Apolog. Tumultuaria.
(...), (if not (...).) Yet even he against Heluidius translates it, Vxores
circumducendi.

Refut. p. 115.
For the rest, it is worth my Readers note, how the Plagiary Priest having
stolen this whole passage (as most of the rest) verbatim out of Bellarmine, yet
ouer-reaches his Master; for where Bellarmine says, Ita fere omnes Graeci and
Latini; So almost all the Greek and Latin; this Bayard dares say, All (saving
Clemens) as well Greek, as Latin; and when he has done, names some that say
nothing of it at all, as Chrysostom; Another that in Heresi^ speaks for him
one where, another where against him, as Tertullian* who being also himself a
married Priest, could say in his exhortation, Licebat and Apostolis nubere, and
v^ores circumducere; Another tha^ grounds upon an evident mis-reading, as
Ambrose; and to make up the Bulk, puts in Saint Bede, and Saint Thomas parties
to the cause, and and then sings, Io^ paean. It is well y^ that he grants
Clemens of Alexandria, and Saint Ignatius to be on our side, for this
interpretation; and when he has done, he must be forced to yield us his Pope
Clement, Pope Leo seconded by his Gratian, and Laurentius Valla, and others
cited by Erasmus; in so much as Espencaeus himself grants herein, Esp. l. 1.
de Cont.
(...) veterum, a difference amongst the Ancient. And if these had never been,
the Text cleeres it self, for, not to enforce the word ((...)) which implies a
power over the party carried* To lead about.
The Apostle speaks of a matter of charge to the Church, by this
circumduction; Now that rich Matrones should follow the Apostles, and minister
to them of their substance, was a matter of ease to the Church. Neither was
this attendance for ministration, so much an act of Cephas, and the other
Apostles, as a voluntary act of the women themselves. To conclude, in this the
Apostles practice should have crossed their doctrine. For if Saint Paul gave
that charge (of being the Husband of one Wife) on purpose Chrysostom. Hom. in Tit.
praecitat.
(as Chrysostom says) to stop the mouth of the Enemies to Marriage; how must
this needs open them again, and breed a conceit of that impuritie, which
Saint Paul meant to oppose, that the Apostles themselves as ashamed of their
wives, forsook them, and chose rather to be attended by Strangers?

So as I must take leave to be ever in this Heresy, that the Apostles had
Wives, and carried them about.

SECT. XXVII.
Refut. p. 116.
But what Boyes-play is this, To give and take? Our doughtie Champion has
granted us Clement of Alexandria, and now he pulls him back again; Clemens
(says he) grants the Apostles to have had wives, but he denies that they
used them as wives; cunningly dissembling that which Clemens said in the
beginning of the same period; For Peter and Philip (says he) did beget
children, etc. How did Peter beget them, if he were not Peter when he begot
them? In the time of their painful Evangelical peregrination they forbore
perhaps: does it therefore follow that they did always forget to be Husbands?
Whence, in all likelihood, had S. Peter his Petronella? if she were not borne
after he was Peter? Whence was that inscription on Pilagiaes Tomb, (if we
may believe Cit. ab Espen. loco citat^. Here lies the Wife of Bishop Dionysius,
Daughter to Thomas the Apostle.
PERIONIVS) Hic sita est sponsa DIONYSII, THOMae Apostoli filia. There is not
(I grant) necessity in this proof there is probability. It is therefore too
boldly affirmed by my Detector, that the Apostles, after that public calling
undertaken, used not their Wives. Is that of Saint Ignatius nothing against
him? Opto Deo dignus, etc. I desire to be found worthy of God, as PETER and
PAVL, and the rest of the Apostles which were married men, and Ignat. Ep. ad
Philadelph. non libidinis causa, sed posteritatis surroganda gratia coniuges
habuerunt.
not for lusts sake, but for propagation of Posterity inioyed their Wives. Thus
he. So much against C. E. that C. E. is no less against him. The Testimony
of Saint Ignatius (says he) is a mere forgerie; easily answered. If Ignatius
had either denied or disliked these Marriages, no man's word had been more
authentike; now, this clause has made him falsified: He cannot (I hope) say
that the sentence came out of our Forge; we take him as we find him; neither
does B. Espenceus, or any other ingenuous Writer, take such exception, but
finds the authority weighty. That more unlikely Epistle which Ignatius wrote to
Saint John, and the blessed Virgin (though palpably rejected by their own) is
classical enough, when it may serve a Coccius, or Bell. Tom. 1. page 837.
Bellarmine, or a Pierre Cotton; But, here the Epistle it self is not
questioned; only this clause is bored in the Ear. And why so? Forsooth the
ancient Greek Copies have it not. Doubtless, the man has vexed the old
Greek Manuscripts; but when he has done, his one Fellow shall give him the
lie; who confesses it to be in all Copies both Greek and Latin, old and new,
whiles he says, that those words ( Those wo^ds (And the other Apostles) are to
be razed out of the Text. Marga^. de la Big^e. Not. in Epist ad Philadelph.
Et alij Apostoli) ex textu abradenda. Or if that will not serve; there is yet
to be seen in Baliol College in Oxford, an old Copy of the age of seven
hundred, or eight hundred years, wherein the words are found; Only the words
(S. Paul, and the other Apostles) blurred; yet so, as they are still to be well
discerned: If the Greek should want the clause, what were this? The first
Edition of Ignatius in Greek was (1558.) as the Centurists have noted; and how
easy was it to leave out one sentence, that seemed prejudicial? Let him never
cast this upon the Graecians: they never so excelled in this Faculty of
counterfeiting as the Romans: Greece in this must yield to Italy, how-euer it
pleases Erat consuetudo Gracorum fere ordinaria corrumpendi libros, Bell. li.
4. de Pont. c. 11. Quoniam Romani sicut non acumina, ita nec imposturas habent,
Greg. l. 5. Ep. 14. ad Noorsen.
Pope Gregory and Cardinal Bellarmine herein only to give it superiority.

Amongst the rest, this very place puts me in mind of a memorable iuggling
Trick of his Fellows. The old Platina printed at Paris by Francis Regnault.
An. 1500. (which I have seen) and all other old Copies, read thus of Saint
Luke; Vixit annos 84. Platin. in Cleto. ad finem. Luke lived 84. years, having
a Wife in Bithynia. Having not a Wife in Bithynia.
Vxore^ habens in Bithynia. Now comes the Onuphrian Edition set forth at
Coleine. An. 1600. from the shop of Materuus Colinus, and reads, Vxorem non
habens in Bithynia; with which authority Espencaeus himself was deceived,
citing Hierome for it as the Fountain, whence perhaps Platina might fetch it;
but if my Reader please to turn to that Her. Catol. script. Illustr.
Catalogue of famous Writers, ascribed (not unjustly) to Hierome, there shall
he find the very same coozenage; the words run so indeed, in the Latin
printed Copies; but not acknowledged, not mentioned by Sophronius in the Greek
Translation; and Erasmus, reading it either, Having, or not having, at last
shuts up; Haec verba videntur adiecta; quandoquidem nec adduntur apud
SOPHRONIVM, nec in exemplaribus emendatioribus. These words (says ERASMUS)
seem patched to the rest; since they neither are added in SOPHRONIVS, nor in
the better Copies. Thus he. It was fit my READER should have a taste of the
Roman integrity.

I alleged the learned Cardinal Caietan for the likelihood of S. Paul's
Marriage; Can my Refuter deny this? The words are plain: Caiet. Com. in Phil.
c. 4. Quia omnes Apostoli exceptis Ioanne and Paul^* vxores babuerunt, Amb.
etc. Refut. p. 117.
Locus cogere videtur; The place seems to enforce it, not by demonstratiue
reason but in all reasonable sense, that PAVL had a Wife, So he. Which is all I
contended for. If now he shall think to choke me with a cross Testimony of
the same Author, concerning Saint Paul's not conuersing with his Wife after his
Apostle-ship, he may understand, that I well remember Caietan to have been a
Roman Cardinal; and therefore in some points necessarily unsound; whose
ingenuitie yet in this business I have formerly showed.

SECT. XXVIII.
Refut. p. 118.
FRom the practice of the Apostles (which is yet clear for us) we descended to
their Canons. It troubles my Refuter, that I say, the Romish Church fathers
these upon the Apostles, and that their Jesuit TVRRIAN sweats to defend it
(insinuating my contrary opinion) and yet that I cite them for my self;
whereas his wisdom might have considered that their force is no whit less
strong against them, notwithstanding our doubt, or denial. For example, The
Trent Canons rore terribly to them: to us, or the French, they are but as the
Pot-guns of Boys: we may cite these to them as Gospel, they may cite them to
us as Alchoran.

By this it appears how far not only Schoole-Learning, but even Logike
transcends this poor Refuters capacity, who could not distinguish between
disputing adrem, and ad hominem.

What I said in my Epistle to my reverend and worthy Friend Master Doctor
James, the incomparably-industrious and learned Bibliothecary of Oxford (a man
whom their Posseuine thought so well of, that he has handsomely stolen a Book
of his, and clapped it out for his own, a man whom so base a Tongue as my
Detectors cannot disgrace) I profess still, that I hold those Canons of the
Apostles vncanonicall; And do I hold this alone? Does not his Pope Gelasius
so? Does not Isidore Bishop of Hispalis so? Does not Leo the Ninth so? Are not
some of them at pleasure rejected by Posseuine, Can. 65.67. etc.
Baronius, Bellarmine? Or, in a word, if they be the true issue of the
Apostles, are they accordingly respected, and observed of the Roman Church?
Does not his Mic. Med. de sacr. hom. Contin. l. 5. Vix. sex autocto Latina
Ecclesia nunc obseruat.
Medina grant to their shame, that the Latin Church scarce observes six, or
eight of them? These Canons then I do not hold Apostolical; I do hold
ancient, and not unworthy of respect; and such as I wonder they have escaped
the Roman Purgations. As for those other nine or ten noted Counterfeits,
which I joined herewith for company, in that Epistle, his shame would serve
him to justify, if his leisure would; whereas there is scarce one of them
whom his own Authors have not branded.

Ref. p. 120.121. vsque ad 125.
My Refuter must have a fling; In an idle excursion therefore he justly rayles
on the Protestant practice, in rejecting those Fathers for Bastardie one while,
whom otherwhiles they cite for current; when his own eminent impudency in
the very passage next going before, and in the next following (to go no
further) offends in the same kind. The truth is; The Protestants take liberty
to refuse those Fathers, whom even ingenuous Papists have censured as base; The
Papists take liberty, when they lift, to reject the authority of those
Fathers, whose Truth they cannot deny. The instances hereof would be
endless. But with what face can any Papist tax us for this, when all the
World may see above three hundred and twenty of their Authors, whom after
the first allowance they have either suppressed, or censured? To their eternal
and open conviction, Doctor James (whom they may revile, but shall never
answer) has collected and published the names, and pages.

SECT. XXIX.
NOt to follow therefore this babbling vagary of my Adversary against
Zuinglius, Ref. p. 126.127. Apost. Can. 5.
Luther, Musculus, Whitakers, (what Puppy cannot bark at a dead Lion?) we come
close to the Canon. That no Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon shall forsake or cast
off his Wife in pretense of Religion, or Piety, upon pain of deposition.
Wherewith how much my Refuter is pressed, appears in that he is feign with
Baronius to avoid it, with, Apocryphorum non est tanta authoritas; There is no
so great authority in Apocryphal Canons.

Where is the man that even now vpbrayded us with the lawless rejection of
ancient Records; and by name would undertake to justify those whom my Epistle
taxed for adulterine, whereof these Canons of the Apostles were a part? now he
is feign to change his note, Apocryphorum non est tanta authoritas. He has
cast off Ignatius already, anon you shall find him rejecting Socrates, Sozomen,
Nicephorus, Gratian, Sigebert, H. Huntingdon, and whom not? upon every occasion
shamelesly practizing that which he censures.

If I allege the sixth general Council, that of Constantinople, proclaiming
this sense truly Apostolical, even the sixth general Council is rejected as
neither sixth, nor general, nor Council; That this Apostolical Canon is bent
against the denial of Matrimonial conversation, is apparently expressed in
those Canons of Constantinople, how-euer the extent of it in regard of some
persons is restrained. There is no way therefore to untie this knot, but by
cutting it; and my cauilling Priest with his Jesuits may gnaw long enough upon
this bone, ere they suck in any thing from hence, but the blood of their own
jaws.

Any of those words single might be avoided, but so set together, will abide no
elusion, Let him not upon pretense of Religion eiect his Wife.

The shift that C. E. Refut. p. 128.
borrowes from Bellarmine, is gross, and such as his own heart cannot trust
((...)) says he) that is, In pretense of heedinesse.
praetextu cautionis. Look over all the Copies; all interpretations of these
Canons; that of Dionysius Exiguus; that of Gentianus Heruetus; that of Caranza;
that which Gratian, (whom my either graceless or ignorant Adversary dares
name against me) cites from hence; all of them run praetextu religionis.
How clear is that of their own Did. 28. Sub obtentu religionis propriam
vxorem contemnere.
Law? Si quis docuerit Sacerdotem, etc. If any man shall teach that a Priest,
under pretense of Religion, may contemn his own Wife, let him be accursed.

And Zonaras, whom both our Iunius, and their Espencaeus cite out of Quintinus
his Exposition, is most clear; Hoc enim videtur in calumniam fieri nuptiarum,
etc. For this eiection (says he) would seem to be done in reproach of
marriage, as if the Matrimonial knowledge of man and wife caused any
uncleanness. Thus he. Where it is plain, that he takes it not of maintenance,
but ((...)) of the Conjugal act. The necessity of which sense also is euicted
by their own Espenc. l. 1. de Cont. c. 4.
Espencaeus out of Saint Chrysostom in his second Homily upon Titus. And In
Canon. Apost. in P^ot. in neno Can.
Balsamon no less directly; Because (says he) before that Law of JUSTINIAN,
it was lawful for a man upon any cause to divorce his Wife: therefore the
present Canon gives charge, that it shall not be lawful for a Bishop, Priest,
or Deacon, upon pretense of Piety, to put away his Wife. Thus he.

From all which it is not hard to see, that in those young days of the Church,
the mystery of iniquity began in this point to work; so as Marriage,
according to the Apostles prediction, began to be in an ill name, though the
clear Light of that Primitive Truth would not endure the disgrace.

So as in all this I have both by Moses, and the Examples of that Leuiticall
Priesthood; by the Testimony of the Apostles, by their practice, by their
anciently-reputed Canons, and by the testimony of the agedest Fathers, so made
good the lawfulness and antiquity of the Marriages of persons Ecclesiastical,
that I shall not need to fear a Divorce either from my Wife, or from the
Truth, in that my Confident and just Assertion.

THE HONOR OF THE MARRIED CLERGY maintained, etc. The second Book.
SECT. I.
ANd now, Refut. p. 130.
since in this point we have happily won the day, less labor needs in the
other. It is safe erring with Moses and the Prophets, with CHRIST and his
Apostles; Soon after (according to S. Paul's prophecy) Spirits of Errors were
abroad; and whether out of the necessary exigence of those prosecuted times,
or out of an affectation to win favor and admiration in the eyes of
Gentilisme, Virginity began to raise up it self in some private conceits,
upon the ruins of honest Wedlock; neither is it hard to discern by what
degrees; yet, never with such absolute success, as to proceed to any Law of
restraint. I do not therefore feign to my self (as mine idle Refuter) golden
ages of mirth and Though Amram the Leuite, father to Moses, married in the heat
of Pharaohs persecution: and David did the like in Saul's.
marrying, under those tyrannous persecutions, but in those bloody ages, I do
avouch to him, and the World, an immunitie from the Tyrannous yoke of forced
continency. This if he could have disproued by any just instances, he had not
given us words.

Refut. p. 131.
If he be angry that I said, some of the pretended Epistles of his ancient
Popes to this purpose are palpably foysted; Let him fasten where he lists, if
he have not an answer, let me have the shame; in the mean time, it is enough
to snarle where he dares not bite.

That which I cited from Origin, Refut. p. 131, 132, 133.
aduising the sons of Clergymen not to be proud of their parentage, he
cannot deny, he can cavil at. The same persuasion (says he) might be made to
S. PETER'S daughter (as many are of opinion that he had one) yet will it not
follow that he knew his wife, after he was an Apostle. So he. But what needs
this parenthesis, if the man be true to his own Authors? Did we devise the
Story of Petronilla? Did we invent the passage of her Suitor Flaccus; Of her
Fever, the cure whereof her father denied? Of her Epitaph engraven in Marble,
by her fathers own hand; Aureae Petronillae, dilectissimae filiae, To my dear
and precious PETRONILLA, my most beloved daughter, found by Paul the First? Are
not these things reported by their own Volateranus, Petr. Natalis, Esp. 1. c.
8. Volat. 1 18. Petr. Not. l. 5. c. 69. Plat. vit. Pauli. 1. Sigeb. 757.
Beda, Vssuardus, Sygebertus, Platina? Still where is the man that cries out of
rejecting authorities in other cases allowed? Either then let him give the lie
to his Histories, or else let him compute the Time when Flaccus, the Roman
Count, was a Suitor to her, and see if he be not forced to grant that she was
begotten of S. Peter after his Apostleship: And so (for ought he knows) might
those sons be whom Origin thus dehorteth; This man was not their Midwife.
The place of Origin which he Orig. Homil. 13. in Numer.
cites to the contrary, he took up somewhat on trust: let him go and inquire
better of his Creditor; by the same token, that in the Homily of Origin,
whither he sends us, he shall find nothing but Balaams Ass; an object fit
for his meditation. As for that parcel of the Testimony, which he says my
chin-cough caused me to suppress (in ipsa Christianitate) it is as Herbe-Iohn
in the Pot, Refut. p. 133.
to the purpose of my allegation. Origin speaks of that Text, Many that are
first, shall be last, etc. Which he applies as a cooling-card to the children
of Christian parents, especially Si fuerint ex patribus Sacerdotali sede
dignificatis, If they be the sons of them which are dignified with
Sacerdotall honor; The change of the Preposition is remarkable, ex patribus,
arguing that he speaks not of their education, but their descent, and
therefore implying no less then I affirmed, that their parentage gives them a
supposed cause of exaltation.

SECT. II.
HOly Athanas. Epist. ad Dracont. Many Bishops, etc.
ATHANASIVS was brought by me in stead of a thousand Histories: Who tells us
that it was no rare thing to find married Bishops in his time. Refut. p. 134.
My wise Refuter, after he has idly gone about the bush a little, comes out
with this dry verdict, What will Master HALL hence infer? That Bishops and
Priests may lawfully marry? Saint ATHANASIVS says it not, but only
recounteth the fact, that some married of both sorts, but whether they did well
or ill, or whether himself did approve or condemn the same, there is no word
in this sentence. Thus he. We take what he gives, and seek for no more; We
cited Athanasius in stead of many Histories, not of many Arguments, Histories
de facto, not discourses de iure; The lawfulness was discussed before, the
practice and use is now inquired of. This Athanasius witnesses, and C. E.
yields; Wherein yet I may not forget to put my Refuter in mind, how brittle
his memory is; who in the same leaf contradicts himself; For when he had
before confessed that ATHANASIVS does neither approve nor condemn the
practice, either as good or evil, Refut. p. 136.
now he plainly tells us, that the words were not spoken by way of simple
narration, but of mislike and reprehension. He would be a good liar if he could
agree with himself. Why of dislike? For (says he) it was never lawful for
Monks or Bishops to beget children. Ipse dixit, we must believe him; Chrysostom.
ad Hebr. (...).
Not to tell him that Chrysostom teaches us (...)) it is possible with
marriage to do the acts of Monks: nor to convince him with
counter-testimonies, let him tell me what fault it is, to do or not to do
miracles? These in this sentence of Athanas. ibid. We have known Bishops
working miracles, and Monks working none; Many Bishops not to have married,
etc. As likewise you may find Bishops to have been fatherr of Children, and
Monks not to have sought for marriage.
ATHANASIVS, go in the same rank with Marriage. But, to clear Athanasius, he
brings Hierom against Vigilantius, (impudently called by him, The father of the
Protestants, who would have all Clergymen to marry; when his very Rhemists
have checked him for this slander) pleading against that necessity, from which
we have often washed our hands; when as the same Author against Iouinian affirms
de facto, the same with Athanasius, and us.

To say then that Athanasius spoke this only of lewd licentious Monks or
Bishops, is but the lewd liberty of a licentious tongue that has overrun
both Truth and it self.

From hence this Orator, this parcel of wit, flies out into a pleasant frumpe,
as he thinks, but indeed an ugly, inhumane, loathsome ribaudrie, ill-beseeming
the mouth of any that was borne of a woman, I will not say whether ill or well
beseeming the pen of a Virgine-Priest, forsooth so pure and Angelical, that
marriage would vn-Saint him. His unmanly unnatural Style belcheth thus: Page
137.
Thus LVTHER, of KATHERINE BORE his Sow, had six Pigs. Away nasty C. E.
transformed by Circe! Hoy! back to her Styes, yea thine, where thou may
freely Grunnire in septis
cum foedo hoc agmine clausus.


Then proceeds he, envying the the matrimonial fruitfulness of Bucer: who
surely, had he under the veil of maydenly Priesthood been far more fruitful
in a whole swarm of Bastards, should never have heard of it, unless perhaps
he had denied to pay, Taxam Camerae. As for Ochius, allowing Polygamie, and
perhaps other worse obliquities in his opinions, what are they to us? For the
marriage of P. Martyr Occolampadius, Pelican, etc. Let him take for an
acquittance that which has been paid them thus, Nobis nostrae sunt lunones,
vobis vestrae Veneres. And then I ask, Viuat vter nostru^ cruce dignior. If
this will not serve for repayment, I must eeke it out with a small, yet current,
commodity of two poor verses, which I learned of his Mantuan at the Grammar
School: Sanctus ager scurris,
venerabilis ara Cynaedis
Seruit, honorandae
Diuum Ganymedibus aedes.


Let him take this spoonefull of Holy Water to digest his Hogges-flesh.

SECT. III.
HItherto my Refuters Job 41 27. Refut. p. 138, 139.
Iron has been as Straw, his Brass as rotten Wood, his Sling-stones as
Stubble; but now he has found that will kill me dead; and says no less
then Hoc habet. Cypr. l. 4. Epist. 10.
CYPRIAN is by me alleged for the History of Numidicus; whom I avouched a
married Presbyter, by the same token that he saw his wife burning (besides
him) with the flames of Martyrdom. And Lord, what outcries are here of fraud
and corruption! and how could this Mass Priest wish himself near me when I
should be urged with this imposture, to see what face I would make thereon?
Even such a one (good sir Shorn) as is framed by the confidence of honest
innocence. God deal so with my soul, as it means nothing but ingenuous
sincerity; neither has my pen swarued one letter from the Text: My margin
said, Numidicus Presbyter; Numideus Priest.
so does Cyprian himself, two or three lines before this report of his wife;
so (besides the Text) does the margin of Erasmus. And what treachery could it
be to add the word of CYPRIANS own explication? But Numidicus was not then
Priest when his wife was martyred; rather upon that constancy was honored
with holy Orders. How appears that, when Cyprian only says, Let Numid. the
Priest be received into the number of the Priests of Carthage, etc.
Numidicus Presbyter ascribatur Presbyterorum Carthaginensium numero and
nobiscum sedeat in clero. He was before a Priest, for ought this Libeller, or
any mortal man knows, and now was ascribed into the honored Clergy of
Carthage, soon after to be promoted to Episcopal dignity. Before the report
therefore of his wives martyrdom, he is named a Priest. What have I offended
in seconding Saint Cyprian? Let this peremptory babbler prove this ordination
to be after that noble proof of his faith. I shall confess my self mistaken
in the time, never false in mine intentions.

Till then, he shall give me leave to style the man as I find him, Numidicus
Presbyter.

Numid. Presbyter Presbyterorum Carth. numero a^^r.
If Cyprian had said, Numidicus, Praesbyterorum numero ascribatur, the case had
been clear; but now doubling the word, he implies him a Priest before; and
how long before, and whether not before his Confession, it will trouble my
learned Adversary to determine. How feign would this man crow, if he could but
get the color of an advantage?

In the mean while, this impotent insultation bewrayes nothing but malice and
ignorance.

SECT. IIII.
MY Refuter may transpose the History of Paphnutius, Refut. p. 142.
but he shall never answer it. After his old guise therefore he falls to his
Hatchet, and when he has tried to bow it a little and finds it stiff, he
cuts it up by the roots. What one word can he control in the Relation of
Socr. l. 1. c. 8. Sozom. l. 1. c. 22.
Socrates, or mine Illation? The Bishops went about to bring in a new Law of
Continency to be imposed upon their Clergy, says Socrates and Sozomen;
therefore, before it was not. Paphnutius reclaymed, and called that yoke heavy
and unsupportable, the use of the Marriage Bed, Chastity. The issue was,
Potestas permissa cuique pro arbitratu; Every man left to his own liberty.
The story is plain, there is no place for cauils. The only comfort that my
Detector and his Tutors find in the History, is, Refut. p 143.
that Paphnutius is not all ours: He calls for the use of Marriage to the
wedded Clergy, not for wedlock of the vn-married. True; therein I must retort
the answer of Sotus, that the good Martyr gave way to the corruption of the
Times; wherein the wicked mystery had begun with Saint Paul's ((...).) But in
the mean time, let him know, that if Paphnutius plead but by halues for us,
he pleads against them altogether; yea, this he knows already, else he
would never be so audacious as to condemn the authors for insincere, and
fabulous, yea heretical; and to bring the clamours of his Bellarmine, to
discredit Socrates in three gross untruths, and Sozomen with Multa mentitur.
Refut. p. 146.
O impudency without measure, without example! Cassiodorus, and Epiphanius,
Socrates, Sozomen, Nicephorus, grave and approved Authors of our
Ecclesiastical Story, for but reporting one piece of an History, in favor
of Clergy-mens marriages, are spit upon, and discarded with disgrace. This is
no new Song; my Refuter has learned it of Copus, Torrensis, Bellarmine,
Baronius, and others. All whose mouths together with his, in these particular
exceptions, let me stop with that ingenuous answer of Espenc. l. 1. de Contin.
B. Espencaeus, there needs no other Advocate; Excipit Torrensis, etc. But
TORRENSIS excepts against SOCRATES and SOZOMEN, as though they had lewdly, and
shamefully belyed this story of PAPHNVTIVS, and says, the one was a friend of
the Nouatians, the other an abettor of THEODORUS the Heretic; that both their
Histories are in this void of credit, authority, probability. As if they
could not at once be bad Men, and yet good Historians; or, if they lie in any
other place, they must needs lie in this; For SOZOMEN, TRITEMIVS commends him
for a worthy furtherer of secular learning, and well versed in the Scriptures.
And for SOCRATES, he extols him for a learned and eloquent man, for a very
excellent, and greatly experienced Historian. Thus he, and much more, to which
(for brevity) I refer my peremptory Refuter; Refut. p. 144, 145.
who shall there find satisfaction to his Objections of the silence of other
Authors, and the Canon alleged against the subintroduction of (Mulieres
extraneae) strange Women into the houses of Clergy men: His Clictouaeus telling
him, That Wives cannot be comprehended under the name of Strange Women.
vxores dici non posse extranaeas, and the Law made afterward by Honorius and
Theodosius, plainly commenting upon this Constitution.

SECT. V.
AS for his Testimony of Leo the great, living in the time of Socrates, I
answer it by the testimony of Socrat. l. 5. c. 22. Refut. p. 148.
Socrates, living in the time of Leo the great. Multi enim, etc. For many
(says he) in this Episcopal dignity, in their Episcopal houses, in the
time of their being Bishops, do beget children of their Wives, whom they had
before lawfully married. Thus he. A place that answers for it self, and many
others. Wherein yet my Refuter finds some of my faulty concealements. First,
that the more, and more famous Bishops and Priests did the contrary. True,
they did so, but voluntarily as with us some of the Heads of our Clergy, and
others of the Body, do contain, not forced, Socr. vbi supr. They contayn of
their own accord, and at their own choice.
Continent sponte ac pro arbitrio; This I think is not the Roman fashion.
Secondly, They conuersed with the Wives which they married before their
Ordination, they did not marry after. Let his wisdom show me upon what
reason the act of marrying should be unlawful, where the act of Marriage is
lawful, and we will yield him justly to stick at this difference. And when
he has done. let him bite upon their old Did. 84. cum in pr^terito They say
that of old, before Siricius, Priests might contract Matrimony. Et quod
Gregorius introduxit continentiam Subdiaconis, sed Presbyteris and Diaconis,
Siricius, Did. 82.
Gloss (though now by them defaced.) Dicunt quod olim, Ante Siricium
sacerdotes poterant contrahere.

SECT. VI.
Refut. p. 150.
IN the rest, he falls not upon me, but the received Historians, Socrates and
Nicephorus; They have done him a spite, and he will revenge it. These he
will convince of a double lie. The one, that HELIODORVS was the first author
of the law of Continency in Thessalia, the other, that this Continency was
arbitrary. His reason for the former is weighty; It is not likely (says he)
that HELIODORVS, which would rather lose his Bishopric then recall his
lascivious book, would be so eager above the rest for the continency of his
Clergy. As if ever any men had been more luxurious then the greatest enemies
to Marriage; as if it were impossible for Pope John the thirteenth (from whom
Dunstan received his rigorous Commission) to be unnaturally incestuous; as if
it were impossible for his great Prelate of Crema, when he came to oppose the
Marriage of our English Clergy, to be Vid. Pos. l. 3.
found that night in bed with an Harlot?

And here my childish Adversary will needs make sport for Boys; I cited in my
Margin Heliodorus, the author of the Aethiopick History; As if (says he)
HELIODORVS had written some History of Aethiopia, whereas he only entitled
his work, Aethiopia. Ridiculous head! What Schole-boy, what apprentice knows
not HELIODORVS? Nosque manum ferulae, etc. If this learned Critic had but ever
opened the Book, he had found (...); Neither does any Englishman know it by
any other name, then, as it is translated (ere I was borne) The Aethiopicke
History; yea, if a man were not resolute to shut his eyes, in the very place
of Socrates, which he cites, the Book is called Aethiopica, whereto what
construction can be given, but this of mine? Such folly is for the Rod or
Ferule; This is (I confess) a Trifle; yet such as may give my Reader a taste
of the bold blindness of my impudent Detector.

SECT. VII.
Refut. p. 151.
THe other stings yet more, that this Episcopal and Priestly Continency was
upon no other terms, then Socrat. l. 5. c. 21. If themselves will; Forced by
no Law. The custom has been.
Modo ipsi voluerint, and, Nulia lege coacti; and consuetudo inualuit. And now
all in a rage my Refuter will prove against Socrates, that there was a Law for
this; and to this purpose, he brings in two Canons of the Canstantinopolitane
Council in Trullo: Mark, Reader, with what judgment. The Trullan Council was
above two hundred years after: Socrates ended his History in the year Histor.
Sacr. ad finem.
443. The Trullan Council was held (as their Binius computes it) in the year
692. and yet the Canon of the Trullan Council, in a matter of fact, disproues
Socrates. The other Councels of Ancyra, Caesarea, and Nice, are either
Prouincial, or against him. As for the plea of Synesius, that he might not be
a Bishop, because he would not leave his Wife, it is answered by the fact of
Synesius, that he was made a Bishop, and left not his Wife. But what an idle
and insolent boldness is this, for an obscure Libeller, to go about now
almost 1200. years after, to control a grave approved Historian of the
Church, in a matter of ordinary practice, which his own eyes and the worlds
did daily witness; As if he durst have published such a report of the common
use of his time, wherein all the Age he lived in, could have convinced him?

The witlesly-malicious Prosopopey, Refut p. 153.
wherein my Refuter brings in the Reverend and Peerless Bishop of London,
pleading for his wife to his Metropolitan, becomes well the mouth of a scurrile
Mass Priest, and is worthy of nothing but a scorn. Those two incomparable
Prelates are the chief objects of these evil eyes; whom God has raised
happily above the reach of their envy. It galls this Romish Rabble, that these
two Ringleaders of the English Clergy (besides their busy employments in
their careful, prudent, and zealous government) preach more Sermons in a
year, then, perhaps, all the Bishops under the Papacy. Rumpantur and ilia.

SECT. VIII.
Refut. 154.
IT pleases his discretion to marshall my Epistle as he lists, and then to
complain of disorder, and my leaping over hundreds of years from the Nicen
Council to Gratian the Canonist; My Readers eyes can confute him, which cannot
but witness, that I name diverse in all Ages recorded for married Bishops, and
Presbyters. This Beadrole (he says) is idle, because I show not that they
then used their Wines when they were Bishops. An hard condition; That I must
bring witnesses from their Bed-sides. Is it not enough that we show they had
wives, that they had children? No (says my Refuter) It must be proved that
they had these children by these wives after Ordination. We were neither their
Midwiues nor their Gossips, to keep so strict an account. But what means, They
sleep with their wives, and in the time of being Bishops, beget children of
their own wives, Socr. vbi supr.
Cum vxoribus dormiunt? and, Tempore Episcopatus filios gignunt ex proprijs
vxoribus? This we have showed out of Socrates. What was that which Dionysius,
the ancient B. of Corinth, (before ever Paphnutius was) wrote to Pinytus,
charging him, That he do not necessarily impose the heavy burden of
continency upon his Brethren, Eusebius. l. 4. hist. c. 22.
Ne grave seruandae castitatis onus necessario fratribus imponat.

What was that, for which Eustathius, B. of Sebastia, the unworthy son of
Eulanius B. of Caesarea was censured? was not this one of the Articles, Socrat.
l. 2. c. 33.
Benedictionem, etc? That he taught men to decline the blessing and communion
of married Priests? Away then with this either ignorant, or impudent facing of
so evident a falsehood.

Refut. p. 155.
The testimony of Hierome, the example of Vrbicus B. of Claramont, and of
Genebaldus B. of Laudune, show what was the conceit and practice of those
particular places wherein they lived; And yet Hierome in the same Book can say;
Hier l. 1. aduers^ouin. As if now a-dayes many Priests also were not married.
Quasi non hodie quoque plurimi sacerdotes habeant matrimonia. In that story
of Vrbicus, related by Gregor. Turonensis, I can but wonder how far men may be
transported by superstition; so as to make the Apostles charge give way to an
humane opinion. The Wife of Greg. Tur. l. 1. c 44. Cur coniugem spernis, cur
obturatis auribus Pauli praecepta non audis? Scripsit enim Reuertimini ad
alterutrum, etc. Ecce ego ad ^e reuer^or, ^e^ ad extraneum, (...) ad proprium
vas recu^ro, etc. Why desp^sest thou thy Wife? why do thou shut thine ears
against the Precept of S. Paul? For he has written, Meet together again,
lest, etc.
Vrbicus comes to his door, and alleges S. Paul's charge; (Meet together
again, lest Satan tempt you, etc.) Cur coniugem spernis, etc? he yields to do
the duty of an Husband, and now in remorse, inioynes himself a perpetual
penance. What penance do we think Saint Paul was worthy of, for giving this
charge which she alleged? Let my Reader judge, whether of the two was the
better Divine. How insolent is Tradition, thus to trample upon Scripture? But
since it pleased my Refuter to lend me this one example of Gregor. Turonensis,
I am ready to give him use for it. In the second Book of Turonensis he shall
find Gregor. Turon. l. 2. c 21. Not. Theodos. Iun. and Valent. 3. Imperat. vxor
Papi^illa, cum qua concerditer vixit, liberosque ex ea suscepit vtriusque
sexus, Ad Apoll^n. epist. 16. l 5.
Sidonius a married Bishop, and his Wife, a Noble Matrone, in all likelihood
living with him, for (nesciente coniuge) without his wives knowledge he gave
silver plate to the Poor. Turon. 4. c. 12.
In the fourth Book he shall find Anastasius a married Presbyter, feoffed in
some Temporalties which he would rather die then not leave to his issue. Tur.
l. 8. c. 39.
In the eight Book he shall find Badegisitus, the cruel Bishop of the
Cenomans, matched with ^n ill wife; who yet lived with him (as it seems) all
his time, and had altercations with Bertram, Archdeacon of Paris, for his
goods, deceased. In these there is strength of ^egall presumption, though no
necessity of inference. But what do I instance in these, or any other, when
Balsamon tells us clearly, that before the sixth Synod After their Episcopal
dignity, Balsam. in Can. Apost. 5.
it was lawful for Bishops to have wives, Etiam post dignitatem Episcopalem?
And his own Canon Law can tell him, that in the East Church, their Priests,
Matrimonio copulantur; Are joined in Marriage, vid. supr.

Use, Marriage contracted.


which his wariest Masters expounding, would interpret by copulato vtuntur.
Judge then, Reader, what to think of the mettle of this man's forehead, who
would bear us down, that no one Bishop or Priest was allowed, after Orders,
to have any Wife. Yea, even for the very contraction of Marriage it self,
after Orders, Espenc. l. 1. c. 11.
honest Espencaeus can cite one Io. Mayor. and comptuar. Council.
Ioannes Marius, a Dutchman by birth, but a French Historian, to whom he
allows the title of (non indiligeris) who writes, that he knows that in the
times of Pope Formosus, and Ludouicus Balbus, Priests were married, Et ijs
lieuisse sponsam legitimam ducere modo Virginem, non vero Viduam; and that it
was lawful for them to marry a Wife, so she were a Virgin, not a Widow.

As for that base slander wherewith this venomous Pen besprinkles the
now-glorious face of our renowned Archbishop and Martyr Doctor Cranmer, Refut.
p. 159.
whom he most lewdly charges with lasciviousness and incontinent living with
I know not what Dutch Fraw, it is worthy of no other answer then, Increpet te
Dominus. It is true that the holy man wisely declining the danger and
malignitie of the times, made not at the first any public profession of his
Marriage; as, what needed to inuit mischief? But that he ever had any
dishonest conversation with her or any other, it is no other then the accent of
the mouth of Blasphemy.

And if any one of our Clergy, after a legal and just Divorce long since,
have taken to himself that liberty which other Reformed Churches publicly
allow (as granting in some case a full release, both a thoro and a vinculo)
what ground is this for an impure wretch to cast dirt in the eyes of our
Clergy, and in the teeth of our Church? Malicious Mass Priest, cast back
those emissitious eyes to your own infamous Chair of Rome; and if even in
that thou can discern no spectacles of abominable uncleanness, spend thy
spightfull censures upon ours.

Refut. p. 160.
I reckoned diverse Examples of married Bishops and Priests out of Eusebius,
Ruffinus, others; amongst the rest Domnus Bishop of Antioch, which succeeded
Samosatenus, for which my margent cited Eusebius, in his seventh Book and nine
and twentieth Chapter. My Detector taxes me for citing Authors at random; as
Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 29. when as there are (he says) but six and twenty
Chapters; and for things which are not found in him; As if the man had
desperately sworn to write nothing but false. Trust not me, Reader; Trust
thine own eyes; Thou shall not find that Book of Vid. Eusebius. Edit. Basil.
Anno 1587.
Eusebius, to have one and thirty Chapters; and in the cited place thou shall
duly find the History of Domnus. Whose patience would not this impudency
move?

If I reckoned not Examples enough, or such as he likes not, (as unjustly seeming
litigious, there is choice enough of more; Tertullian, Prosper, Hilarie,
Eupsychus, Polycrates, and his seven Ancestors; To which let him add four and
twenty Diocesses at once in Germany, France, Spain, Anno 1057. of married
Clergymen, recorded by their own Fox Act and Mon. in hac quest.
Gebuilerus, and make up his mouth, with that honest confession of Auentine,
Auent. hist. Eoior. l. 5. Their Wives called, presbyterisse, ibid. etc. honesto
vocabulo, as he there speaks.
Sacerdotes illa tempestate public vxores, sicut caeteri Christiani habebant,
filios procreabant; Priests in those days publicly had Wives, as other
Christians had, and begat children; which the old Verse (if he had rather)
expresses in almost the same terms. Quondam praesbyteri poterant vxoribus vti:
which his Mantuan has yet spun in a finer thread, as we shall show in this
Section.

What Hodie apud Graecos Sacerdotes post susceptum ordinem ducere vxorem, sed
vnicam ac virginem, a Graecis didici. Proposit. Erasmicorum. censur. cum
declaratione. c. de caelibatu.
danger is there now therefore either of the breach of my promise to my worthy
Friend Master Doctor Whiting, or of my divorce, or of his victory? If the man
and his modesty had not been long since parted, these idle crackes had never
been.

But whereas this mighty Champion challenges me with great insultation in many
passages of his brauing Discourse, to name but one Bishop or Priest of note,
which after holy Orders conuersed coniugally with his Wife; without the
scandal of the Church, branding such (if any were) for infamous; and daring to
pawn his cause upon this trial; I do here accept his offer, and am ready
to produce him such an Example, as if all the Jesuits heads in the world stood
upon his shoulders, they could not tell how to wrangle against. I do not urge
to him that Prosper of Aquitaine, a Bishop and a Saint, whose Verses to his
Wife are famous, and imply their inseparable conversation.

Age iam precor mearum,
Comes irremotarerum, etc.
Nor yet the forenamed Hilarie, T^ vero siquid minus per atatem in hymno, and
Epistola intelligis.
Bishop of Poitiers, who in his old age (if that Epistle be worthy of any
credit) writing to his Daughter, confesses her years so few, that through the
incapacitie of her age, she might perhaps not understand the Hymn or Epistle;
of whom the honest Carmelite MANTVANVS could ingenuously confess: Non nocuit
tibi progenies, His children hurt him not, nor his Wife lawfully conjoined in
Wedlock. In those days God misliked not the Marriage Bed, nor the cradle, etc.
non obstitit vxor
Legitimo coniuncta thoro. Non horruit illa
Tempestate Deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas.


Nor Bishop Simplicius, of whom Sidon. Apol. Conc adiunct. Ep. 9. l. 7.
Sidonius gives this praise, that his Parents were eminent either in Cathedris,
or Tribunalibus, and that his Pedigree was famous either Episcopis, or
Praefectis: and for his Wife, that she was of the Stock of the PALLVDII, qui
aut literarum, aut altarium cathedras cum sui ordinis laud tenuerunt; of whom
also Sidonius can say, she did respondere Sacerdotijs vtriusque familiae,
answer the Priesthoods of either Family.

Nor Alcimus Alcim. Auit. Vien. Gal. Arch. l. ad sororem, circa An. 492.
Auitus the French Archbishop, who writing to his Sister, of her Parentage,
has thus, -- Stemma Parentum,
Quos licet antiquo mundus donarit honor,
Et titulis a primaeuo insigniuerit ortu,
Plus tamen ornantur sacris insignibus illi, etc.
I will not, dear Sister, make report of the Pedigree of thy great
Grandfathers, etc. whom the renowned life of Priests made famous to the World.
Nec iam atauos soror alma tibi proauosque retexam,
Vita Sacerdotum quos reddidit inclyta claros.


Nor Paulinus Bishop of Nola in Campania: to whom Ausonius writes, Tanaquil
tua nesciat istud; And Formidatamque iugatam obijcis, etc.

These and such like might suffice reasonable men; but since we have to do
with those Adversaries, whom Saint Paul calls (...); who, if we urge hundreds
of such evident examples, turn us off with bold shifts; and will needs put us
to prove those acts which seek secrecy; Let him and all his accomplices whet
their wits upon that clear and irrefragable place of Gregory Nazianzen, a man
beyond all exception; who brings in his Father Gregory, whom the world knows
to have been Bishop of the same See, speaking thus of him, (...)
(...). Greg. Naz. Car. de vita sua, Edit. Morel. Paris. To. 2. p. 9.

(...). etc.


Nondum tot annisunt tui, quot iam in sacris mihi sunt peracti victimis, etc.
That is, The years of thy age are not so many as of my Priesthood.

Words that will convince the most importunate gain-sayer, that GREGORY
NAZIANZEN was borne to his worthy father, after the time of his holy Orders.
And lest any man should suspect that this ((...) nondum) may reach only to the
birth, not to the begetting of Gregory Nazianzen; so as perhaps he might be
borne after his fathers Orders, begotten before them: Let him know (to make all
sure and plain) that Gorgonia and Caesarius the sister and brother of this
Gregory, were by the same father begotten afterward; as is evident both by
that Verse of Nazianzen; who speaking of his mother, as then childlesse when
she begged him of God, says, Ibid. de vita sua, etc. Iamb.
Cupiebat illa masculum
foetum domi
Spectare, magna vt pars
cupit mortalium.


Elias Cretens. In Orat. Greg. Naz. 19.
And the clear Testimony of ELIAS CRETENSIS, Quamuis enim si natiuitatem
spectes, etc. Although (says he) if you regard his birth, he was not the
only child of his Parents, forasmuch as after him both GORGONIA and CaeSARIVS
were borne. Thus he.

O infamous Gregory's, the scum of the Clergy! O irregular Father, that durst
defile his sacred function with so carnal an act! O shameless son, that
blushes not to proclaim his own sinful generation! Go now petulant Refuter,
and see whether you can either yield, or answer.

As for that glorious show of Antiquity wherewith C. E. hopes to bleare his
Readers eyes, gracing himself herein with the astipulation of our Reverend
Jewel; I need not return any other answer then of his Beatus Rhenanus:
Quanquam veteres omnes, etc. Arg. lib. Tert. Exhort. cast. matrimonio parum
aequi fuerint, etc.
Although all the Ancient, and HIEROME himself were no whit equal or
indifferent to Marriage; esteeming virginity and chastity very high; both
because they thought the Last-day was near at hand, as remembering that
sentence of S. PAVL, Tempus in collecto est; The time is short.
and because they saw many impediments grow from marriage, which marred the
purity of Christianity, in those days, especially, when Christians lived
amongst Heathens, and matched in marriage with them: Surely it is evident, that
for this cause HIEROME was in an ill name at Rome, etc. Thus he. We durst not
have said so much, for our selves. The highest Antiquity is ours, the later
had bin ours, if it had not bin upon these grounds which were then their own,
proper to the time, place, occasion.

SECT. IX.
I Descend to the Testimony of Gratian; Champion E. calls this, Picking of
Strawes. If picking of Strawes be boyes-play, and argue that they which use it
are foiled, and have lost all, as our Refuter merrily pipeth, let him
acknowledge how beggarly the proofs are grown of the martyrdom of their
Saintly Jesuits and Priests amongst us, did they not stoop to pick strawes,
to thresh out a miracle (when it was) for translating Father Garnet from a
Traitor to a Martyr; yea and that Chafe, the gullery whereof themselves smile
at here, is devoutly transported beyond the Seas, and enshrined for a sacred
relic, and proclaimed by their Kornma^nus for one of the great Wonders of the
Dead; Ridet aruspex vbi aruspicem viderit.

It is well that the great Compiler of the Canon Law of Rome is grown so base
with Catholic Priests. He witnesses plainly, that some Bishops of Rome were
the sons of Priests not spurious, but begot in lawful Wedlock; Did. 56.
Cenomanens em. etc.
Which was (according to Gratian) euery-where lawful to the Clergy, before the
prohibition. C. E. bites the lip at this authority, and first he tells us, it
is the Palea, Refut. p. 161.
not Gratian. But if this be chafe, there is no Corn. Reader, try by this the
egregious impudence of this fellow. Turn to the place, thou shall find the
words to be none but Gratians; and the notes allowed by public authority,
openly to confirm it: Hic aperte ostendit Gratianus se in ea fuisse opinione,
etc. Here GRATIAN openly shows that he was in that opinion, that heretofore
the Priests of the Latin Church might be married.

Refut. p. 162.
Secondly, my parenthesis displeases him ( As now, a days) But what needs this
quarrel? He must grant, if the Romish Priests have sons, they can be no
other then spurious. It is his best not to press this point too far. This
idle jealousy of his can argue no good. I touched not the continency of his
Paulus Quintus, so much as in my thought, I only wish that his Holiness would
bestow some of the offals of his Nephews great Benefices, upon this
Mass Priest for the reward of his superflouos Oleum peccatorum.

My third untruth, Refut. p. 163, 164, 105.
(and that a gross one) is, that I say many Bishops of Rome followed their
Fathers in the Pontifical Chair: whereas in this Chafe of Gratian, he
finds but one: Syluerius Pope, son of Syluerius Bishop of Rome. And what if
in his chafe he find but one, whiles I in my Corne-heape can find more? Did
I tie my self in this clause only to Gratian? Was not Pope John the Eleventh,
or, in some accounts, the Tenth, son to Pope Sergius? And is there no Chair
Pontifical but the Roman? Was not Theodorus Pope, son to Theodorus Bishop
of Jerusalem? Faelix the Third, son to Bishop Valerius? Pope Adrian the
Second, son to Bishop Taralus? His Platina can supply his Gratian in these.

What have I to do with his quarrels about Hosius, Faelix, Refut. p. 166.
Agapetus, Steven? They are their ownes; Let him wring Gratian by the ear,
till I feel: And surely, the poor Canonist bleedes on all hands. Bellarmine,
Baronius, Posseuine, and this stout Beagle, have every one a snatch at him;
and he must be content to go away with this gash, (We are not bound, to
follow him as an infallible Writer, but may with free liberty reject him.)
Yea, how merry does my Refuter make himself with his despised Gratian? Like a
Philistim he has pulled out the eyes of this Samson, and now makes sport with
him; If Doway like it well, it shall not be displeasing to us. The man (as ill
as he loves marriage) will needs make a match betwixt his Gratians Pope
Steven, and his Pope Ioane. Io Hymen! Was ever man so mad, to make himself
pastime with his own shame? Was the History of that their monstrous Papesse
of our making? Do not Sigebert M^rtin. Polon. Platin Mart. Minorit. Oath. Fri^.
Flores Temp. Petrarcha, etc.
the whole stream of their Writers of Chronicles, their own Bishops, Monks,
Recluses, Registers, record it openly to all posterity, without the
contradiction of the next ages, yea of any, till this last? Let them take to
themselves therefore, this fruitful Successor in the infallible Chair; she is
their own, they may dispose of her where they list; and since my Refuter will
find out a match for her out of the Chair of exploration, why should not we
dance at the wedding? Why do not we help him to a piece of an Epithamium?

Papa pater patrum,
Papissae pandito partum.
Flor. Temp. Impr. vlt. 1486.
A flower that never came out of Luthers Poesy.

SECT. X.
I See, that whiles I follow this Wrangler by the foot, I am become insensibly
tedious. The residue of his long-some Traatise is spent upon the Council of
Constantinople. GREGORY'S charge, Isidores rule, Hulderick, Hildebrand,
Dunstan, and Anselme, and the estate of our forefathers in the English
Clergy. The discussion of all which, as not being essential to our business,
(except only the last) will admit more brevity of dispatch. The vital parts
of our cause being secured, there will be less danger in the remoter limbs;
which yet, if our Target guard not* our sword shall. In all these, it shall be
best to reduce his Cauils unto heads, that we may crop them with more speed and
ease; Only I must crave leave to dwell somewhile in the last.

Council. 6. Constantin. in Trulio.
Concerning the Council of Constantinople (after some idle mis-taken discourse
of the occasion thereof) he insists upon these four points: First, Refut. p.
168, vsque ad 174.
That it was not general: Secondly, Not the sixth: Thirdly, Not peremptorily
ours: Fourthly, Not by them defaced, or torn out.

First, it is no trusting what a Roman Priest says in choler of a Gr^cian
Council. The Greek Church is equally in their Books with ours; and this
Council, with the Synod of Dort. It is an eternal quarrel, which all the
vassals of Rome have against this Council, that it equalled the Bishop of
Constantinople, with the Roman: A crime that cannot be forgiven.

The inuectiues of our Popish Divines, especially Pighius, Vid. Bell. de Romans
Pont. l. 2. cap. 18.
Bellarmine, Baronius, have made good that note of Balsam. in Phot. Nomoc.
Balsamon, Occidentales Episcopi, etc. The Western Bishops (says he) that is,
the Italian or Latin (Ab huius Synodi Canonibus oportune icti) finding
themselves galled with the Canons of this Synod, have given it out not to be
General: Thus he. And why was it not general? It had no form of a Council
(says my Refuter) No Legates of the Pope, Refut. p. 174.
no inuitation of the Latin Bishops, neither were any of the other Patriarchs
present, or consenting. Every word a shameless untruth; Basilius Bishop of
Gortyna the Metropolis of Crete, Balsam. ibid.
(which was then under the Archbishop of Rome) and the Bishop of Rauenna (says
Balsasamon) were there to represent the Roman Church; The Bishops of
Thessalonica, Sardinia, Heraclea, Corinth, were there and then the Popes
Legates. And for the Patriarchs; Basilius (says the same Balsamon) Bishop of
Gortyna, which was present in the name of the Roman Church, is found to have
subscribed after the four Patriarchs, and certain other Metropolitans. What
can be more plain? But S. Bid (says C. E. Refut. p. 171.
) tells us that JUSTINIAN the Younger commanded SERGIVS Bishop of Rome, to be
carried to Constantinople, because he would not subscribe huic erraticae
Synodo. Still mistaking and ignorance. His Surius and Turrian could have taught
him out of Theophanes, this was another, a Pseudo-Synode, which the same
Justinian had in his first government called in favor of the Monothelites;
which was some years after the true Synod under CONSTANTINE the Bearded.
Constantinus Pogon^tus.
This man's wit wanders with his erraticall Synod.

SECT. XI.
FOr the number of, Sixth, Quini* sextam.
we need not be scrupulous; Whether it were the fifth, or sixth, or both (as
Balsomon calls it, (...)) or neither. It is enough for me, that Gratian,
Caranza, Espencaeus, and other his own great Masters call it familiarly both
Sixth, and General; In this I cannot but be safe enough. I grant, that (to
speak precisely) the sixth Synod under Constantine published no Canons, but
afterward many of the same Fathers, which had formerly met in the sixth Synod,
and others, to the number of 227. being called together by the then penitent
and restored Justinian ((...)) gathered up, Slit-nose.
and set forth with universal consent, the Canons formerly made, and by them
re-enforced. But what need I trouble my self with any other answer to all
these windy cauils of my Adversary, then that which Tharasius himself, the
Patriarch of Constantinople, has most fully given; Gratian. did. 16. Habeo
libru^.
Quae est haec ignorantia, etc? What ignorance (says he) is this, wherewith
many men are tainted, about these Canons? For it is a scandal to doubt whether
they were the Canons of the sixth Synod. Let these men therefore know, that the
sixth Synod was gathered in the time of CONSTANTINE, against those which ascribe
one only action and will to Christ; The Fathers then condemning those
Heretics, and confirming the Oxthodoxe Faith about the fourteenth year of
CONSTANTINE, returned home: After four or five years, the same Fathers (being
met under JUSTINIAN the son of CONSTANTINE) set forth the foresaid Canons;
Neither let any man doubt of this; For those very same Fathers which in the
time of CONSTANTIN subscribed, did also under JUSTINIAN subsigne this present
Paper; which thing is evident enough by the unchangeable likeness of their
own hands. So he. Whether therefore the computation of Tharasius or
Theophanes, be followed, we have what we desired; The same acts are set
forth if not by altogether the same person, and Did. 16. vbi supr.
Gratians judgment is herein ours.

SECT. XII.
FOr the third point. Refut. p. 175. vsque ad 182.
To prove that this Synod is not peremptorily for us; H^e urges diverse other
Canons of it, which in other things sound against us. Then, he shows the
instanced thirteenth Canon, not to be so absolutely and fully ours, as is
pretended.

First, where finds he this Law, that no man may allege one testimony of a
Father, or a Council, but he must be tied to justify all the rest? Himself
would be the first that would shrink at this condition. This challenge is
unreasonable, and might turn off all allegation. For example, If a man should
allege the Nicene Council, Canon. 1. against any superstitious Fool that
has made himself a corporal Eunuch, might he straight for his justification
fly upon the last Canon of that Council, unnecessarily inioyning us to stand
at our Sundays Prayers. Synod. La^dic. Can. 20. Can. 35. Can. 60. Can. 37.
Or if a man should cite the Synod of Laodicea against a Deacon (though a
Cardinal) sitting before a Priest, or against the worshipping of Angels; were
it meet to choke him with a return of the last Canon of that Council,
forbidding the Apocryphal books; or the 37. Canon, forbidding his Holiness
to take so much as a Bible in his solemnity, from the hands of Jews: If a man
shall allege a testimony of Cyprian, were it fit to vpbraid him with the
error of re-baptization? Or if of Augustine, with the error of the necessity
of Infants communicating? This is clauum clauo. For me, I have undertaken no
such task to warrant them that once said true, from ever erring: I do
therefore herein scorn my silly Refuters compassion, Refut. p. 181.
who is so far from crushing me in this, that he hurts none but his own
fists, in beating them about his own hard head. For, if the pressing us with
the authority of some of these Canons, be to justify the rest, then the 36.
Canon of that Council bears him and his Rome down before it, whiles it sets
Constantinople cheek by jole with it* maugre. A point, which rather then they
will yield, they will be glad to abate us all the rest: This we are sure of,
that the alleged Canon is peremptorily, fully, cautelously ours: For this, my
credit is at the stake, Refut. p. 182. vsque ad 192.
which my Refuter pleases himself with the hope to impair, insulting in the
idle fancy of a just advantage, whiles he shows the Canon to come short in
some points of our requisition and practice; For there, Bishops are excepted,
and the freedom of Marriage after Ordination.

Reader, compare the Canon with the words of my engagement, I undertook thou
should find no decree could be made more peremptory, more cautelous, more
full and absolute for the lawfulness of the marriage of Ecclesiastical
persons.

For first; The Fathers profess herein to cross the practice and decree of
the Roman Church. Secondly, They profess the conjugal cohabitations of sacred
persons to stand by the Apostolic Canons, and to be a sincere, exquisite, and
orderly constitution. What could be said more? They (thirdly) ratify this
liberty for ever. They (fourthly) give charge that no man by the cohabitation
with his lawful wife, be hindered from ascending to the highest degree of holy
Orders.(Fifthly) That in the time of their Ordination. it be not so much as
required of them, to abstain from the lawful companying with their Wives;
which were (say they) to offer injury to marriage ordained by God, and blessed
by his presence; and to cross him that said, Those whom God has joined
together, let no man separate* and, Marriage is honorable Amongst all, etc.
(Sixthly) That if any man shall presume so far, as to offer to debar any
Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon, from the conjunction and society with his
lawful Wife, he shall be deposed; Or if any Priest or Deacon shall voluntarily
cast off his wife, upon pretense of Religion, that he shall be suspended, and
(if he go on) deposed. Judge now whether herein my protestation have erred;
Not that there can be no circumstance devised, as of the extent of the persons,
or time, or manner, wherein curiosity might enlarge the scope of this liberty
(so I never meant:) but if this one point (That the marriage of persons
Ecclesiastical is lawful) can be more fully and warily set down, let me
lie open to censure; if not, hate the vanity of this idle Mountebanke, and
confess with Aristophanes, There is no salve for the sting of a Sycophant.
Refut. p. 192.193.194.
Aduersus ictum Sycophantae non inesse pharmacum. The Parlamentall Law in the
time of King Edward, was (I grant) more full in extending the liberty, could
not be more full in auouching the lawfulness of our Marriages. Where I must
take leave to tell my Refuter, that the comparison he presumes to make of King
Edwards Parliament, with the proceedings of Jack Straw, Wat Tiler, etc. is,
like himself, sedicious and traiterous. And what marvel if such repyners blow
out the foggy vaporous blast of sedicious words, against our highest Court of
Parliament, which some of their Companions have attempted to blow up with a
blast of fire? This Constitution was not civil only, but Synodicall: And may
not a lawful Synod or Convocation, with the concurrence of the three States,
and the sway of Royal authority, make or re-establish a Law agreeable to the
Word of GOD, and the received practice of their Progenitors, but every
Iacke-sawce of Rome shall thus odiously dare to control and disgrace it? One
of his Capitoline gods of Rome called England his Ass; Etiam Asinus meus
recalcitrat?
So it was whiles it might bear nothing but his Trumperie, and go but where
his Grooms would either lead, or drive it: now that it has taken heart, and
(with Cardinal Campegius his Sumpter) cast off this base lode; and has happily
ouerrunne this servitude; they are ready, with the Keeper of metamorphosed
Apuleius, to seek a desperate remedy from the next Tree.

SECT. XIII.
Refut. p. 195. vsque ad 198.
SVch then is the Canon of Constantinople, which therefore (I said) because they
cannot blemish enough, they have indignely torn out of the Counsels: And here
is much vehement and brauing Rhetorik spent upon me as a shameless Writer; and
this passage as the grossest lie, that ever was published by Protestant, and
now I am coniured, how blemished? how torn? what? where? how? when? Because
innocence is bold, the man will be bold, that he may seem innocent; but he
shall well find that facing will not serve his turn. Is he so ignorant as not
to know that all his great Baron. An. 58 nu. 18. and Bell. l. 1. de verbo Dei,
c. 2. and 2. de To. Pont. c. 17. l. 1. de Conc. c. 7. l. 1. de Cleric. c. 21.
Bin. Tom. 1. p. 14. etc
Masters discard this whole Council as spurious? Does he not knew that it is
(if not torn) yet left out in diverse of their Editions of the Councels? Let
him learn, if he know not, that their ancient collection of Canons, which was
called Codex, or Corpus Canonum, which was in use in Leo the Fourths time,
mentioned by Gratian, did. 20 c. de libellis, and printed Anno 1526 at Mentz,
and reprinted at Paris, in o lauo, Anno 1609. omits it. The other Collection
of Councels by Isidorus Mercator, which began to be received about Charles the
Great his Time, wherein, besides the forged Decretall Epistles of diverse Popes,
are the Canons of many Provincial Councels of Afrike, France, Spain, etc. set
forth by Iac. Merlin at Coleine, 1530. and which has been usually received in
the Western Church, in the times of the Schoolmen, who usually (as do also
Iuo and Burchardus) allege them, likewise omits it. The two Editions of the
Councels by P. Crabbe, likewise omit it; and if it had not been for stark
shame, so would the rest also. Does he not know what his Anastatius and
Numbertus protest of some particular Canons, and this for one, Did. 16. In
No^s. These Chapters we do altogether reject. Let them by no means be
received.
Haec capitula, omnino refutamus, and, nullatenus recipiantur. And for this
very particular Canon; If he know not, There is first an attempt of a double
blemish to be cast upon it, The one, in that they read it so, as if the
Roman Clergy professed quod copulentur vxoribus non suis, That they are joined
with Wives not their own.
as by way of scorn; whereas the words run, se d^inceps cum vxoribus suis
non congressuros.

The other, in that some of their Authors would refer Sacrorum virorum to
Constitutiones, not to Nuptias* marring quite the sense of the Canon. This for
the blemish. For the wiping out of this very Canon, and denying it place with
the rest; Let him hear his own ^sp. l. 1. de Conti^.
Espencaeus, telling him, that even they which allowed this Synod rejected by
Pighius, Vt totum scilicet profanum, error^^, ^nsolentiae, impudicitiae plenum,
manifestae falsitatis Apocryphum, and corruptissimum.
and others, yet hunc Canonem duriter tractant, etc. Use this Canon somewhat
hardly, as altogether profane, full of error, insolence, immodestie, manifest
falsehood, Apocryphal, and most corrupted; and his ingenuitie is feign to
plead, in conclusion, Canonem hunc legitimum esse non gratis, sed necessario
donemus* That they must (not upon courtesy, but of necessity) yield this
Canon for legitimate, not suppositicious. And what is this in my Detectors
Construction, but a cashiering of this Canon out of the Councels, against the
authority of Gratian, and the Greek Copies? Lastly, the eyes of learned
Chemnitius, are undoubted witnesses to us, what credit soever they find with
this Italianate generation; In ^omis Conciliorum prorsus expunxerunt, and
omiserunt hunc Canonem: Chemnit hist. de Caelib. Sacerd. p. 65.
In the Tomes of the Councels they have altogether wiped out, and omitted this
Canon: So as if we had those blurred Copies which he saw bleeding from the
hand of the Inquisitors, there could be no fence for this charge, but that
which serves for all, impudent denyals.

Neither needed my Refuter to take it so highly, Refut. p. 196.
that I objected to them the tearing, blemishing, and defacing of this, and
other Records against them; Ere long the World shall see, Erasm. ^ang. in
N^ceph (...). Sigebert. ^.
to the foul shame of these selfe-condemned Impostors, that in the Writings
both of ancient and later Authors, they have blotted out more then an hundred
places (some of them containing above two sheets apiece) concerning this very
point, which we have in hand.

This is no news therefore; Neither needed my Detector to make it so dainty.

SECT. XIIII.
^
I Cited from Gratian the free Confession of Pope Steven the Second,
acknowledging the open liberty of Marriage to the Clergy of the Lasterne
Church; Matrimonio copulantur. They are ioyne^ in Marriage.
A place truly irretragable; My Refuter first excepts against the number,
telling us that Steven the Second lived but three or four days at the most,
and therefore he could not be the man; what spirit of Cauillation possesses
this Mass Priest? He cannot but know that his own Sigibertus ascribes five
years to this Steven, and Hermannus, six: But five is the least: So also
Funccius in his C^onol.
And his Binius tells him that the Steven he speaks of (sitting but two days
exclusiuely) ^in. Steph. 2. A pluribus e Serie Romans Pontificum dim^ttitur.
is by the most omitted in the Catalogue of the Roman Bishops: whence it is
that the Chronicle names not two Steuens betwixt the first and the fourth. But
this man (he says) called no Council; what is that to me? Gratian affirms
it, I do not. Let him fall out, for this, with his friends. And now according
to the old wont, (after he has tried to shift off, Matrimonio copulantur,
with the sleeulesse evasion of a false gloss (.i. vtuntur) which Caietan has
sufficiently confuted for us) he falls to a flat reiection of Gratian, and tells
us, out of BELLARMINE, Caiet. Opus. Castit. Refut. p. 203.
That Canon to be perhaps of no authority, but an error of the Collectors.
Good God! what face have these men? That none of their received Authors can
be produced against them, but they are straight counterfeit; and yet the very
same, where they speak for them, canonical? Their Clyents, if they might but
know these tricks, would be ashamed of their Patrones.

Refut. p. 204.
That the Clergy not only of the East might Matrimonio copulari, but of the
West also might Matrimonium contrahere (which are the words they are unwilling
to know in their own Canon Law) show sufficiently that they not only were
married of old, but might marry; But for the Eastern Clergy, it is freely
granted by all ingenuous spirits; in so much as Espencaeus tells us, that never
Author, either old or new imputed this for a fault unto the Greek Church,
that their Clergy was married.

Refut. p. 206.207.
What shall we say then to this bold Bayard, that compares this toleration of
Marriage in the Greek Church, with MOSESES permission of the Bill of Divorce
unto the Jews? As if Marriage had been only tolerated, not allowed; as if
unjust Divorce were a fit match for lawful Wedlock; whiles he here talks of
Duritia cordis, well may we talk of his Duritia frontis. It is true, every
Church, every Country, has their Customs and Fashions; which Ioannes Mayor
pleades against Bedaes Censure of the English and Scottish and British
observation of Easter,) and may be as justly in this case pleaded for us; This
was of old no less ours, then the Greeks; And if any Church will be
prescribing against God, we have no such Custom, nor the Church of God;
Refut. p. 207.208.
But what a ridiculous insinuation it is, that the Greek Priests are dispensed
with by supreme authority Ecclesiastical? Forsooth, by the Pope of Rome.
Feign would I learn where upon what terms, at what rate the Graecians
purchased in the Court of Rome Dispensation for their Marriages.

I would my Refuter had the Office appointed him to shuffle over all the
Records of the Apostolic Chamber, till he find such a grant made propter
duritiem cordis; then should a great deal of good Paper escape the misery of
being besmeared by his Pen.

What strange fantastike Dreams are put upon the World? Where the Papacy
cannot prevail, there forsooth his Holiness dispenses. The Greek Church
admits married Priests, the Pope dispenses with them; They deny and defy
the Popes Supremacies; I trow he dispe^seth with them for that too: and why not
with the Church of England? We pay no Peter Pence; we run not to
Rome-market to buy trash, I hope his Holiness dispenses with us for these
Peccadillo's; we take liberty here to marry rather then to burn, why should
we not hope to receive that Dispensation whereof we heard the news of late
from a poor Bankrupt Carryer? Ad populum phaleras.

SECT. XV.
AS for the Contradiction, Refut. p. 209. vsque ad 214.
which his sagacitie finds (not without much scorn) in the two Parlamentall
Laws of the Father, and the Son King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the
Sixth; whereof the one forbids, the other allows the Marriage of
Ecclesiastiques, it needed not have bin any wonder to a learned Priest, which
might have known Councels enough, diametrally opposite to each other: what fault
was it in the recouerd blind man, that he first saw men walk like Trees, and
after like men? Even the best man may correct himself. Neither was there here
any contradiction. King Henry spoke with the Roman Church, (whose one half
of him then was) King Edward spoke with the Scriptures, and purer antiquity:
King Henry never said, God disallowed these Marriages, King Edward never said,
they were allowed by the Romish Church.

And why may not we draw out the like absurdity out of Queen Mary's
Parliaments; wherein she reuersed many things established by King Edward; as in
this very Case concerning Marriage of Priests? May not we hereupon ask, What
will you say to such Parliaments wherein the Brother is thwarted by the Sister,
and that with the consent of the most of the same Parliament Men enacting in a
few years contrarily?

Or as if it were any news with Popes rescindere acta praedecessorum; even of
those which immediately preceded them? Who knows not the Story of Pope
Formosus, and Stephanus, and the many and strong contradictions of decrees in
the frequent, long, and desperate Schisms of the Romish Church?

This lash is indifferently fit for all backs; let him that has no cause to
smart, complain.

What needed this foul mouth then to break forth into so palpable slanders of
that holy Archbishop and Martyr Doctor Cranmer, Refut. p. 212.
charging him with deep dissimulation, in soothing up both these Kings in
their contrary Decrees? When it is most manifest, that this worthy
Metropolitan was the only man, which durst for three days together, openly in
Parliament oppose those wickedly proiected Articles of King Henry; and this in
special. In so much, as he was willed out of the house, till the act might
pass; which (notwithstanding he well knew King Henry) he stoutly refused.
Would this man (think we) care to belie all the Saints in Heaven for an
advantage? What will not he dare to say, that will object inconstancy to him
who sealed Gods Truth with his blood?

The contradictions and weaknesses that he finds in this Synod of
Constantinople, Refut. p. 216.218.
do no whit move us; If he can allow and commend, and cite against us the
seven and thirtieth Canon, of the Council, for the worship of the Cross, or
the fourscore and fifteenth for the holy Chrisme, and yet disallow the
thirteenth; why, may not we by the same Law cite and approve the thirteenth
Canon against them, and yet disauow those other?

SECT. XVI.
Refut. p. 220.
NEither was it for want that I mentioned only this Council of Constantinople;
The more ancient Constitutions of Ancyra, and Gangra; and the first and fourth
of Toledo, besides the Apostolical and Nicene, might have bin urged by me. It
was not mine intent (with this babbler) to say more then all; but only to take
an handful out of the Sackes mouth for a taste to the buyer; That fair
flourish therefore of Councels which he musters up against me herein, will be
but, Arma armis contraria: Refut. p. 225.
Wherein since my Refuter will needs make himself so busy, let me entreat him
by the way to compare the Council of About Ann. 324.
Gangra, with the Decree of his Pope Hildebrand; The Council says flatly, Si
quis discernit Presbyterum coniugatum, etc. If any man make difference of a
married Priest, so as that by occasion of his marriage he ought not to offer,
and does therefore abstain from his oblation, let him be accursed; But, his
Hildebrand vxoratos Sacerdotes a diuino remouit officio, and laicis missa eorum
audire inter dixit, nouo exemplo, etc. that is, removed married Priests from
their divine office, and forbad Laymen to hear their Masses, says Sigeb. de
Gregor. Pap* An. 1074. Idem and Math. Paris.
SIGEBERT; Therefore by the sentence of the Council, Pope Hildebrand is
accursed; And accursed for that very point which made him a Romish Saint. When
my Refuter has gnawed awhile upon this bone, he may hope to be rewarded with a
crust.

Refut. p. 225. vsque ad 234.
And now for his Councels, to make up the number he names for the foreman of
the quest, the Council of Ancyra (somewhat before the Nicene) one who has
passed a direct verdict against him, allowing Deacons, upon their profession,
to marry. The miserable euasions of his Vid. ^in. ibid.
Binius, and Baronius, in this point, argue both a mind and a cause desperate;
whiles (without all color of warrant) they imperiously turn down these
married Deacons to a lay-communion, and feign this liberty only in a forced
Ordination, not in a voluntary.

Refut. p. 226.
As for that first Canon which he cites of the Council of Arles, That a man
cannot be made Priest in the band of Wedlock, unless he promise conversion:
It is a gross counterfeit: And, that the world may see we use not to pass
these censures without evident reason; It mentions the Arians which were not
yet hatched; It mentions Bonosus, which lived long after in the time of
Innocent 1. It mentions the Concilium Vasense, which was yet later, in the time
of Leo the First. When his Authors can agree of the time, and make good the
Synod, he shall receive an answer to it: In the mean time, it was either
before the Council of Nice, or after it; if before, it was corrected by the
Nicene; a Provincial must yield to a General; if after, it was presumptuous,
in decreeing that peremptorily which the general determinately left free.

The Council of Arausica is cyted by him in direct terms opposite to the
Ancyran. Refut. p. 227.
He must make them friends, ere he can bring it forth against an enemy. As
for the maine stay of this cause of his, Carthaginen. 5. African. Can. 3. sub
Coelest. Can. 37.
which is the two Councels of Afric, lent him by his Bellarmine, Secundum
proprios terminos, vel propria statura.

Where they read it, Secundum priora statuta.


it is grounded (as our learned Iunius has probably answered) upon mere
corruption, and mis-taking; the Latin Copies taking propria, for priora: The
charge of the Council being only, that Deacons, Priests, Bishops ((...)
(...)) Acording to their turns of ministration, should abstain from their
Wives, which no modest Divine will not willingly subscribe unto. Moreover, I am
sure, if the one word be not corrupted, the other is ambiguous, and may as well
signify Balsamons (...). And if these Canons were first Latin, and after
translated into the Greek; yet the Greek shows what was the first Latin, and
may well correct the mistaken Original. But to discuss the several Councels,
which he only thinks fit to name, and utter by wholesale against us, were a
work for a Volume apart. The old word is, Dolosus versatur in generalibus,
There is deceit in generalities; It were easy to show that some of these are
impertinent, others plainly against them; others corrupted to speak against
us, as that of Mentz, and Worms, whereof in the sequel; others partial to the
faction of Rome. So then, here Obruimur numero; He thinks to carry it by
number, not by weight; where with us, one piece of Gold is worth a whole bag
of Counters. But, if after the Tyrannical impositions of his Siricius and
Innocentius took place in the Church, he could name for every one of his
provincial Synods, an hundred, it were all one to us; we are not the worse,
his cause no whit the better. This tradition, after that in an emulation of the
Montanisticall vaunt of Virginity, it had gotten head in the Church, ran like
fire in a train; Those provinces that held correspondence at Rome, according
to the charge of Ad similitudinem sedis Apostolicae, eos cuncta obseruare
constituat. Greg. Epist. l. b. 3.34.
Gregory, spoke as she did prompt them; What should they do but follow their
Mistress? The Greek Church, and those that either had dependence upon it, or
which had continued in the succession of this custom of marriage, still
maintayning the lawfulness and use of it inviolable. So then, in sum. This
he has gained, which I am ready ever to auow; The ancientest Councels are
against him; The later are against us; and God with us against 6the^; Of which
we have Gnapheus Orat. in desens. Io. Pistorij. Woe to you rebellious Children,
that you should hold your Council, and not of me.
learned to say, Vae vobis filij desertores, vt saceretis Conciliu^ and non ex
me. And if his Mistress of Rome have elsewhere found vassals, it follows not
that we may not be free. Yea, it is more then manifest, by those evidences we
have already produced from their own records, that notwithstanding this cogged
number of his prouincial Synods, Priuata decreta.
and Private decrees (as Volusian terms them) all the time of the first 700.
years, the freedom of this practice continued in many parts of the Christian
world; Insomuch as amongst the rest, the Church of Armenia, for the time of the
years mentioned, vpheld a Tradition, Council. Constant. 6. Can. 33. Quoniam
Cog^uimus in Armeniorum regione eos solum in Cleri Ordinem referri, qui sunt ex
genere Sacerdotali.
not to admit of any Clergy man, but those which descended ex genere
Sacerdotali, descended from Priests; Witness the Fathers of Constantinople, in
their three and thirtieth Canon. Where my Detector should do well to inquire
what Balsamons Clerici Chryso-bullati means; Sure I am, that this example
sufficiently proves the practical liberty of those Churches in the questioned
limits of the seven first Centuries. To which we may add the Church of
Bulgaria, out of his Did. 28.
Gratian; The Church of Germany out of Annal. Boyorum, supra.
Auentine; The Church of Ireland out of Vita s. Malach. Lib. Synod. Wigorn.
Eccles. Canon. Council. Hybern. sub Patricio, Auxilio Isernino. Quicunque
Clericus ab ostiario vsque ad Sacerdotem sine tunica visus fuerit, etc. and
vxor eius sine velato capite ambulauerit, pariter a laicis contemnantur, etc.
Matthew. Park. Def. of Pr. Mar.
Bernard, who confesses the Episcopal See of Armach to have been furnished
with a lineall descent of Bishops for eight generations, before the time of his
Malachias; which were still both vxorati and literati. How those men were
Bishops, and yet sine ordinibus, is a riddle which (I confess) I cannot aread.
Perhaps, they were without Roman Orders, but if they were not Clerks after the
then Irish fashion, what needed they be Literati, that they might be Bishops?
The Church of our Britain (as we shall see in the Process) and others. These
are more then enough to let the World see this restraint, for all this pretense
of Provincial and partial Councels never universally obtained.

Sect. XVII.
Refut. p. 235.
YEt the man having unmercifully crushed me in pieces with this empty bladder of
windy and worthless authority, crows over me, thus, in conclusion, And
truly to me he seems not to be more mad, then blind; for otherwise he
would never have proclaimed this freedom of seven hundred years, seeing the
very form of words used by his own sacred Council, does so strongly withstand
his fond collection; For there it is decreed, Qui sunt in sacris, etc. We will
that the marriages of such as be in holy Orders, from this time forward be
firm and valid; For in case this freedom had been common before: why did
they say, Deinceps, from this time forward? Thus he. Wherein I would his
Superiors did but see how kindly he buffets himself. For if this be the force
of Deinceps, or A modo, From this time forward.
I thus argue against him; He has pleaded before, that neither this nor any
other Church ever allowed or ever practiced the celebration of marriage after
Ordination; Now, if he turn to the sixth Canon of this Council of
Constantinople, he shall find Decernimus* vt nulli deinceps hypodiacono, etc.
We decree that from hence-forward no Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest may marry
after his Ordination; Therefore by the force of his inference before this time
(for almost seven hundred years) this was commonly practiced. And now to
answer my Refuters Deinceps: If his wit had been any way matchable with his
malice, he might have seen that this Deinceps had relation to the Roman
Church, not to the Greek; For, (if he know not) this Synod meant to prescribe
Laws to his Mistress, and to correct that their injurious Tradition of
restraynt, and to enlarge this liberty through all the Territories of the
Universal Church; For this purpose is the, Deinceps, of the Constantinopolitan
Fathers, who well knew, how much it needed in the Western Church, which had
inthralled their Clergy in the bondage or that unlawful prohibition. So as
the Refuter, whiles he plays upon my want of Logic, in not descrying the
dangerous necessity of this inference upon me, plainly bewrayes his own
want of brains, in not descrying the Folly of his objection; Refut. p. 236.
and where he tells me (like a dull Iester) That all the Walls and Windows,
from the Hall to the Kitchen, may mourn to see an Vniuersitie-man have so
little wit, I must tell him that all the Doors of Doway may leap off their
hindges, to see their Champion so childishly absurd.

Refut. p. 237.
Now then to answer his idle Epilogue; If it appear that his own Pope and
Canonist, and the received Histories of the Church, and the examples of
several nations and persons acknowledge this ancient liberty both in the
Eastern and (some) Western Churches de facto; And Moses and the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles, the ancient Councels, with this sixth of
Constantinople, approve it de iure; it follows that the necessary imposition
of professed continency, is but a part of that sour milk wherewith the
Shee-Wolfe of the Seuen-hils feeds the faction of her Romulists and Rhemists,
and none of that wholesome sustenance which God and his purer Church have
provided for their Children.

THE HONOR OF THE MARRIED CLERGY maintained, etc. The third Book.
SECT. I.
THe Marriage of Ecclesiastiques which had the common allowance of the first
Times, had in some parts but the conniuence of the subsequent, and the
Prohibition of the last. Those Churches that were not parties to the faction of
Rome, could not but be much moved with so peremptory a decree of a famous
Council, reducing them, in this point, to the exactness of Apostolic
institution, and professing to rectify that Roman deuiation; No marvel
therefore, if not long after, there insued a collision of opposite parts, and
much scuffling betwixt the abettors of Antichristian servitude, Refut. p. 241.
and Evangelical liberty; whom this Hedge-creeper dare term incontinent
Grecians, Schismatikes, Heretics; His Pen is no slander: The multitude of his
Synodes, wherein was such reiteration of the same Law, shows the opposition
which it still found in the Church, and the preuayling use of the contrary
practice.

Refut. p. 243.
The Epistle of Pope Gregory the third, to the Clergy of Bauaria, which gives
that disiunct charge, Of either living chastely, or marrying a wife whom they
may not divorce, is no where (forsooth) extant, because he finds it not in his
Binius, or Baronius; as if no water had gone beside their Mill; and here I am
threatened with the Cornelian Law for forgery; no less crime: To avoid the
peril whereof, let my farseene Detector turn to the Bauarian Annals of Auent.
Boyorum Annot. l. 3.
Auentine, in the third Book, there he shall find it; An Epistle sent to
Viuilus, and the other Clergy of Bauaria, by the hands of Martinian, George,
Dorotheus, a Bishop, Priest, Deacon, with this express disjunction, Aut cast
viuat, aut vxorem ducat, etc. Refut. p. 244.
That which he brings from the successor of this Gregory, Zacharias, shows
what his Pope wished, when he had gotten better footing in Germany, 2but the
success makes for us; for B. Boniface either never durst, or at least never
did urge these Rules to his Germans. So, I hope, his mouth is stopped for my
forged Testimony of his Gregory, which could not in his conceit be other,
because he never saw it peep forth before this in other men's books. Ywis
nothing ever looked forth of the Press, that escaped that bookish eye: witness
the next passage, which if his Superiors could have had the leisure to have
viewed, they had blushed at their Champion. Refut. p. 245.
This charge of GREGORY (I said) was according to that rule of Clerks, cited
from ISIDORE, and renewed in the Council of Mentz; but by our iuggling
Adversaries clipped in the recital: Here the man cries out, as before, of
forgerie, so now of ignorance, telling his Readers, that I have only taken this
upon trust from another note-booke. Reader, by this judge of the spirit of my
Detractor. It is true; Isidore wrote no Book of this title: But in the second
Book of his Ecclesiastical Offices, he makes the title of his second Chapter,
De Regulis Clericorum; Of the Rules of Clerks. From this Chapter, I cite a
confessed passage, and am thus censured; whereas the Council of Mentz cites it
by this very style, Sicut in Regula Clericorum dictum est; As it is said in the
Rule of Clerks. Is it simplicity that he knows not this title of Isidore? or
maliciousness, that he conceales it? One of them is unavoidable. It is clear
then, to his shame (if he have any) that the testimony is aright cited; and
is it less clear that it is maimed, and cut off by the hammes in their
Moguntine Council? Compare the places, Cont. Mogunt. 1.
the fraud shall be manifest. That Council in the tenth Chapter professes to
transcribe ( verbatim) the words of Isidore in the forecited Tract; and where
Isidore says, Castimoniam inuiolati 2corporis perpetuo conseruare studcant,
aut certe vnius matrimony vinculo foederentur; Let them live chaste, or marry
but one. Their good Clerks have utterly left out the latter clause, and make
Isidore charge his Clerks with perpetual continency; Let them live chaste. He
that denies this, let him deny that there is a Sun in the heaven, or light in
that Sun; what need I say more? Let the Books speak.

Here my Refuter does so shuffle and cut, that any man may see he speaks
against his own heart; for (to omit his strayned misse-interpretation of
Isidore, since we now contend not of the sense, but of the citation) how
poorly does he salve up the credit of his Moguntine Fathers, whiles he says,
Refut. p. 246, and 249.
ISIDORE spoke in general, the Fathers in that Council more strictly; when he
that has but one half of an eye may see, that both speak in one latitude of
the same persons? Those Fathers giving the same title to that Chapter, and
professing to follow the Letters and Syllables of Isidore; both name only
Clericos in that rule without distinction. Away then with this graceless
facing of wilful frauds in your faithless Secretaries, which have also fetched
two Canons out of Carthage to Worms; and learn to be ashamed of your gross
falsifications, and injurious expurgations; else doubtless the World will be
ashamed of you.

SECT. II.
I Did but name Huldericus his Epistle in mine, as a witness, Refut. p. 252,
to 282.
not as the foundation of my cause; my Refuter spends but one and thirty whole
Pages upon him: How else should he have made a Volume? In all this what says
he? Little in many words; and the same words thrice over for failing.

And first, he wonders at my extreme prodigality of credit, and fearednesse
of conscience, in citing an Epistle so convicted by Bellarmine, Baronius,
Eckius, Faber, Fitz-Simons the Jesuit, and others. Why does he not wonder that
the Moon will keep her pace in the sky, whiles so many Dogs bark at her
below? When these Proctors of Rome have said their worst, there is more true
authority in the very face of this Letter, and better Arguments in the body of
it, then in an hundred Decretal Epistles which he adoreth. Let the World wonder
rather at his shamelessness, who relating the occasion of this fable (as he
terms it) faynes it to be only a Lutheran fiction to cover their incestuous
marriages, whereas their own Cardinal Aeneas Syluius, almost two hundred
years ago, mentions it, and reports the argument of it; whereas it is yet
extant (as Illyricus) in the Libraries of Germany; whereas Hedio found an
ancient Copy of it in Holland; and our John Bale; Archbishop Parker, B.
Jewel, Io. Fox, had a Copy of it, remarkable for reverend Antiquity, in
aged Parchment here in England; which, I hope to have the means to produce.
Whereas, lastly, the very style imports age. As well may he question all the
Records of their Vatican, all report of Histories, all Histories of Times: He
that would doubt whether such an Epistle were written, may as well doubt
whether Pope Zachary wrote to B. Boniface in Germany a direction when to eat
Bacon: may doubt whether Paul the fifth wrote to his English Catholics to
persuade them not to swear they would be good Subjects; may doubt whether
Spider-catcher corner-creeper C.E. Pseudo-Catholike Priest, wrote a scurrilous
Letter of above two quire of Paper, in a twelue-yeers-answer to three leaves of
I.H. It is not more sure that there is a Rome, or that Gregory and Nicholas
sat there, then that such an Epistle was written thither above seven hundred
years ago. It was extant of old, before ever those Lutheran quarrels were
hatched. Let him therefore go fish for Frogs in the Pond of his Gregory,
whiles he deriues thence the vain pleas of improbabilitie. If there were
differences in relating the circumstances of that story (as, I know none) must
it needs thereupon be false? Which of their Histories is not liable to
variety of report? To begin with the first: The succession of Linus, and
Cletus, and Clemens, is diversely reported; is there no truth in it? To end with
the last: The Title of Paul the Fifth to the Chane of Peter in the lawfulness
of his Election, is diversely reported; has he therefore no true claim to his
Seat? But who ever placed Gregory's Pond in Sicilie? This is one of the
fittens of his Fitz-Simons. If other Authors have mentioned this narration,
then all the strength of this History lies not on Huldericke; If none besides
him, his words vary not; These are but Tricks to out-^ace Truth.

The Epistle, in spite of Contradiction, is so ancient; and what c^ we then
for names? Whether ^ were Saint Vdalrike, or Hulderick, or Volusianus, we
labor not much* (...) it be the task of idle Critics ^ dispute who was
Hecuba^s Mother, and what was her age; No less vain is my Refuter, that spends
many waste words about his Saint V^^rick, in showing the difference of time,
betwixt him, and Pope Nic^las; The one dying, Anno 869. ^ other being horn,
890. and proving out of his obscure Sorbonist M^nchiacenus, that there were
five Bishops of Auspurge, betwixt the times of the one, and the other; whereby
a simple Reader might easily be deluded, and drawn to think, there is
nothing but impossibility and untruth in our report^ whereas there is nothing
in all this peremptory and colorable flourish of his, but mere ^ogging or
misprision: For both Illyricus apart, and the Centurists, and Che^nitius (all
Germans that should be best acquainted with the state of their own) have long
since told him, that his Saint Vdalrick was not the man, whom they held the
Author of this Epistle, but, ^lderick, another, not much different in name,
but differing in time, above seventy years* Ne nominis equiuocatio lectorem
^urbet, and lest the equivocation of the name (faith CHEMN^^IVS) should trouble
the Reader; There is another VDALRICK of Augusta, Chem. hist* de Caelibatu.
whom AVENTINE writes to have dyed, Anno 973. But this HVLDERICK, AENaeAS
SYLVIVS writes to have dyed, Anno 900. and in the year of his age, 83. Thus
he; from the authority of two their famousest Historians; from whose account
Onuphrius differs not much: But (that my Refuter may hereafter save the labor
of scanning their discordant Computations) whether it were either, or neither
of them, it is not worth to us one hair of his Crown: since with our faithful
and learned Fox, we rather from the authority of ancient English Copies,
ascribe it to Volusianus, whose second Epistle also in the same style, Act. and
M^n. p. 1055.
to the same purpose, is extant from the same Records, not inferior to the
former; What matters it for the name, when it appears that the Epistle it
self is truly ancient, ponderous, reverend, Theological, conuictiue; and such
as the best Romans heads cannot after seven hundred years shape a just
answer unto? Even in some Canonical Books, though there be difference in
the names of the Penmen, there is full assent to their divine authority; And
why is it not so in humane? Thus then we have easily blown away these light
bubbles of Discourse, which our Adversary has raised out of the Nut-shell of
his computation; from the Age, Person, Writings of his Saint Vdalrick; and
return his impuram nescio cuius nebulonis Epistolam, with his ferrei oris, and
plumbei cordis, back whence it came; to the Writer cited by my Adversary, not
named: But by better due to the next hand; whereto I am no whit beholding for
leaving it vnenglished: In that C. E. spared not me but himself: who is
nescio quis, but he that leapeth into the Press without a name? Who Nebulo,
rather then he that masketh and marches sub nebula, hoping to pass in the
Conflict for a doughtie Knight or Champion Sconosciuto, not daring to lift up
his Beuer? Who writes impuram Epistolam, but he that has scribbled a
Voluminous Epistle, to cry down pure and Honorable Marriage for the
inhauncing of impure Celibate? not that, in Thesi, Celibate is impure, but in
Hypothesi, theirs, forced and hypocritical.

SECT. III.
AS for the difference that he finds in our number of Pope Nicolas, whether
first, or second, or third, we may thank his Gratian; whose fashion it is (as
likewise Sigeberts) to name the Popes without the note of their number; we are
sure it was not Nicolas Nemo which wrote to Odo, Bishop of Vienna, reproouing
him for giving leave to Aluericus a Deacon to marry: thereupon sending his
contrary Decree to the Germane Churches; which it seems, (or the like
imposition) gave occasion to this noble Epistle.

But can there be any Game amongst our English Popish Pamphleters, where the
Fox is not in chase? Where is the shame of this Roman Priest, whiles he so
manifestly belies our holy, reverend, worthy Master Fox, whom this Scoganly
Pen dare say plays the Goose in the inconstancy of his Relation of this
Nicolas, first reporting him the first, then the second; when it is most
manifest in the during Monuments of that industrious, and excellent Author,
that he still insists upon Nicolas the Second; rejecting by many Arguments,
the opinion of them which have referred it ^o the first? Such truth there is in
shorn crowns.

John Husse was a Goose by name, and now John Fox is a Goose by reproach; Two
such Geese are more worth then all the fawning Curres of the Roman Capitol.

And how much more wit then fidelity is there in my Detector, whiles he would
prove that Pope Gregory had then no Pond; because there are now no Ponds at
Rome? As if Rome were now in any thing as it was; as if twelve hundred years
had made no alteration; As if the streets of Troy were not now Champaine; Nunc
seges est vbi Troia suit.
As if his Lipsius could now find Rome in Rome: As if lastly that man were
incapable of a large Pond, whose Se^ is universal.

As for the number of childrens heads, I can say no more for it then he can
against it; this History shall be more worth to us then his denial; Vid. qua
supra, ^ l. 1. S. 12. Histor. Radulphi Bourn, etc.
But this I dare say, that I know persons both of credit and honor, that saw
betwixt fifty, and threescore, cast up out of the little Mote of an Abbey
where I now live: Let who list cast up the proportion.

After the refusal of this worthy Epistle, according to his fashion he tryes
to disgrace it with us; telling us, that therein the Bishop of Rome is styled
Supreme Head and Governor of the whole Church. If it were thus, so much more
powerful is the Testimony against them, by how much more the witness was
theirs. There must needs be much cause, when he that so humbly ouer-titles
the person, resists the Doctrine so vehemently. But the truth is, that the
Epistle styles Pope Nicolas no otherwise in the superscription, then Sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae prouisorem: Ouer-seer of the holy Roman Church. And in the
body of the letter, Summae sedis Pontificem; Bishop of the chief See; to
whom the examination of the common affairs of the Church does appertain;
which is far other, then in the now Roman sense, the Supreme Head of the
Church. Secondly, he tells us that this Epistle both grants and allows a Vow
of Continency; He excepts none, but a professor of Continence.
Nullum excipit nisi professorem continentiae; wherein we are no other then
friends; we yield no less; where there is good evidence of the gift and
calling of God. But whiles our Volusian grants the professor of Continency
bound, and pleads the Clergy to be free, how plainly does he show us that
there was no such Vow, then required of, no such made by the Clergy.

Page 272.
But what needs the man to be so furiously angry with the good old Epistler*
for saying, that the Apostles charge ( Let every one have his own Wife) is
general to all; reaching to the Clergy as well as the Laity? excepting none
but those which have the gift of Continency. What Logike, (the want whereof he
sometimes causlesly obiecteth to me) ever taught him that (...), Euery-one.
vn^squisque, was any other then universal? Or what other sense can be put
upon the words of the Apostle? Could I as truly vpbraid Sir Refuter with
reading the Logike Lesson, as he does me with the Rhetorike, surely I should
not now be put to the pains to teach this Nouice, that (...) ( vnusquisque)
is a term of collectiue universality and must be extended to all, where kind
is excepted tacitly; ex natura re^, as this case must needs be acknowledged
to be; fore-prizing none but such as have the gift of Continency; which Saint
Paul touches upon in that Chapter.

Judge then, Reader, whether the Catholic Bishop that wrote this, or the
Mis-Catholike Mass Priest that reprooues it, be more worthy of Bedleem.

SECT. IIII.
LAstly yet, Refut. p. 273.
as if in the loose he would shake hands and be friends with him, whom he had
so long defied; he thus closes up: Then if Priests have this gift, and have
prefixed this course to themselves in the Lord, they shall not need to marry.
And this is the case of all Clergymen who vow Chastity. Thus he. Believe
him, Readers* if ye can: All the Romish Clergy, all Votaries have the gift of
Continency, Witness our foresaid Volusianus in the same Periods; Multos
eiusdem consilij assentatores hominibus non Deo pro falsa specie continentiae
placere volentes, grauiora vides committere, patrum scilicet vxores subagitare,
masculorum ac pecudum amplexus non abhorrere. I will not english it for shame.
Would God the World did not too well find still these proofs of Romish
Chastity.

Propert.
Nunc etiam Romae quidlibet audet Amor. Refut. 274.
But as one that thinks no man can be his friend, except also he be our
enemy; like a true Makebate, he will tell us a Tale in our ear, that shall
set a perpetual jar betwixt us and our Hulderick. Iwis, says my Refuter,
your Vdalricke is not the man you take him for; For thus he there writes to
the Pope; Wherefore, O reverend Father, it shall be your part to cause and
ouer-see, that whosoever either with hand or mouth has made a Vow of
Continency (as all Clergy men in holy Orders have) and afterward would
forsake the same, should be either compelled to keep his Vow, or else by
lawful authority should be deposed from his Order. So he. But we are not so
light of belief to lose a friend thus easily. Know then, Reader, that the (As
all Clergy men in holy Orders have.)
Parenthesis (which is the harshest piece of this clause) is foysted into the
Text, and forged by this Cauiller; the quite contrary whereof is affirmed in
the former Period of our Vldaricke, where thus he writes: Non parum quippe,
etc. From this holy discretion thou have not a little swerued, when as thou
would have those Clergymen, whom thou ought only to advise to Abstinence
from Marriage, compelled unto it by a certain imperious violence; For is not
this justly in the judgment of all wise men to be accounted violence, when as
against the Evangelical Institution, and the charge of the Holy Ghost, any man
is constrained to the execution of private Decrees? The Lord in the old Law
appointed Marriage to his Priest which he is never read afterward to have
forbidden; So he. Let my Refuter then reconcile his false Parenthesis, with the
true Text, (which he can never do, since it directly crosses the whole scope
of Huldericks Epistle) and then he shall see us easily reconcile Huldericks
proposition with ours.

But, not so long to delay my Readers satisfaction; the Truth is; The Author
pleades for an indifferent immunitie of Clergy men from the necessity of this
Vow, else the Epistle were contradictorie to it self: for if he suppose that
all the Clergy had vowed, and all that had vowed should be compelled to keep
their Vow, how could he plead that the Clergy should not be compelled to
Continence? The drift of Vldericke or Volusian, then, is, that it may be
equally lawful, equally free for Priests either to vow, or not to vow
Continency; which granted, if any one having liberty not to have vowed, or
observed it, shall notwithstanding prefixe this course to himself in the Lord,
Praefixit hoc sibi in Domino, ibid.
out of a long-settled experience and assurance of this calling and gift of
God, and now, when he has thus engaged himself to the expectation of the
Church, voluerit apostare, shall be froward wantonly to abandon this Vow,
willingly neglecting all good means for the continued observation thereof,
such a one shall be liable either to compulsion, or deposition; As now, if any
one of ours should in the midst of freedom bind himself by a voluntary Vow,
it were pity and shame that he should play fast and loose at pleasure with
impunitie.

What Wool then is here worthy of this cry? Or wherein has our Author
offended us? whiles we neither make this Vow, nor can therefore ever break
it, nor ever allowed the breakers of so* made Vows, guiltless?

One quarrel yet, Refut. 276.
he cannot remit to Master Fox, and me; that for this forenamed Hulderick,
we cite Aeneas Syluius in his Germania; a Book that never was.

This great helluo librorum has wearied all Libraries; and consulted with his
Tritemius and Posseuine; neither of them mention any such work of Aeneas
Syluius; whereas, if he had but taken the Book next the door, GESNERS
Bibliotheca, he had found (if at least he could have seen the Wood for Trees)
Syluius his Germania; which (for failing) he might have heard of in a double
Edition; The one larger, the other more contracted. There is extant the same
Authors Germania, wherein are contained the grieuances of the German-nation,
and a confutati^n of the same with a reply.
The first, Gesner expresses thus Extat eiusdem Germania, qua continentur
grauamina nationis Germanicae, and confutatio eorundem, cum replica. The latter
is, AENEae SYLVII GERMANIA excerpta, etc. The GERMANIA of AENaeAS SYLVIVS
gathered out of that Book, wherein the grieuances of the Germane Nation
objected to the Sea of Rome, by MARTINE MERE a Lawyer of Mentz, are refelled.

See now, Reader, whether my Refuter can blush. In the one of these, which
(after denial) he confesses to have seen, he finds somewhat that likes him
not. In sua Germ. Illyr. Catal. Test. lib. 19. Aeneas.
Syluius speaking of Auspurge, Sanctus VDALRICVS huic praesidet (says he) qui
Papam arguit de Concubinis: VDALRICK is the Saint of that City, who reproved
the Pope concerning Concubines. The bone lies before him, let him pick out the
marrow as he can; which because he finds hard to break, he casts it from him
in a chafe, and tells us for the last refuge; He has seen a printed Copy, and
two manuscripts without these words. In verbo Sacerdotis. And so just have we
found him of his word, all this while, that he were hard-hearted that would
not believe him.

SECT. V.
Refut. 280.
But still I am taken tardie in my Time, or rather do ouer-take. I reckon this
liberty to have continued in Germany after Hulderick, for some 200. years;
Whereas, betwixt S. VDALRICK and GREGORY the Seventh, were but 112. years.

But still his Saint deceiues him, and (if I should have erred) his own
Chronologers should have deceived me. For his Onuphrius in his Ecclesiastical
Chronicle, makes our Hulderick Bishop of Auspurge in the beginning of Pope
Nicholas, Ann. 859. And his Sigebert, and other Chroniclers cast Gregory the
Seventh his opposition to Priests marriage, upon the year 1074. Where now is
my error? Where is my ouerreaching? Count it, Reader, and see whether I cannot
make my word good, and give him fifteen years in to the bargain: and now
judge whether of us may say, Non sat commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi, Daue,
haec; and whether of us it is, from whom nothing comes, sauouring of any
learning or Truth: and if thou think it fit, blush for him.

The like (I fear) willing error upon the same ground is the mis-calculation
of the Times of Leo the Ninth, and Nicholas the Second, Refut. p. 28^.
betwixt whose times, and Vdalrick, he makes but fifty years; abating one
other half of the hundred, to expose me to the laughter of his credulous
Clients, which may now say, Lo the man which in a reckoning of 200. years did
out-lash but 150. When As both their Sigebert, and Hermannus Contractus, (and
who not?) make Leo the Ninth, Pope. An. 1049. and Nicholas the Second, some ten
years after him; The very elder whereof, if we reckon to Hulderick, An. 859.
will be in no less then 190. years distance. The man wanted either counters,
or wit, or honesty; Truth I am sure he wants.

SECT. VI.
Refut. p. 283.
ANtichrist, which was conceived in the Primitive times, saw the light in
Boniface the Third, and was grown to his stature and (...) in Gregory the
Seventh. So as I might well say, that the body of Antichristianisme, together
with the prohibition of marriage, began to be complete in that Hildebrand. The
times accord better then our Papists would have them. After a thousand years
Satan was loosed; at that very time did this HILDEBRAND (otherwise Gregore) by
the instigation of the Devil (as himself confessed at his death) (witness
Cardinal BENNO, and SIGEBERT) trouble the Church: belike with the violent
obtrusion of this doctrine of Devils (prohibition of marriage) and insolent
detrusion of imperial authority. It is then but a Sardonian laughter that my
Refuter takes up at our complete Antichrist; whose supparasitation may one day
cost him tears and gnashing.

But (good God!) what Saints has the Roman Church? Hildebrand is one of their
Calender; The Legend of whose Holiness shall anon make any man save C. E.
ashamed.

Since it will be no better; Refut. p. 284.
Perge mentiri; I am now charged with a fair contradiction, whiles I am
accused to say, That the liberty of Priests marriages was universal for a
thousand years, and yet had before granted, that in STEVEN the Second his time
(which was two hundred and forty years before) the Western Clergy was
restrained. In all which he persuades his friends that I would feign lie
grossly, if my memory would let me. Reader, do but reuiew my words. These
they are: After him (that is, Hulderick) so strongly did he plead and so
happily, that for two hundred years more, this freedom still blessed those
parts. I speak of Germany, he of Italy; I speak of those parts, he of all.
Is not this a Logical and faithful refutation? Yet more, this bold and false
hand dares write, that Leo the Ninth, Refut. p. 285.
and Nicholas the Second, never meddled with the prohibition of these
marriages; Only the one made a Decree against Harlots, the other against
Concubines: neither of which (he hopes) we will apply to our selves. We are
so used to these impudent assertions, that now we cease to wonder at them. Let
him tell me what was that Epistle which Leo the Ninth wrote to Peter the
Hermit? He detests the incontinencie of Clerks, and writes to have it
punished. App^ud. Epist. L^. 9. Binius.
Whose very title is Incontinentiam Clericorum detestatur, and puniendam
describit. The Epistle is bitter, like my Libellers. And lest he should say we
guiltily take to our selves the imputation of Incontinency, it is bent against
quadrimodam carnalis contagionis pollutionem, a fourfold pollution of
Clergymen: Whereof one he will not sure deny to be marriage.

Let him tell me what was done under Leo in the Council of Mentz, (about the
year 1049.) of which, Adam Bremensis (who was there present) writes, Simoniaca
haeresis and nefanda Sacerdotum coniugia holographa Synodi manu perpetuo
damnata est, That is, Adam. Brem. l. 3. c. 11. Bin. not. in Synod. Mogunt.
The heresy of Symonie, and the wicked marriages of Priests, by the consent of
the Synod was condemned. Is this nothing done by his Leo; the Leo rugiens of
that time?

As for his Nicholas the Second; Refut. p. 286.
Good man, he did nothing, neither; Only he stained women as honest as
himself, with the name of Concubines, and men more holy then himself, with
the name of Nicolaitans, (whom he must needs love for the names sake) and an
estate of life, as holy as his own, with the name of Filthy copulation. Let
his Popes shameful Decrees, and his shameless lies, go both together for
company whence they came.

SECT. VII.
Refut. p. 287.
YEt still the further we go, the worse. My Refuter surpasses himself in the
prizes that he plays for his Pope Gregory the seventh, who first (he says)
did not ruin this liberty of Marriages: Let Vincentius, and Radulphus de
Diceto and Sigibert speak for us both; Chron. Sigebert. Ann. 1074. Polydor.
Virg. Exemple post homines natos imp^rtunissimo. Ex qua re tam grave oritur
scandalum, vt nullius haeresis tempore sancta Ecclesia grauiore schismate
scissa sit, Sigeb. ibid.
Vxoratos Sacerdotes a diuino, etc. He removed married Priests from their
function, and forbad the people to hear their Masses; a new example, and as
many thought, inconsiderately prejudicial, against the judgment of the holy
fathers, etc. But he fully prevailed not (says my Refuter.) What thank is
that to him? he did his best, and kindled those coals that could never yet be
quenched. He led the way to his Urban the second, and Paschall the second.
They followed him, and prevailed; The broiles were his, if not the victory.
Gratum opus scortatoribus (says Auentine. Refut. p. 2^8.
) Auentine (says my Refuter) a late Gospelling brother. For us, we are glad of
the fraternity of so worthy an Author, whom Beatus Rhenanus gratulates to his
Germany, and calls Most learned Auentine.
Eruditissimum Auentinum, and Excelling in the knowledge of all variety of
learning.
Variarum cognitione disciplinarum praestantem; and Erasmus, A man of
unweariable pains, and deep reading.
Hominem studio indefatigabili, ac reconditae lectionis. Lastly, whom his just
Epitaph styles, A most diligent and accurate searcher of antiquities.
Rerum antiquarum indagat^rem sagacissimum: But the truth is; no man by his
History can tell his Religion: The Canons of Augusta praise him for the light
he gives to the institutions of their Monasteries; And when he speaks of the
Shrines of Berg, Valentia, and Halle, I am sure he mentions them with too
Popish devotion; and when of Io. Husse and Jerome of Prage, he taxes them with
crimen irreligiositatis; Yet this man (borne Anno 1466.) when he but speaks a
famous truth of Hildebrand, and the German Clergy, he is become a late
Gospelling brother. Still let us have Brethren that care more for their
honesty, then their faction.

Refut. p. 289.
Neither yet (to give the Devil his due) do we think so ill of those enemies
of married chastity, that they did purposely enact Laws of unmarried
looseness; but that all abominable filthiness did follow upon the restraint
of lawful remedies, who sees not? Pono conti^entiam pautis tenentibus,
aliquibus eam modo causa quaestus ac iactantiae simulantibus* multis
inconti^entiam periurio aut multiplicum adulterio cumulantibus, etc. Sigeb. An.
1074.
Sigibert himself (their own Monk) freely acknowledges it. John Haywood our
old Epigrammatist told Queen Mary, Her Clergy was saucy; if they had not
Wives, they would have Lemans. Where there is not the gift of holy Continency,
how could it be otherwise? Where the water is dammed up, and yet the stream
runs full, how can it choose but rise over the banks? There is purity
therefore out of Wedlock, but not out of Continence. Refut. p. 291.
And what needed my Detector to travel so far as England for an example of
incontinency in a King Henry, or any wife of his, whether falsely or truly
objected, when he might have looked nearer the center of their Church, and
have found his own Pope John (in the very time now questioned for this
prohibition) Io. autem Pap^ se cum vxore ^uiusdam oblectans, a Diabolo in
tempore percutitur, Sigeb. An. 963.
killed by the Devil in the act of adultery with another man's wife? This end
of the Wallet hangs behind him.

SECT. VIII.
HIldebrand (as I learned of Auentine) is as much as Titio Amoris. The brand of
Love.
But how little he differed in name or nature from Hellebrand, Brand of Hell.
Titio infernalis (as Chemnitius calls him) his History shows too well.
Refut. p. 293.
And is it possible that any man should rise up after so many hundred years,
to Canonize Saint Hildebrand, even in that for which h^ condemned himself? My
Reader must know the man a little from the witness of his own Conclaue, his
Cardinal Benno, Archpriest of the Roman Church, then living: Others besides,
tell of his beginnings in wicked Necromancy, and murderous underminings, and
tyrannical swaying of the Keys, ere he had them: Benno tells how he got them,
how he used them gotten: He got them by fraud, money, violence; used them with
tyranny. There was a knot, and a succession of Necromancers in those days.
Gerberius, which was Syluester the second, was the Master of the schole: His
chief Schoilers in the black Art, were Theophylactus (afterward changed
into Pope Benedict) and Laurentius, and Gratianus. These were the Tutors of
Hildebrands younger times, of whom he learned both Magike and Policy. It is a
world to see what work these Magicians made (like the ill spirits they raised)
in Church and Commonwealth; opposing Emperors, setting up what Popes they
pleased, poisoning whom they disliked: At last, it came to Hildebrands turn to
take the Chair: Ben^o Cardin. vita Hildebr.
To which purpose he separated first the Bishops from the Cardinals auerse from
him: when he had done, he compelled them by terror and force to swear unto his
part; which done, he was elected in spite of the Canons, only by Lay persons,
by Soldiers; he expelled the Cardinals, ^ashly excommunicated the Emperor, of
his own head, without any Canonical accusation, without subscription of any
Cardinal; hired a bloody Villain to murder the Emperor; consulted with the
Oracle of his breaden God, which, because it answered not, he cast it into the
fire; he exercised most horrible cruelties upon many, hanging up men at his
pleasure vnconuicted; in a word, quantis haeresibus mundum corruperit, etc?
says Benno, in his conclusion, His heresies, his periuries, can scarce be
described by many Pens; Clamat tamen altius, etc. But the Christian blood shed
by his instigation and command (says he) cries yet louder to God, yea, the
blood of the Church, which the sword of his tongue in a miserable prodition
has shed, cries out against him; for which things, the Church did most justly
depart from all communion with him. Thus Benno; who yet (to make amends) So our
Rogerus Cestr^ns. l. ^. Papa Hildebradus labora^s in extr^mis, ^ocauit ad se
Cardinalem quem plus dilexerat, and confessus est se suscitasse odium and
schisma inter Imperatorem, and alios Christianos, vnde dissoluit vincula
bannorum and obijt. Refut. p. 295. vsque ad 306.
tells us, that Hildebrand upon his deathbed repented of these lewd courses,
and sent to the Emperor and the Church to cry them mercy: confessing (as
Sigibert reports) that he had by the suasion of the Devil raised these wicked
tumults.

Yet this is the man whom Bellarmine will justify by seven and twenty
Authors, and C. E. can add two more to the heap; yea, in those very things
for which he condemned himself.

Reader, if one of his evil spirits should have stepped into Peter's chair, do
ye think he could have wanted Proctors? But how good an account we were like
to have of seven and twenty Authors (if it would requite the cost to examine
them) appears, in that Lamb. Schafnab. Hist. rerum German.
Lambertus Schafnaburgensis (which is cited for the man that magnifies the
miracles of this Gregory) says not one such word of him; but speaks indeed the
like of one Anno Archbishop of Coleine, who lived and dyed in the time of
Gregory: As for Gregory's miracles, Benno the Cardinal tells us what they
were; that he raised Devils familiarly, that he shaked sparks of fire out of
his sleeue by his magike. A trick that well beseemed an Hellebrand, who set
all the world on fire by his wicked impetuositie. We will not envy Rome this
Saint, let them enjoy him, let them celebrate him, and cry down Henry the
Emperor, and all that opposed him. Still may such as these be the Tutelar gods
of that holy City; For us, it is comfort enough to us, that our marriages had
such a persecutor.

That the Churches did hereupon ring of him for Antichrist, Refut. p. 306,
vsque ad 309.
Auentine is my author: Pro concione, etc. In their sermons (says he) they did
curse HILDEBRAND, they cried out on him as a man transported with hatred and
ambition, Antichristum esse praedicant, They declared him to be Antichrist;
They said that under the colorable title of Christ he did the service of
Antichrist; Antichristi negotium agitat.
That he sits in Babylon in the Temple of God, and is advanced above all that
is called God. So he. And little better is that which his Lamb. Schafn^burg. l.
de Rebus German.
Schafnaburgensis (so much extolled by C. E.) records: Aduersus hoc decretum
infremuit tota factio Clericorum, etc. Against this Decree (says he) all the
whole faction of Clergy men fretted and mutined; accusing him as an Heretic*
and a man of perverse opinion, who forgetting the Word of Christ, which said,
All men cannot receive this* did by a violent exaction compel men to live in
the fashion of Angels.

To which if I should add the sentence of the Synod of Worms, and that of
Brixia, my Reader would easily see, that it is not the applause of some devoted
Pen, that can free him from these foul imputations of deserved infamy.

That untruth then cleared, another belike hangs upon the score; Refut. p. 307.
My Refuter charges me with falsehood, in saying, That GREGORY the seventh was
deposed by the French and German Bishops. Only the Germans (he says) were
Actors in that Tragedy. But if not at Worms, yet let him tell me what was
done at Brixia, and by whom: Quamobrem Italiae, Germaniae, Galliae Pontifices,
etc. Wherefore (says AVENTINVS) the Bishops of Italy, Germany, and France, the
seventh of the Kalends of July, met at Brixia in Bauaria, and sentenced
HILDEBRAND to have spoken and done against Christian piety, etc. and condemned
him of heresy, impiety, sacrilege, etc. Ref. p. 310, 311.
And that my Refuter may find himself answered at once to the last of his
Cauils, wherein he pleads that this deposition was not so much as pretended
for the inhibition of these marriages, but for other causes, let him see the
Copy of the judgment passed against him in the said Council; wherein, after
the accusation of his Simoniacall climing into the Chair (the vice which he
pretended most to persecute in others) his forceable possession, The virtues of
C.E's. Saint.
his heresy, his machinations against the Emperor, his perverting of the
Laws both of God and Men, his false doctrines, sacriledges, periuries, lies,
murders, by him suborned and commended, his tyranny, his setting of discord
betwixt Brethren, Friends, Cousins; It follows, Inter coniuges diuortia facit;
suauis homo sacerdotes qui vxores habent legitimos sacrificos esse pernegat;
interim tamen scortatores, adulteros, incestuosos aris admouet, etc. He causes
divorces betwixt Man and Wife; The fine man denies those Priests, which have
lawful wives, to be Priests at all; in the mean time he admits to the Altar
whore-mongers, adulterers, incestuous persons, etc. Nos ergo. We therefore by
the authority of Almighty God, pronounce him deposed from his Popedom. Thus
Auentine specifies the Decree; which alone without Commentary, without
inforcement, answers all the frivolous exceptions of my wordy Adversary. So
as now, to return his Epilogue, Refut. p. 316.
he has sent back my ten pretended lies, with the unreasonable and inuerted
usury of well-neere an hundred. Pauperis est numerare.

SECT. IX.
FRom foreign parts, I return at last to our own; so I fear has C. E. done
long since; Refut. p. 317.
lurking somewhere in England for no good. These Fugitives love not home more,
then their home has cause to hate them. His Cauils of the wondrous
contradiction betwixt my Margin and my Text, are too childish to be honored
with an answer. My Text was; The bickerings of our English Clergy with their
DVNSTANS, about this time, are memorable. My Margin cites Henry of Huntingdon,
affirming Anselme to be the first that forbad marriage: Betwixt these two,
says my Refuter, was an hundred years difference. I grant it: But (had my
words been thus) if my Detector were not disposed to seek a knot in a Rush,
he had easily noted that in a general suruay of all Ages, the phrase (About
that time) admits much latitude; and will easily stretch without any strain to
one whole Centurie of years. Had the Quotation been as he pleads, this
answer were sufficient. But my words need no such reconciliation; I stand to
the censure, and disclaim the mercy of any Reader: For that citation of
Anselme has plain reference to the following words; Our Histories testify
how late, how repiningly our Clergy stooped under this yoke: it is for this
that my Margin points to Henry Huntingdon, and Fabian, reporting Anselme the
first man that prohibited these marriages. What contradiction now can his
acuteness detect in these two? The English Clergy had bickerings with their
Dunstans; and stooped late and repiningly to this yoke under Anselme. See,
Reader, and admire the equal Truth and Logique of a Catholic Priest, and
judge how well he bestows his Pages.

SECT. X.
IT is true, Refut. p. 318.
Dunstan was the man who first with his other Oswald and Ethelwold.
two Cousins and Partners in Canonization, opposed any appendance of the
married Clergy; He wrought it with good K. Edgar, by dreams, and visions, and
miracles. He, who when the Devil came to tempt him to lust, Gul. Malmesb. It.
Legend, etc.
caught him by the Nose with an hot pair of Tongs, and made him rore out for
mercy, supposed that every Clergy man had the same Irons in the fire; and
therefore blew the Coals to that good King, of the dislike of these Clericall
marriages; and with the same breath inkindled the zeal of Monkerie. The Church
wherein I am now interessed, and wherein I do (by the providence of God, and
the bounty of my gracious Master) succeed their Saint Oswalds Priors, yields
me sufficient records hereof; which because they are both worthy of public
light, and give no small light to the business in hand, I have thought good
here to insert.

The names of the Founders of the Church of Worcester. In the time of King
Ethelred was Worcester made an Episcopal See; Bosel was the first bishop. The
17. was Saint Oswald; in whose time King Edgar gave, etc. And by the mediation
of Saint Oswald was this Cathedral Church translated from married Clerks unto
Monks.
Nomina Fundatorum Ecclesiae Wigorniensis, Tempore Ethelredi Regis, etc. --
constituta est seeds Episcopalis Wigorn: Bosel Episcopus primus -- Septimus
decimus, Sanctus Oswaldus, tempore cuius Edgarus Rex dedit -- Mediante vero
Beato Oswaldo, a Clericis in Monachos translata est seeds Pontificalis honoris.

Then follows the Charter of King Edgar founding the Monks with this Title,
Carta Regis EADGARI, de OSWALDES LAW.

ALTITONANTIS Dei largiflua Clementia, qui est Rex Regum and Dominus
Dominantium. Ego EADGARVS Anglorum Basileus omnium Regum Insularum Oceani quae
Britanniam circumiacent, cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur,
Imperator and Dominus, gratias ago ipsi Deo Omnipotenti Regi meo, qui meum
Imperium sic ampliauit, and exaltauit super regnum Patrum meorum. --

Quapropter and ego Christi gloriam and laudem in regno meo exaltare, and eius
seruitium amplificare deuotus disposui, and per meos fideles fautores DVNSTANVM
videlicet, Archiepiscopum, and ATHELWOLDVM, ac OSWALDVM Episcopos, quos mihi
Patres spirituales, and consiliarios elegi, magna ex part secundum quod
disposui perfeci. --

Et ipsis supradictis meis cooperatoribus strenue annitentibus, iam XL. and
VII. Monasteria cum Monachis and Sanctimonialibus constitui; and si Christus
vitam mihi tam diu concesserit, vsque ad quinquagessimum remissionis numerum
meae deuotae Deo munificentiae oblationem protendere decreui. Vnde nunc in
praesenti Monasterium, quod praedictus reuerendus Episcopus OSWALDVS in sede
Episcopali Wereceastre, in honorem Sanctae Dei genitricis MARIae amplificauit,
and eliminatis Clericorum nenijs, and spurcis lasciuijs, religiosis Dei seruis
Monachis, meo consensu and fauore suffultus locauit, Ego ipsis Monasticae
religionis viris Regali authoritate confirmo, and consilio, and astipulatione
Principum and Optimatum meorum corroboro, and consigno, ita vt iam amplius non
sit fas, neque ius Clericis reclamandi quicquam ind^, quippe qui magis
elegerunt cum sui ordinis periculo, and Ecclesiastici beneficij dispendi suis
vxoribus adhaerere, quam Deo cast and canonice seruire. Et ideo cuncta quae
illi de Ecclesia possederant, cum ipsa Ecclesia, sieve Ecclesiastica, sieve
Secularia, tam mobilia, quam immobilia, ipsis Dei seruis Monachis ab hac die
perpetualiter Regiae munificentiae iure deinceps possidenda trado, and
consigno, ita firmiter, vt nulli Principum, nec etiam vlli Episcopo succedenti
fas sit, aut licitum quicquam inde subtrahere, aut peruadere, aut ab eorum
potestate surripere, and in Clericorum ius iterum traducere, quamdiu fides
Christiana in Anglia perdurauerit. Sed and dimidium Centuriatum, etc. --

In the end dated thus, Facta sunt haec Anno Dominicae Natiuitatis,
D.CCCC.LXIIII. Indictione VIII. Regni EADGARI Anglorum Regis, 6. in Regia vrbe
quae ab incolis Glouceastre nominatur in Natale Domini.

In English thus.
BY the bountiful mercy of Almighty GOD^, which is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, I Edgar King of England; and of all the Kings of the Islands of the
Ocean lying about Britanie, and of all the Nations that are included within it,
Emperor and Lord; do give thanks to Almighty God my King, which has
enlarged my Empire, and exalted it above the Kingdom of my Fathers. --

Wherefore I also having devoted my self to exalt the glory and praise of
Christ in my Kingdom, and to enlarge his Service, have intended; and by my
faithful Well-willers, Dunstan Archbishop, Athelwold, and Oswald Bishops,
(whom I have chosen for my spiritual Fathers, and Counselors) I have for the
greatest part already performed what I intended, etc. --

And by the diligent endeavors of my foresaid Helpers, I have now constituted
and made seven and forty MONASTERIES with Monks and Nuns; and if Christ
shall give me to live so long, I have decreed to draw forth the Oblation of
this my devout Munificence unto God, to the full number of fifty, which is the
number of my remission. So as it appears, this number was set to King Edg^r by
Dunstan for his penance.
Whereupon, now for the present, I do by my Royal Authority confirm to
persons of Monastical Religion, and by the consent and astipulation of my
Princes and Peers, do establish and consigne to them, that Monastery which
the foresaid reverend Bishop OSWALD (to the honor of the Blessed Mother of
GOD) has amplified in the Episcopal See of Wereceastre, and expelling the
wanton and filthy lasciviousness of Clerks, has, by my consent and favor,
bestowed it upon the religious Servants of God, the Monks; (so as from
henceforth it shall not be lawful for the said Clerks, to challenge any thing
therein, as those which have rather chosen (with the danger of their Order, and
the loss of their Ecclesiastical That is, their Prebend.
Benefice) to stick unto their Wives, then chastely and canonically to serve
God. And therefore all that ever they possessed of the said Church, whether
Ecclesiastical or Secular, moveable or immovable, together with the Church it
self, I do from this day forward for ever, give and consigne to the said
Monks, to be possessed of them in the right of my Royal Munificence; so
firmly, that it shall not be lawful for any Prince or any Bishop succeeding
to subtract ought from them, or to withdraw any of the Premises from their
power, and to deliver it back again to the right and possession of Clerks,
so long as the Christian Faith shall remain in England, etc. --

Facta sunt haec, etc. These things were done in the year of Christ's Nativity,
D.CCCC.LXIIII. Indiction VIII. In the sixth year of the Reign of Edgar King of
England; in the Royal City which by the Inhabitants is named Glouceastre, in
the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, etc. --

That Dunstan did this, none ever doubted; but withal it is considerable, who
himself was; an Abbot; and therefore partial to the Cloisters; and who put
him into this Commission; Pope John the thirteenth: a Monster of men, yea, of
Popes; one, who (as was articled against him in a general Council) had
committed ^ncest with two of his own Sisters, who called to the Devil for his
help, at dice, who defloured Virgins, who lay with Stephana his Fathers
Concubine; who drank to the Devil, besides many other horrible criminations;
A man fit to set a Saint on work against lawful Marriages. And thirdly, what
the state of the Times were; wherein liberty was degenerate into strange
licentiousness; Even change of Wives (if we may believe Histories) was then
no wonder; For the correcting whereof, the Reformers (according to the
Philosophers advice) labored toward the other extreme; as those which to
straighten a stick, bow it as much the contrary way: And lastly, how far
this act and endeavor extended: For Dunstan sought not to thrust married men
out of the Clergy, but to thrust Expulit malos Praesbyteros, introduxit
pe^ores Monachos, Polyd.
married Clergy men out of Cathedral Churches, which required a quotidian
attendance, which is evident both by the sentence of Dunstan (Aut Canonice
viuendum, aut ab Ecclesia excundum) either that they must live Canonically, or
get out of the Church; that is, From the greater Churches.
ex Ecclesijs maioribus, as Historians relate it; And by the sentence of the
Rood for DVNSTAN; Mutaretis non been; How much difference there was in these
two, appears in the Decree of Bishop Lanfranc, Anselme's Predecessor; which
tolerating married Seculars, drives directly against married Canons. Refut. p.
321.
Little needed my Refuter then (but that he must have something to say) to
fall upon our right Reverend and Learned Bishop of Hereford (whose worthy
labors have justly indeared him to all Posterity) for that true comparison he
makes betwixt these three Saints of theirs, and Anselme: They by action, he by
Synodicall Decree persecuted the Clergy; They bent their endeavors against
Cathedral Clerks, he against Priests; Their project was particular, his
universal.

That a peremptore sentence passed generally against the Marriage of
Ecclesiastikes in a public Synod under Dunstan, Refut. p. 319.
he referres us to Binius, which at random talks of Concilium Anglicanum;
without all particulars of place, or persons; and referres us to Surius; as if
he had bidden us ask his Fellow if he lie: Why did he not send us to Father
Parsons, or his Gabriel Gifford? Sure, it was in some obscure hole of the
Peake, or some blind Dormitorie of a Covent; neither can we say of it with
the Apostle, These things were not done in a Corner; The Canons, whereto the
fore-alleaged Charter, and the sentence of Dunstan have reference, were no
other then Romish; which these Monkish Prelates had persuaded King Edgar to
receive, and in part to urge upon his married Prebendaries. The success of his
Synod at READING, or WINCHESTER he knows well enough: And is he ashamed of
the miraculous sentence of his Holy-Rood (which Iornalensis reports) who there
openly spoke for the Monks against the Clergy? Absit vt hoc fiat; that he
passes over to that of Calne, Refut. 321.
where the falling of an ouer-charged floor, crushed the Marriage of Clergy
men. Idle Monks, who for their own turn set such a Superstitious gloss upon
that accident, which (as H. Hunt. l. 5.
Henry Huntingdon more probably interpretes it) was Signum excelsi Dei, quod
proditione and interfectione Regis sui ab amore Dei casuri essent, and a
diuersis gentibus digna contritione conterendi: A sign from the high God, that
by their Treason and Murder of their King (who was slain the year after) they
should fall from the favor of God, and be worthily crushed by other Nations.
Thus he. Such was the event; For the construction of it, the Reader may choose,
whether he will believe an Archdeacon of Huntingdon, or a Monk of Malmesbury.
Gul. Malmes.
Ywis these rotten ioysts are foundation enough whereon to build the
prohibition of our marriages.

SECT. XI.
Under these late Romish Saints, Refut. p. 332.
Dunstan and Anselme, I might safely say our English Clergy found the first
machinations against their marriage, and at last stooped perforce to this yoke
of constrained continency. Neither does my wit, or my Logique fail me in
this collection. If these were the men that made the first opposition to the
marriage of Clergy men in England, then it formerly obtained here, without
contradiction. The bare word of my Refuter, is a hot shot to batter this
necessary illation; and to assure the Reader that the forced Celibate of the
English Clergy is of greater Antiquity then these his Saints; To which he
adds (in an ignorant begging of the question) A thing so filthy, after a
solemn vow to God, to take a Wife, as it never appeared without the brand of
infamy. As if our Predecessors in the English Clergy had been ever charged
with a vow; As if the solemnity of this vow had never had beginning?
Chimericall fancies fit for a shorn head. D. Martins arg. is, Priests crowns
signify their vow; No other proof can be brought worth talking (...), but
from the Barbers shop.
When as his Master Harding could not produce so much as a probability of any
vow anciently required, or undertaken; whether by beck, or Dieugard. When as
the ancient Saxon Pontifical makes not the least mention of any such
profession; yea, when Girardus (who was the second Bishop of York after the
conquest) writes flatly to Anselme concerning his own Canons, Antiquit.
Britan. Def. of Pr. Mar. p. 282.
Professiones vero mihi penitus abnegant Canonici, etc. My Canons (says he)
utterly deny to give me profession of continency, which without this
profession have been disorderly advanced to holy Orders; Cum vero ad ordines
aliquos inuito, dura ceruice renituntur, ne in ordinando castitatem
profiteantur; And when I do inuit any to take Orders, they do resist me very
stubbornely, that they will make no profession of chastity in their
Ordination. Thus he. Showing us plainly that the Clergy in those times
challenged no other then the liberty of their Predecessors. But well may he
face us down in this more obscure (though certain) truth, when he dares to
say that Greece it self never tolerated this estate in their Clergy, till by
bad life it fell to Schism, and from Schism to open Heresy; whiles their
own Canon Law (besides all Histories) give him the lie; and what Latinorum
nomo vel veterium, vel recentiorum, inter Graecorum erreres, aut haereses, aut
schismata, hanc coniugalis vsus retentionem supputauit, non Hugo Eterianus, non
Tho. Aquinas, non Guido Carmelita, ad 26. licet hic numerauerit, non alius qui
vel obiter, vel peculiariter de ijs egerit* Espens. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Espencaeus has ingeniously spoken concerning this point, we have formerly
showed. If he did not presume upon Readers that never saw Books, he durst
not be thus impudent.

This argument therefore shall ever stand good, and shall scornefully trample
upon all his vain cauils; Ethelwold was the first, which by the command of
King EDGAR expelled married Priests out of Apud Winton. and Monachos loco
Clericorum primus instituit. De Edgaro. Rogerus Cestrens. l^b. 6.
the old erection of Winchester; Anno 963. DVNSTAN and OSWALD together with him
were the men, who (two years after) first expelled married Clergymen out of
the greater houses of Merceland; As 1177. in the days of King Henry the
Second, the secular Prebendaries of Waltham, were first turned out, to give way
to their Irregulars; therefore until these times, these places were
interruptedly possessed by married Clergymen. If now he shall except; that
this possession of theirs was not of long continuance, but upon usurpation;
whereby the married Incumbents had injuriously incroached upon the right of
Monks; Our Monks of Worcester shall herein fully convince him; who write
under their Oswaldus Archiepiscopus; Oswald Archbishop of York.
Per me fundatus fuit ex clericis monachatus, That is, By me were Monks first
founded out of Clerks; Which was also the fashion of all other erections of
this nature; so as it is manifest, that originally these Churches were founded
in married Clergymen; afterward wrongfully translated, from them to Monks;
And if the first possessors had been A Clericis in Monachos translata est
seeds Pontif hon. vid. supr.
Monks, how could Monks have been there first founded by Oswald, when as
Ethelred had long before both founded, and furnished it? and how out of
Clerks, if Monks had been there before? Let my Refuter show me but a Verse
of equal antiquity in a contrary ryme, Per me fundatus fuit ex
Monachis Clericatus.
and I yield him my argument: Otherwise let the world judge, if he be not
shamelesly obstinate in not yielding.

Refut. p. 324.
But to strike it dead, my Adversary will prove the English Clergy ever to
have been continent. Reader, look now for Demonstrations; His first proof
is, That in all the pursuit of this business, Non est scriptum, ergo non est
factum, etc.
we never read of any that did stand upon the former custom of the Church. A
proper argument, ab authoritate negative. And what other arguments does my
Detector find used by the then-persecuted Clergy? Histories record them not;
therefore doubtless they said nothing for themselves; and if they urged other
proofs, which are not now descended to us by any relation, why not this for
one? Who can but hiss out so silly sophistry? But to stop that clamorous mouth
in this poor cauil; does not his own Gul. Malmes. de gest. Augl. l. 2. c. 9.
Monk of Malmesbury tell him, that the Clergy urged this plea for themselves,
Ingens esse and miserabile dedecus, vt nonus aduena veteres colonos migrare
compellerit, etc. That it was a great and miserable shame, that these vpstarts,
the Monks, should thrust out the ancient possessors of those places; that this
was neither pleasing to God, which had given them that long-continued
habitation, nor yet to any good man, who might justly fear the same hard
measure which was offered to them: Thus they, whose plea and complaynt seemed
so just, that Alfgina the Queen, Prince Alfere, and others of the nobility
ouer-threw many of those new-founded monasteries, and reinstalled the Priests
in their former right.

His next proof is from the Letters of Pope Gregory, Ref. p. 325.
which he wrote to Austin the Monk here in England. Risum teneatis? Did ever
any man doubt, but that Pope Gregory was desirous to establish Romish Laws,
and orders, amongst the English. Where yet his Legate found many as good
Christians as himself under another rule, conform to the Greek Church? But
how follows this? This Pope was willing to in-romanize the English; therefore
the staff stands in the corner: And yet even Pope Gregory allowed marriage to
those of the Greg. resp. ad quaest. 2. Aug.
English Clergy, which were not within the higher Orders; appoynting them to
receive their stipends apart; a favor which he saw necessarily to be yielded
to our nation, whiles he abridged others.

Ref. p. 326.
From Gregory, he descends to Beda, a man doubtless venerable for his
learning, and virtue; but (as it is in his Epitaph) Monachorum nobile sydus.
The noble Star of Monks.
Whether a neighbor at least to Italy, by birth (as they contend) I am sure a
Disciple of Abbot Benedict, and so great a fautor of the Roman faction, that he
censures S. Aidanus and Colmannus, for adhering to those Greek forms, which
the Churches of this Island had anciently followed; whose part Ioannes Mayor
justly takes against him. This Beda in a general speculation speaks his
conceit of the voluntary continency which he holds requisite in the
Priesthood; says nothing of the particular custom of the English Clergy;
rather in diverse passages insinuating the contrary. Amongst the rest, he
tells us that in the Bed. Eccles. hist. Aug. l. 4.
Synod holden by Archbishop Theodorus, and the other Bishops (at Hereford) in
the third year of King Egfride (which was about Anno 673.) their Tenth and
last Canon was pro coniugijs; vt nulli liceat nisi legitimum habere connubium;
For Marriages; That no man should marry unlawfully, no man should commit
incest, no man should leave his own wife, unless (as the Gospel teaches) for
fornication only, etc. I know, my Refuter will plead the universality of this
Canon, and will contend, that a Law generally made for all Christians, is not
without injury restrained to Ecclesiastiques; But let my Reader well consider,
both the Prologue and Epilogue of that Synod, he shall see, that they who are
required to keep these Laws, are Consacerdotes omnes; and that whosoever shall
violate them, Nouerit se ab omni officio Sacerdotali and nostra societate
separatum; must know himself separate from all sacerdotall office and society:
so as it will necessarily follow, that this Law did (at least) concern the
Clergy with others, though not apart; Neither is there any other of those
Canons, which concerns not the Clergy only; except the first, concerning the
observation of Easter, which principally also belonged to them. Whereto it makes
not a little, I forbear the Saxon word, for lack of their Characters. The
Reader shall find them cited in Saxon by Mat. Parker. Def. of Pr. Mar.
that in the Book of Saxon Canons set out for the governing of the secular
Priests, the rule is, Let them also do their endeavor, that they hold with
perpetual diligence their chastity, in an unspotted body, or else let them
be coupled with the bond of one Matrimony. Words, wherein our Clergy meant to
regulate themselves (as it seems) by the holy prescript of Isidore, whereof
we have spoken. Lastly, my Adversary cannot deny, that this Synod gives
order for many accidental matters, concerning the Clergy, for their fixed
station, for their maintenance, etc. but except in this Canon, there is no one
word of their state of life; neither is there in all those Canons, one syllable
of this pretended Celibate, as that, which the contrary received custom of our
Church would never have endured; My Refuter da^es not say that these marriages
were so quite out of use, that it was needless to ordain ought against them;
he knows that his DVNSTAN found here this course so inueterate, that the very
age and deep rooting of it hindered his designs.

SECT. XIII.
Ref. p. 328.
FRom Bid he comes down to his three premised Saints, Dunstan, Oswald, and
Ethelwold; and, to make sure work, cites an obscure Vulstan. in vita
Ethelwoldi.
Scholar of Ethelwold, for an authentic Witness against eight honest
Priests, and the lawfulness of all Priests marriages. And lastly, he makes up
the mouth of his discourse with the full Decree of Archbishop Anselme Richard
in the Synods of London; p. 329, 330, 331.
and why not King Henry's six Article? and why not the Council of Trent? Sic
conclusum est contra haereticos; Now, because his heart told him, how light
these proofs were, he lays in the scales with them certain grave
ponderations, which all put together, will prove almost at weighty as the
Fether he wrote withal.

The first is, That there cannot be a greater national proof then to have
the Bishops and the King, and his Nobility to define, and deliver this point
with joint consent. Take this, Ref. p. 332.
Reader, of King Edward the sixth, and his Parliament, and Convocation, and all
is well. King Edgars Vtopicall decree was hatched in a Monks cowle: and to his
two King Henry's, he might have added Philip and Mary. And why might not we
oppose King Edmund to Edgar, and Osulphus his Bishop to Dunstan? And the
Clergy before Anselme to the Clergy after him? This match were made with some
indifferency; But how idly has my Refuter mislaid the comparison betwixt
Henry of Huntingdon, and Fabian on our part, and all the Clergy and Laity of
theirs? Since those two Authors (if we had no more) report only de facto,
that Priests marriages were not before forbidden; and the cited Clergy and
Laity do now thus late-ward discuss de iure; Neither have the Clergy and
Laity by him alleged, ever contradicted that which Huntingdon and Fabian have
out of the course of all Story affirmed; Unto which, let me add Polyd. Hist.
Aug. l. 6. Anno ^70. De Inuentorib. l. 5.
Polydore Virgill, seconding this their assertion; who plainly tells us, that
for 970. years, the restraint of marriage was never in use amongst the English
Clergy. Search not for this, Reader, in the later editions, lest thou
complain of lost labor; Poor Polydore may cry out of his grave with that
other Polydore in Virgill: Fas omne abrumpit Polydorum obtruncat. Let him then
(to answer this vain challenge) produce but any one Author of equal
authority to any of these, which does avouch the contrary to that, which these
three have thus confidently delivered, and I shall confess my self herein
sufficiently answered; In the mean time, let him, and the world know, that all
the ancient Clergy, and Laity of this Island, was for this liberty, altogether
ours: Whereto if he yield not, let him name the man, before his Dunstan, that
ever in this I Will opened his mouth against it; Till then, the Reader cannot but
see; that whereas our proof is, Ex ^re duorum, aut trium, his side is mute;
that for our Something, be can show Nothing at all; and that our Huntingdon, F.
Fabian and Polydore, are better then C. E. and his Man in the Moon.

SECT. XIIII.
HIs second ponderation of the sanctity of the persons, Refut. p. 335.
i^ no truer auoir-de-poi^. That B. Dunstan was an holy man, we may easily
grant; but taken from the Covent of Glastenbury. Neither would the Nobility of
his time be so liberal as to the King, To King Ath^sta^, who first brought
him from his Cell.
De^libidinibus and pra^tigijs; for (two remarkable qualities in his
Saintship) lechery and sorcery; whereupon he was cast out from the Court; and
that he was received again, he might thank the Kings horse, whose sudden
stop on the Verge of a steep downe-fall, restored Dunstan to the good opinion
of the superstitious Prince; who yet was so far from being guilty of this
deliverance, that he did not so much as know of the danger; An acquitall at
least as causeless as the accusation.

That Bishop Anselme was devout and learned, we willingly grant, but withal an
Italian, and taken from a Norman The Clergy of England did so well approve these
Monkish Archbishops, that after Anselme, and Rodulph, the Bishops of the Land,
became Suitors to the King, that they might never have any Archbishop of
Canterb. chosen from the Monkish profession, Sax. Chron. Ann. 1123.
Covent; He was holy, but how impetuously addicted to his own will; and how
refractarie to authority, I had rather Histories should speak then my self.
Neither is it any wonder if both these Prelates (how holy soever) sauoured
somewhat too strong of the Cloisters, and of Rome. Something must be yielded to
Times and Places; we will not think but a well-meant zeal carried them into
these resolutions; but a zeal misguided with the sway of the Times. The name
of Saints, the truth of their sanctity did not privilege them from errors; we
know how to sever their chafe from their wheat, and to send one of them to the
Winds, the other to the Granarie. Refut. p. 338.
As for the married Clergy, That they were ever accounted the scumme and
refuse of their Order, it is but the scurrilous scummy blurre of an intemperate
pen; what was Spiridion? what was Hilary? what were both Gregory's? what was
Sidonius? what was Tertullian, Prosper, Simplicius, Eupsychius? In a word, what
were all those whom his Damasus recounteth? what was the father of the
Archdeacon of Huntingdon, whom within two leaves he records (from his
Epitaph) for Stella cadit cleri, splendour marcet Nicolai: Stella cadens cleri,
splendeat arce Dei, Huntingd. l. 7.
the star of the Clergy. This scumme is better then their broth: which
though it send forth a fume, seemingly delicious, yet many times being nearer
tasted, proves but cock-crowne pottage. These Saints he ignorantly
ballanceth again with our Huntingdon, and Fabian; as if their present decree
did contradict the history of things passed; as if we had no more histories on
our side, because my margin cited them not. In the mean time, he finds this
Testimony of Huntingdon so too much, that he would feign strip us of it;
denying peremptorily, that Huntingdon affirms Anselme to be the first that
forbad marriage to the Clergy.

Reader, in stead of all other ponderations weigh the words, Henr. Huntingd.
edit. Sauil. p. 378.
Eodem anno ad festum S. Michaelis tenuit Anselmus Archiepiscopus Concilium,
apud Londoniam, in qou prohibuit vxores sacerdotibus Anglorum, antea non
prohibitas, i. The same year, on the Feast of S. MICHAEL, Archbishop ANSELME
held a Synod at London, wherein he forbad wives to the Priests of England,
before not forbidden; and tell me whether my Detector be true.

The words are too plain; he will wrangle yet with the sense, and tells us
that the word, Before, may signify, perhaps, Immediately before, in the reign
of the Williams, and not all succession of times. It were well if he could
escape so: But this starting hole will not hide him. For (not to send him to
Schole to learn the difference betwixt Antea and Dudum, or Pridem). The same
Author, in the following words, shows us the censures and conceits that
passed upon this Act, as an absolute and vnheard-off novelty; like as in
Germany, the Historians brand this same Act in Hildebrand, with a nouo exemplo,
and inconsiderato praeiudicio. And for the times preceding, Polydore Virgil
gives the very same witness. Neither let him fly for succor to his Dunstan,
who never can be proved to have prohibited the marriage of Priests, though he
disliked that Monasteries and Cathedral Churches should be possessed by
married Clerks.

Lastly, Refut. p. 343.
where the testimony is displeasing, the witness himself must be disgraced.
Curiosity led my Detector to search who this H. Huntingdon might be; with one
inquiry he might find him to be a Canon Regular of Austins Order, and for
dignity an Archdeacon; a person past exception: But for his Parentage, he went
no further then to the next Leaf, to find that he was the son of a noted,
and, in those days, eminent Clergy man: Vid. supra.
His Epitaph at Lincoln shows him to have been the Star of the Clergy, no
whit dimmed in his acknowledged light, or hindered in his influence, by his
conjunction in lawful wedlock: What better instance could my Refuter have
given against himself? If he think to insinuate that his birth made him
partial; The Reader will easily consider, that if such Parentage had been
then accounted shameful, the Historian would have had the wit to have
suppressed it; And withal that he durst not, writing in the times when this
thing was so familiarly and universally known, have offered such a Proposition
to the light, out of a vain partiality, to incur the controllment of all
eyes.

SECT. XV.
AS for our Fabian, if C.E. Ref. p. 333.
find him a Merchant, I find him to have been Sheriff of the Honorable
City of London; A man whose credit would scorn to to be poysed with an
hundred namelesse Fugitives, parasiticall pettie-chapmen of the late
small-wares of Rome. Neither can the name of a Citizen disparage him to any
wise judge. How many have our times yielded of that rank, whom both
Academicall education, and experience and travel, and study have wrought to
an eminent perfection in all Arts, especially in Mathematickes, and History!
Such was Fabian, whose fidelity (besides his other worths) was never (that I
find) taxed but by this insolent Pen that has learned to forbear no man; He
was too old for us to bribe, and too credible for C. E. to disgrace. If he
would have lent Rome but this one lie, no man had been more authentical; now
his truth makes him fabulous Fabian. That one fault has marred our Archdeacon
of Huntingdon also.

Ref. p. 348.
The Story which he tells of the Cardinal of Crema the Popes Legate taken in
bed (after his busy endeavors, against the married Clergy) the same day with
an Harlot, has undone his reputation. Why will C.E. stir this sink? No man
provoked him: If he did not long to blazon the shame of his friends, he had
rather smothered this foul occurrence; but since he will be meddling, Res
apertissima negari non potuit, celari non debuit, says HVNTINGDON. The thing
was most openly known, it could not be denied, it might not be concealed.
Yet now comes an Vpstart-Nouice, and dares tell us from Baronius, that this was
a mere Fable; how public and notorious soever, Huntingdon makes it: with
these men this rule is universal, whatsoever may tend to the dishonor of the
Church of Rome, is false and fabulous.

Indeed, I remember what their Gloss said of old, Did. 96. In script.
Clericus amplectens mulierem, prasumitur been agere, si ergo Clericus
amplectitur mulierem, interpratabuitur quod causa benedicendi eam, hoc faciat:
That is; A Clergy man embracing a woman, must be presumed to do well; If
therefore a Clerk take a woman by the middle, it must be interpreted that he
does it to give her his blessing. So the Chronicle tells us of Adelme, Abbot of
Malmesbury, who when he was stirred to the vice of the flesh, had wont to
despite the Devil, and torment himself with holding a fair young Virgin in
his bed, so long as he might say over the whole Psalter, Vid. Pask. Def. Polyd.
suppressing the name, tells the History.
Perhaps, the good Legate was but bestowing his ghostly blessing on so needful
a subject, but that he was found in bed with her, if C. E. were not as
shameless as that Cardinal, or his bedfellow, he durst not deny; For what
impudency is this, to cast this relation only upon H. Huntingdon, when so many
uncontrollable Pens have recorded it to the World? Men of their own stamp,
for Religion, for Devotion. Matthew Paris, Ranulfus Cestrensis Roger Houeden,
Polydore Virgill, Fabian, Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, otherwise called
Florilegus; Dictus IOANNES, qui in Concilio, etc. says he; The said JOHN which
in the open Council had grievously condemned all the Viz. the married: so did
the enemies of Marriage disgracefully term the married Clergy; and so are the
words of the Legate to be understood, de latere meretricis; he then railing
against Marriage (not whoredom properly) was deprehended in whoredom.
Concubinary Priests, was taken himself in the same crime. Now let my Reader
judge, whether this Priests Truth, or that Cardinals honesty were greater.

SECT. XVI.
HIs third Ponderation is the same with the first; Every thing eekes. His
Saint Dunstan and Anselme, Gregory and Bid are again laid in our dish; we
cannot feed on these ouer-oft-sod Coleworts. I am challenged here, to produce
any Priest or Deacon that lived in Wedlock before the times of Dunstan; The
man presumes upon the suppression of Records. For one, I name him hundreds. Who
were they that Dunstan and his fellow-Saints found seated in the Cathedral
Churches of this Land? whom did they eiect? Were they not married Priests?
What did the eiected Clergy plead but ancient possession? After that; in the
Synod which Archbishop Ex Act. Council. Wint. sub. Lanfr.
Lanfranck held at Winchester (which I wonder my Detectour would ouer-see: This
neglect is not for nothing;) was it not decreed, that the Canons should not
have Wives, but that the Priests which dwelt in Towns and Villages, should not
be compelled to put away their Wives; though caution is put in for the future?

What does this imply, but that in those ancient Times the English Clergy were
inoffensiuely married? To which add that old Record from an ancient
Martyrologe of the Church of Canterbury: Martyrol. Cant.
LANFRANCVS Archiepiscopus reddidit Ecclesiae Sancti ANDREae, etc. LANFRANCK
Archbishop has restord to Saint ANDREWS Church; the Monastery of Saint MARIE
with the Lands and Houses which LIVINGVS Priest, and his Wife had in London,
etc. And before him, or Dustan either, in King Edmunds time, Fox. Act. and Mon.
Bishop Osulphus with Athelme and Vlrick, Laics, thrust out of the Monks of
Euesham, and placed Canons (married Priests) in their room.

If he be the Son of a Bishop, etc.
Lastly, Iornalensis records it as King Ina's Law, long before these times; Si
Episcopi filiolus sit, sitdimidium hoc, etc. as supposing this no other then
ordinary in those times.

Now let my Refuter comfort himself and his Catholics, with the weak defense
of Heresy, and the strong Bulwarks of Roman Truth; who in the mean time
must be put in mind, that he puts on me the burden which should lie upon his
own shoulders; I have produced Histories which affirm peremptorily, that the
English Clergy were never forbidden to marry until Anselmes time; it is now
his task to disprooue this assertion of theirs by equal authority to the
contrary, which till he have done, the day is ours.

SECT. XVII.
HIs fourth Ponderation, Refut. p. 347.
is the difficulty of this grant in King Edwards Parliament. And is it
possible the man should not see the greater difficulty that was found in the
inforcement of this glorious Celibate? How Alfere and the Nobles dispossessed
the Monks of Dunstan; justly restoring the married Priests to their ancient
right? How Lanfranck durst not speak it out; Anselme did, but prevailed
little: Let Vid. supra. Epist. ad Ansel. Neubr. l. 3. c. 5.
Girardus then Archbishop of York witness. After whom Roger Archbishop of
that See (as Neubrigensis, records) thrust out Pope Paschalis writing to
Anselme, says, that there was at this time so great a number of Priests Sons
in England, that the greater part of the Clergy consisted of them.
Anselmes Monks, and stood for the liberty of Marriage: in so much as in the
succession of Times, even by Royal leave also, Marriage of spiritual persons
yet continued; Neither could Anselmes Successors, Radulphus, Gulielmus de
Turbine and the rest, (notwithstanding all their Canons and practices) prevail
against it. How plain is that of the Chron. Saxon. Anno 1129.
Saxon Chronicle? Thus did the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishops, which
were in England; And yet all these Decrees and biddings stood not; All held
their Wives by the Kings leave, even as they did. Insomuch as Archbishop
WILLIAM referred it to the King. The King decreed, that the Priests should
continue with their Wives still. Neither were any thing more easy then to give
store of instances in this kind. What need I give more then that of Galfride
B. of Ely, Chron. Iornal.
who was avouched before the Pope himself to have married a wife? which Habet
excusationem Euangelicam resp. est ab Epis. Arelat. Alexandro Papae
Euangelical excuse (vxorem duxit) was made for his not appearing at Rome with
the rest. Of Richard Bishop of Chichester. ROBERT Bishop of Lincoln married
men, after these Decrees; yea, good Evidences of Ancient Charts are ready in
our hands, to show the use and legal allowance of these Marriages for no less
then two hundred years after.

As for those idle words which his sauciness throws after our reverend
Martyr, Archbishop Cranmer, (whom he falsely affirms to have been the first
married Archbishop of this Kingdom, Anno 1250.
when as Archbishop Boniface sat married in that See three hundred years
before him) and King Edwards Parliament, we answer them, with silence and
scorn. Let leesers have leave to talk.

The approbation, and better expedience of single life in capable subjects, we
do willingly subscribe unto; The lawfulness, yea, necessity of Marriage
where the gift of Continence is denied, our Savior, and his chosen vessel
justify with us. So as I still conclude, He that made marriage, says it is
honorable, what care we for the dishonor of those that corrupt it?

SECT. XVIII.
Ref. 351.
HIs last ponderation is leaden indeed; That from the bickerings of our English
Clergy with their DVNSTANS, it will not follow that continency was not
ancient, but was repiningly, lately, unjustly imposed. C. E. writes in the
Margin, Master Halls loose manner of disputing.
By this reason, he will prove there was never Thief or Malefactor in our
Country, before the time of King JAMES; since all Judges have yearly
bickerings with such people. Thus he. But did ever such loose Besome sweep the
press before?

Reader, vouchsafe yet once more to cast thine eye upon the close of my
Epistle; Does my argument run thus wildly as he makes it? The English Clergy
had bickerings with their DVNSTANS, therefore continency was repiningly and
unjustly imposed? Can thou think I have met with a sober Adversary? My
words are; That our Histories teach us how late, how repiningly, how unjustly
our English Clergy stooped under this yoke. And what can his sophistry make
of this? Are ye not ashamed (ye Superiors of Doway?) are ye not ashamed of such
a Champion; fitter for a troop of Pigmees to traile a reed in their bickerings
with Cranes, then to be committed with any reasonable or Scholler-like
Antagonist? In the bickerings with his Dunstans, the Patients pleaded
prescription (as we have showed out of Malmesbury) and taxed his Saints with
nouelty; In my bickerings with him, I plead Antiquity, Scripture, Reason; and
tax him most justly with impudence, and absurdity. How well is that man, that
is matched but with an honest Adversary?

The Conclusion.
Ref. p. 353. etc.
THe Conclusion follows, a fit cover for such a dish; The Reader was not weary
enough, but he must be tired out with a tedious recapitulation; wherein my
Refuter recollects all his dispersed folly, that it may show the fayrer:
Telling his Protestant friend, what I have bragged, what I have undertaken,
what I have not performed, how I have satisfied, how I have mistaken; what
himself has in all passages performed against me, how he has answered, how he
has conquered; The best is, the Conclusion can show no more then the Premises.
By them, let me be judged: Those have made good to my Reader that C. E. has
accused much; and proved nothing, vanted much, and done nothing; rayled much,
and hurt nothing, labored much, and gained nothing, talked much, and said
nothing.

It is a large and bold word: but if any one clause of mine be unproven if any
one clause of mine be disproued, any one exception against my defense proved
just, any one charge of his proved true, any one falsehood of mine detected, any
one argument of mine refelled, any one argument or proposition of his not
refelled, Let me go away convicted with shame. But if I have answered every
Challenge, vindicated every I only except that one slip of my pen, that I said
Gratian cited a sentence out of Austin, which was indeed his own.
authority, justified every proof, wiped away every cavil, affirmed no
proposition untruly, censured nothing unjustly; satisfied all his malicious
objections, and warranted every sentence of my poor Epistle: Let my Apology
live and pass; and let my Refuter go as he is, C. F. Cauillator Egregius: Let
my cause be no more victorious then just; and let honest Marriages ever hold up
their heads, in despite of Rome and Hell: With this Farewell, I leave my
Refuter, either to the acting of his unbloody executions of the Son of God;
or the plotting of the bloody executio^s of the deputies of God, or (as it were
his best) to the knocking of his Beads; But if he will needs be meddling with
his pen, and will have me, after some Iubilies, to expect an answer to my
sixe-weekes labor, I shall in the mean time pray, that God would give him the
grace to give way to the known Truth, and sometimes to say true.

Yet to gratify my Reader at the parting, I may not conceal from him, an
ancient and worthy monument, which I had the favor and happiness to see in
the Inner Library of Corpus Christi College in Cambridge; An excellent
Treatise, written (amongst seventeen other) in a fair set hand, by an Author
of great learning and Antiquity; He would needs (suppress his name, Of Roane
in France.
but describes himself to be Rotomagensis: The Time wherein it was written,
appears to be amids the heat of contention, which was betwixt the Archbishop
of Canterbury and York, for precedencie; As also the contention betwixt the
Church of Roane and Vienna. R^g. Houed.
which quarrel fell betwixt Rodulph of Canterbury and Thurstin of York, in
the year (1114.) at which time Pope PASCHALIS wrote to King HENRY concerning
it; and was renewed after about the year 1175. The Discourse shall speak
enough for it self.

ROTOMAGENSIS. ANONYMVS.
An liceat Sacerdotibus inire Matrimonia.
SCire volui quis primus instituit ne Sacerdotes Christiani inire deberent
matrimonia. Deus an homo? Si enim Deus, eius certe sententia and tenenda and
obseruanda est cum omni veneratione and reuerentia. Si vero homo and non Deus,
de cord hominis and non ex ore Dei talis egressa est traditio: Ideoque nec per
eam salus adquiritus si obseruetur, nec amittitur si non obseruetur. Non enim
est hominis saluare vel perdere aliquem pro meritis, sed Dei proprium vnius
est, scilicet, quod Deus hoc instituerit, nec in veteri Testamento nec in
Euangelio, ncc in Apostolorum Epistolis scriptum reperitur, in quibus quicquid
Deus hominibus praecepit insertum describitur. Traditio ergo hominis est and
non Dei, non Apostolorum institutio. Quemadmodum and Apostolus instituit, vt
oportet Episcopum esse vnius vxoris virum. Quod minime instituisset, si
adulterium esset quod Episcopus haberet simul and vxorem, and Ecclesiam quaesi
duas vxores, vt quidam asserunt. Quodque de Scripturis sanctis non habet
authoritatem eadem facilitate contemnitur qua dicitur. Sancta enim Ecclesia non
Sacerdotis vxor, non sponsa, sed Christi est, sicut Ioannes dicit, Qui habet
sponsam, sponsus est: huius inquam sponsi Ecclesia sponsa est, and tamen huic
sponsae licet in part inire matrimonia ex Apostolica traditione. Dicit enim
Apostolus ad Cor. Propter fornicationes inquit vnusquisque vxorem suam habeat,
and caetera vsque volo omnes homines esse sicut me ipsum, sed vnusquisque
proprium donum habet a Deo, alius quidem sic, alius vero sic. Non enim omnes
habent vnum donum virginitatis scilicet, and continentiae, sed quidam virgins
sunt and continentes, quidam vero incontinentes, quibus concidit nuptias ne
tentet eos Sathanas propter incontinentiam suam and in ruinam turpitudinis
corruant. Sed and sacerdotes quoque alij quidem continentes sunt, alij vero
incontinentes, and qui continentes sunt, continentiae suae donum a Deo
consecuti sunt, sine eius dono and gratia continentes esse non possunt.
Incontinentes vero hoc donum gratiae minime percipiunt, qui cum intemperantia
suae conspersionis, tum etiam animi infirmitate per carnis desideria diffluunt.
Quod nullo modo facerent, si continentiae gratiam and virtutem a Deo
percepissent. Sentiunt anim and ipsi alia^ legem in membris suis repugnantem
legi mentis sua, and captinantem eos in lege peccati, et quod nolunt agere
cogentem, qui de corpore mortis huius liberantur gratia Dei. Hac itaque eos
lege captiuante, and carnis concupiscentia stimulante, aut fornicari coguntur
aut nubere. Quarum quid melius sit Apostolica docemur authoritate, qua dicitur,
melius nubere quam vri. Quod melius est, id certe eligendum and tenendum est.
Melius est inquam nubere, quia peius est vri. Quia melius est nubere quam vri,
Conueniens est incontiuentibus vt nubant, non vt vrantur. Bonae etenim sunt
nuptia, sicut Augustinus ait in libro super Genesin ad litera^, in ipsi^
commendatur bonum naturae quo incontinentiae regitur pranitas, and naturae
decoratu^ foecunditas. N^ vtriusque senus infirmitas propendens in ruinam
turpitudinis, recte excipitur honastate nuptiarum, vt quod sanis possit esse
officium, s^grotis remedium. Neque enim quia incontinentia malum est ideo
connubium, vel quo incontinentes copulantur non est bonum. I mo vero non
propter illud malum culpabile est bonum, sed propter hoc bonum veniale est
illud malum: quoniam id quod bonum habent nuptiae, and quod bonae sunt nuptiae,
peccatum esse nunquam potest. Hoc autem tripartitum est, fides, proles,
Sacramentum. In fide attenditur, ne praeter vinculum coniugale, cum altera vel
cum altero concubatur. In prole, vt amanter suscipiatur, benign suscipiatur,
religiose educetur. In Sacramento, vt coniugium non separetur, and demissus aut
demissa ne causa prolis alteri coniugatur. Haec est tanquam regula nuptiarum,
qua vel naturae decoratur foecunditas, vel incontinentiae regitur prauitas.
Hanc autem regulam nuptiarum, and hoc tripartitum bonum instituit aeterna
veritas ordine decenti and lege aeterna, contra quam quicquid fit, vel dicitur,
vel concupiscitur, peccatum est. Quod in libro contra Faustum Manichaeum
Augustinus testatur, dicens, Peccatum est factum, vel dictum, vel concupitum
contrae aeternam legem. Aeterna lex est diuina voluntas, sieve ratio ordinem
naturalem perturbari vetans, conseruari iubens. Quicquid igitur ordinem
naturalem perturbari iubet, conseruari vetat, exercere nuptias and earum
tripartitum bonum, fidem, scilicet, prolem and Sacramentum eos habere prohibet,
and regulam illam aeternae veritatis qua naturae decoratur foecunditas, vel
incontinentiae regitur prauitas, eos soluere praecipit, etc. quibus naturalis
ordo peragitur, abhomi^ari iubet. Hoc inquam mandatum naturalem ordinem
conseruari vetat, perturbari iubet, and ideo contra aeternam legem fit, et
peccatum est: peccant enim qui mandatum tale instituunt, quo naturalis ordo
destruitur. Nam etiam vt videtur, minime credunt quod de Sacerdotum filijs
assumat Deus ad aedificandam supernam Ciuitatem, and ad restaurandum Angelorum
numerum. Si enim crederent, nunquam tale mandatum instituerent, quia scienter
and nimia temeritate id efficere conare^tur, vt superna Ciuitas nu^quam
proficiatur, and Angelorum numerus nunquam reperaretur: si enim superna Ciuitas
de filijs etiam Sacerdotum perficienda est, and si Angelorum numerus de ipsis
etiam reperandus est, qui hoc efficere conatur vt nulli sint, quantum in ipso
est, and supernam ciuitatem destruit, and Angelorum numerus ne perficiatur
efficit. Quo quod peruersius potest fieri? Hoc enim fit contra voluntatem and
praedestinationem illius, qui quae futura sint fecit. Fecit enim
praedestinatione quae futura sunt in opere. Quicunque ergo id efficere conatur
at non faciat Deus in opere quae fecit in Praedestinatione, ipsam
Praedestinationem Dei conatur euacuere. Si ergo Deus fecit in Praedestinatione
vt filij Sacerdotum futuri sint in opere, qui hoc efficere conatur vt non
futuri sint, in opere destruere molitur facta Dei quod fecit praedestinatione,
and ita praedestinationem Dei nititur euertere, and voluntatem Dei contraire
quae aeterna est. Voluit enim Deus ab aeterna, and ante saeculum omnes homines
creare in saeculo, certo quidem ordine quo praecogitauit and praedestinauit eos
se creaturum. Nihil enim inordinate facit, nihil in saeculo creat, quod non
ante in praedestinatione suae mentis procedente omnia saeculo disponendo
praeordinauerit. Quaecunque ergo in hoc saeculo ab ipso creantur,
Praedestinationem mentis praedisponentem ac praeordinantem omni^ necessario
sequuntur, quod impossible est non fieri quod Deus ab aeterno voluit and
praeordinauit fieri. Necesse est igitur omnes homines eo ordine creari, quo
voluit ab aeterno and praeordinauit. Alioquin non sicut voluit Deus, neque
sicut praeordinauit omnes homines sunt crea^i, sed quod hoc inconueniens est
necesse est illos creari, sicut voluit ab aeterno and praecogitauit atque
praeordinauit, quod omnia quae voluit fecit, and nihil vnquam fecit quae non
voluit ab aeterno and praecogitauit decreto certo and incommutabili. Quia nec
eius voluntas irrite potest fieri, nec praecogitatio falli, nec
praeordinationes commutari. Quae cum ita sint, necesse est vt sicut Laici, ita
etiam Sacerdotes de quibus homines creantur, ad ipsos creandos Ministerium
exhibeant diuinae voluntati and Praeordinationi. Parents non sunt authors
creationis filiorum, sed Ministri. Qui si Ministerium non exhiberent,
voluntatem Dei and praecogitationem si possibile esset irritam facerent,
ordinationique resisterent. Quod si scienter facerent grauius vtique
delinquerent, si nescienter minus non solum in Deum Patrem, sed and in
coelestem Jerusalem sanctorum omnium matrem, quod quantum in ipsis esset illos
creari non permitterens, ex quibus ea aedificanda and coelestis patriae dantia
sunt praeparanda. Sed ab hoc delicto defendit eos in potentia, quod non possunt
voluntati Dei resistere and praeordinationi contraire. Voluntas enim Dei and
Praedestinatio Lex aeterna est, in qua omnium rerum cursus d^cretus est, and
paradigma est, in quo omnium saeculorum forma depicta est, quod nulla ratione
aboleri potest. Huic igitur Ministeriu^ non exhibere malu^ est, quod exhibire
bonum est and maxim cum bona fit voluntate. Quod tum fit, cum parents
conueniunt causa giguendae prolis, non appetitu exercendae libidinis. Gignendae
prolis dico, quia and praesens Ecclesia multiplicatur, and coelestis Ciuitas
fabricetur, and electorum numerus compleatur, quorum nihil potest fieri sine
conuentione tali. Si enim primi parents Sanctorum omnes aut continentes
permansissent aut virgins, nullus Sanctoru^ ex eis esset natus in saeculo,
nullus gloria and honor coronatus in coelo, nullus adscitu^ in Angelorum
numero. Sed quia inestimabile bonum est, quod Sancti natisunt in saeculo, quod
gloria and honor coronantur in coelo, and quod adsciti sunt in Angelorum
numero, ex eo parentum foecunditas beatior praedicatur, and conuentus sanctior.
Sic ergo melius fuit eis tales filios genuisse quam non genuisse, talemque
fructum nuptiarum protulisse, quam si^e fructu continentes, aut virgins
extitisse. Quamuis bonum fit quibusdam continentes esse, vel virgins, illis
viz. quos Deus v^luit ab aeterno, and praeordinauit ita creandos esse in
saeculo, vt continentia vel virginitate permaneant: sicut enim voluit ab
aeterno, and praeordinauit quosdam, ita creandos esse in saeculo, vt fructu^
nuptiarum faciant and filios generent, ita etiam voluit and praeordinauit ab
aeterno, quosdam ita creandos esse, vt in continentia vel virginitate
permaneant. Et sicut illi ad creandos filios voluntati Dei and praeordinationi
ministerium exhibent, ita and isti ad conseruandam and continentiam and
virginitatem voluntati Dei est praeordinationi ministrant. Ac per hoc and
illorum foecunditas and istorum virginitas bona est atque laudabilis, quae si
non ministeriu^ exhiberet voluntati Dei et praeordinationi, nec bona esset nec
laudabilis. Omne enim quod voluntati Dei and praeordinationi contrarium est,
nec bonum est nec laudabile. Si ergo voluit Deus and praedestinauit alios
futuros virgins, ali^s nuptiarum fructum facientes. Si enim omnes essent
virgins, nullus Sanctoru^ qui vel nascitur vel nasciturus sit, in hoc saeculo
natus esset, vel nasciturus. Nec ipsi etiam virgins essent, quia nati non
essent. Ex foecunditate enim illorum orta est istorum virginitas. Magnum igitur
bonu^ est foecunditas, de qua sancta praecessit virginitas. Quia autem virgins
esse debeant, and qui nuptiarum fructus facientes, docet eos verbu^ quod Deus
seminat in cordibus illorum. In aliorum enim cordibus se^^at verbum bonae
foecunditatis nuptiarum fructum facientis, in aliorum vero cordibus seminat
verbum virginitatis, Deest (opinor) pars clausulae; Illi ergo in quibus seminat
verbum virginitatis, etc.
ipsi virginitatem seruare desiderant: In quibus vero verbum nuptiarum seminat,
ipsi facere nuptiarum fructum appetunt.

Which, for my Countrimens sake I have thus Englished.
I Would feign know who it was that first ordained, that Christian Priests
might not marry, GOD, or Man? For, if it were GOD, surely, his determination is
to be held and observed with all veneration and reverence; But, if it were Man,
and not GOD; and this Tradition came out of the heart of Man, not out of the
Mouth of GOD, then neither is salvation got by it, if it be observed; nor lost,
if it be not observed: For it does not belong to Man either to save or destroy
any man for his merits, but it is proper only unto GOD. That GOD has ordained
this, it is neither found written in the Old Testament, nor in the Gospel, nor
in the Epistles of the Apostles, in all which is set down whatsoever GOD has
enjoined unto men. It is therefore a Tradition of Man, and not an institution
of GOD, nor of his Apostles: As the Apostle instituted (rather) that a Bishop
should be the Husband of one Wife; which he would never have appointed, if it
had been adultery for a bishop to have at once a Wife, and a Church, as it
were two Wives, like as some affirm: Now, that which has not authority from
the holy Scriptures, is with the same facility contemned, that it is spoken:
For, the holy Church is not the Wife, not the Spouse of the Priest, but of
Christ, as Saint John says, He that has the Bride, he is the Bridegroom.
Of this Bridegroom, I say, is the Church the Spouse; and yet it is lawful
even for this Spouse in part, to marry, by Apostolic Tradition; For the
Apostle speaks thus to the Corinthians, Because of fornications, let every man
have his own wife. And I would that all men were as I am, but every man has
his proper gift of GOD, one thus, another otherwise. For, all men have not one
gift, namely, of Virginity, and Continency: But some are Virgins, and
contain; others contain not; to whom he grants marriage, lest Satan tempt
them through their incontinency, and they should miscarry in the ruin of their
uncleanness. So also of Priests, some are continent, others are incontinent;
and those which are continent, have received the gift of their continence from
GOD, without whose Gift and Grace, they cannot be continent. But those which
are incontinent, have not received this gift of grace, but, whether by the
intemperance of their humor, or the weakness of their mind run out into
fleshly desires; which they would in no wise do, if they had received from GOD
the Grace and Virtue of Continence. For they also which are delivered by the
grace of GOD from the body of this death, feel another Law in their members
rebelling against the Law of their mind, and captiuating them to the Law of
sin, and compelling them to do that which they would not. This Law
therefore, holding them captive, and this Concupiscence of the flesh provoking
them, they are com^lled either to fornicate, or marry: whereof whether is the
better, we are taught by the authority of the Apostle, who tells us it is
better to marry then to burn. Surely, that which is the better, is to be
chosen and held; now it is better to marry, because it is worse to burn; and
because it is better to marry then to burn, it is convenient for those which
contain not, to marry, not to burn. For marriage is good, as Augustine speaks
in his Book (super Genesin ad Literam) in it is commended the good of nature,
whereby the prauitie of incontinence is ruled, and the fruitfulnes of Nature
graced; For the weakness of either Sex declining toward the ruin of
filthiness, is well relieved by the honesty of marriage, so as the same thing,
which may be the office of the sound, is also the remedy unto the sick:
Neither yet, because Incontinence is evil, is therefore Marriage (even that
wherewith the Incontinent are joined) to be reputed not good; yea rather not
for that evil, is the good faulty, but for this good, is that evil
pardonable, since that good which marriage has, yea which marriage is, can
never be sin. Now, this good is threefold, the Fidelity, the ^ruit, the
Sacrament of that estate; I^ the Fidelity, is regarded: That besides this bond
of Marriage, there be not carnal society with any other. In the Fruit of it,
That it be lovingly raised and religiously bred. In the Sacrament of it, That
the marriage be not separated, and that the dismissed party of either Sex,
be not joined to any other, no not for issues sake. This is as it were the
Rule of Marriage, whereby the fruitfulness of Nature is graced, or the
prauitie of Incontinence ruled. And this Rule of Marriage, and this threefold
good, the eternal Truth has appointed in the order of his Decree, and that
eternal Law of his, against which whatsoever is done, spoken, or willed, is
sin; which Augustine in his Book against Faustus the Manichee witnesses,
saying, Sin is either Deed, Word, or Desire against the Law Eternal. This
Eternal Law is the divine Will or Decree, forbidding the disturbance, and
commanding the preservation of due natural order; whatsoever therefore
commands natural Order to be disturbed, forbids it to be conserved, prohibits
men to use Marriage, and to attain to the threefold good thereof, Fidelity,
Issue, Sacrament; and commands them to break that Rule of Eternal Truth,
whereby the fruitfulness of Nature is graced, or the prauitie of Incontinency
ruled, commands men to abhor those things whereby natural Order is held and
maintained. This Commandment, I say, forbids natural Order to be observed,
commands it to be disturbed, and therefore is against the Law of GOD, and by
consequence, is sin: For, they sin that ordain such a command by which
natural Order is destroyed.

These men do not (it seems) believe, that of the children of Priests, GOD
takes for the building of his City above, and for the restoring of the number
of Angels: For, if they did believe it, they would never ordain such a
Mandate, because they should wittingly and ouer-rashly go about to effect,
that the supernall City should never be perfited, and the number of Angels
never repaired. For if the supernall City be to be perfited even of the sons of
Priests, and if the number of Angels be of them to be repaired, those that
endeavor to procure that they should not be, do (what in them lies) destroy
the supernall City, and labor that the number of Angels may not be perfited;
Then which, what can be more peruersely done? For this is done against the will
and predestination of him which has done those things, which shall be; for he
has done in his predestination those things which shall be in effect;
whosoever therefore goes about to procure that GOD may not in effect do those
things, which he has done in his predestination, goes about to make void the
very predestination of GOD. If then GOD have already in his Predestination
decreed, that the sons of Priests shall once be in effect, he that goes about
to procure that they may not be in effect, endeavors to destroy the work of
GOD, because he has already done it in predestination; and so strives to
overthrow GODS predestination, and to gainstand that Will of GOD which is
Eternal: For GOD would from Eternity, and before all Worlds, create all men
in the World, in that certain Order wherein he pre-conceiued, and
predestined, to create them; He does nothing disorderly, He creates
nothing in the World which He has not fore-ordayned, by disposing it in the
Predestination of His mind that went before all Worlds. Whatsoever therefore
is by Him created in this world, does necess^rily follow the Predestination of
His mind predisposing, and preordayning all things; because it is impossible
that should not be done, which GOD from Eternity has willed and fore-ordayned
to be done; It is therefore necessary that all men should be created in that
very Order, wherein He willed, and from Eternity fore-ordayned; Or else, all
men are not created as GOD would have them, nor as he fore-ordayned them; But
because this is inconvenient, it must needs be that they are created as He
willed from Eternity, and forethought, and fore-ordayned; because He has
done all things that He would, and never did any thing which He willed not
from everlasting, and has fore-conceiued in His certain and unchangeable
Decree. For neither can his Will be frustrated, nor his forethought deceived,
nor His fore-ordinations altered: Which, since it is so; need must it be, that
as Laics, so Priests also, of whom men are created, should yield their service
to the divine Will and Preordination to the creating of them. For Parents are
not the Authors of the Creation of their Children, but the servants; who if
they should not yield their service, they should (if it were possible) make
void the forethought of GOD, and resist his Ordination; which if they should
wittingly do, they should offend the more, if ignorantly, the less; not only
against GOD the Father, but also against the Heavenly Jerusalem, the Mother of
all Saints, because (what in them were) they should not suffer those to be
created of whom it is to be builded, and those things to be prepared, whereby
that Celestial Country is bestowed. But from this offense their impotence
frees them, because they cannot resist the Will of GOD, and cross his
Preordination. For the Will and Predestination of GOD is that eternal Law, in
which the course of al things is decreed, and the pattern wherein the form of
all Ages is set forth, which can by no means be defaced; Not to yield our
service then hereunto, is evil, because to yield it, is good, and especially
if it be done with a good intent; which is then done, when as Parents meet
together in a desire of propagation of issue, not in an appetite of exercising
their lust. Of propagation, I say, that both the present Church may be
multiplied, and the Celestial City built, and the number of the Elect made up,
none of which could be done* without such conjugal meeting. For if the first
Parents of the Saints had continued all either Continent, or Virgins, no Saint
had been borne of them in the World, none of them had been crowned with glory
and honor in Heaven, none of them ascribed into the number of Angels. But
since it is an inestimable good, that Saints are borne in the World, that they
are crowned with glory and honor in heaven, and that they are ascribed into the
number of Angels: thereupon the fruitfulness of Parents is more blessed, and
their meeting holyer. So then it is better for them to have begotten such
Children, then not to have begotten them, and to have brought forth such fruit
of marriage, then to have been continent, or Virgins, without fruit. Although
it is good for some to be continent, or Virgins, namely, for them whom GOD
eternally willed and pre-ordayned to be so created in the world, that they
should remain either in Continence, or Virginity: For as he has eternally
willed and foreordained that some should be so created in the world, as that
they should yield the fruit of Marriage, and beget Children, so also has he
willed, and from eternity fore-ordayned, some to be so created, that they
should continue in Continency or Virginity: And as those other yield their
service to the Will and Preordination of GOD, in the creation of children, so
these also serve the Will and Preordination of GOD in conseruing their
Continence, and Virginity; and hereupon is both the fruitfulness of the one,
and the Virginity of the other good, and laudable; which if it did not yield
service to the Will and Preordination of GOD, would be neither good nor
laudable: For whatsoever is contrary to the Will and Preordination of GOD, is
neither good, nor laudable. If therefore GOD willed and predestined some to
be Virgins, others to yield the fruit of Marriage (for if all were Virgins, no
Saint that now is, or shall be borne, should either be now or hereafter borne
in the World, neither should those Virgins be at all, because they should not
be born; for of the fruitfulnes of the one arises the others Virginity)
therefore is fruitfulness a great Good, from which holy Virginity has
proceeded: Now that there should be some Virgins, and others that should bear
the fruits of Marriage, the Word which GOD sows in their hearts, teaches us.
For in the hearts (...) some he sows the Word of good fruitfulness,
yielding the increase of Marriage, and in the hearts of others he sowes the
Word of Virginity; Those then in whom he sowes the Word of Virginity, they
desire to keep Virginity, but those in whom he sowes the Word of Marriage,
they desire to yield the fruit of Marriage.

WHERETO I WILL add for Conclusion the wise and ingenuous judgment of Erasmus
Roterodamus; The rather, because it pleased my Refuter to lay this worthy
Author in our dish.
Habetur Tomo nono Op. Eras. page 982.
In his Epistle to Christopher, Bishop of Basil, concerning humane
Constitutions, Thus he writes.
Nam in totum quae sunt humani iuris, quemadmodum in morbis remedia, etc.
FOr those things which are altogether of humane constitution, must (like to
remedies in diseases) be attempered to the present estate of matters, and
times. Those things which were once religiously instituted, afterward
according to occasion, and the changed quality of manners and times, may be
with more Religion and Piety abrogated; which yet is not to be done by the
temeritie of the people, but by the authority of Governors; that tumult may
be avoided; and that the public custom may be so altered, that concord may
not be broken: the very same is perhaps to be thought concerning the Marriage
of Priests of old, as there was great paucitie of Priests, so great Piety
also; They, that they might more freely attend those holy Services, made
themselves chaste of their own accord. And so much were those Ancients
affected to Chastity, that they would hardly permit Marriage unto that
Christian, whom his Baptism found single, but a second Marriage yet more
hardly: And now that which seemed plausible in Bishops and Priests, was
translated to Deacons, and at last to Subdeacons: which voluntarily received
custom was confirmed by the authority of Popes. In the meane-time* the number
of Priests increased, and their Piety decreased; How many swarms of Priests
are maintained in Monasteries and Colleges? Inter bos quanta raritas little qui
cast viuunt?

Nec enim attingo nunc secretiorum libidinum mysteria, etc.


and amongst them how few are there that live chastely? I speak of them which
do publicly keep Concubines in their houses, instead of their Wives. I do
not now meddle with the mysteries of their more secret lusts; I only speak of
those things which are most notoriously known to the World: And yet, when we
know these things, how easy are we to admit men into holy Orders, and how
difficult in releasing this constitution of single life? when as contrarily S.
PAVL teaches that hands must not be rashly laid upon any; and more then once
has prescribed 2what manner of men Priests and Deacons ought to be, but of
their single life, neither Christ, nor his Apostles have ever given any Law in
the holy Scriptures. Long since has the Church abrogated the nightly Vigils at
the Tombs of Martyrs, which yet had been received by the public custom of
Christians, and that for diverse Ages; Those Fasts, which were wont to continue
till the evening, it has transferred to noone; and many other things has it
changed according to the occasions arising: Cur hic humanam constitutionem
vrgemus tam obstinate, prasertim cum tot causae suadeant mutationem? Primum
enim magna pars Sacerdotum viuit cum mala fama; parumque requieta conscientia
tractat illa sacrosancta mysteria, etc.
And why then do we so obstinatley urge this humane constitution, especially
when so many causes persuade us to an alteration? For first a great part of our
Priests lives with an ill name; and with an unquiet conscience handles those
holy Mysteries; And then the fruit of their labors (for the most part) is
utterly lost, because their doctrine is contemned of their people by reason of
their shameful life. Whereas, if Marriage might be yielded to those which do
not contain, both they would live more quietly, and should preach Gods Word to
the people with authority, and might honestly bring up their children, neither
should the one of them be a mutual shame to other, etc.

Postscript to a second Libell.
THe answer to one Libeller draws on another. These kind of Creatures do
best in couples: He is cruel that neglects his own Fame; and though in time
a false rumor would die alone, yet it is best to prevent the Day, and to
dispatch it at once by a just Apology; especially, where the calumniation is
grown universal; I have therefore easily harkened to my wisest Friends, in
stopping the mouth of an idle clamor. There is a base Paper that (...) through
all hands, (...) rep^h of one Doctor Hall, whom the Libeller (in the person of
his Curate) taxes for incompetence of all ^ante* pitifully complaining to his
Majesty (whom that presumptuous wretch dares to name in his lewd Scroll) that
so small a Thong is out out to him of so large an Hide* intimating the rich
Master whom he serves, guilty of a miserable parsimonie, and unworthy neglect
of his meritorious service; and (...) the more envy upon the Man (...) Name he
traduceth, he sets out (...) large proportion of his supp^ Masters Revenues.
When (...) the Libell, I could not but imagine it intended to some other of ^y
(not infrequent) Name; so v^ce ^y vnappliable (...) I find al^ those
particulars to my self: But ^o^is^e my answer to this Popish Ad^ersarie was
on foot, that malicious (...) will need^ appropriate the (...) with incredible
(...) too well (...) Kingdom (...) the Place, and I am the Man, whereto they
have also added (after their manner) an unwritten fiction, that his Majesty
taking notice of so wit^ Complaynant, has sharply rebuked (...) for so
disproportionable (...) and has raised me, by (...), unto an higher rare; The
matter objected were not much (...) in another (twelve pounds ^y the year were
too much for a Libeller;) the words imply more ^hen they express; the Heart of
them is worse then the Face, and my public Vows have turned my (...) into
Beams. Thus must we (with our Apostle) pass through good as po^and evil; Yet
let me (...) and the World) say this for my self (if I must (...) subject of
this foolish (...) this (...) never (...) of any (...) ^esse a (...) never
(...) yeere^ (...) of Souls. In the Place where I now live (which my Libeller
vpbraids me with) I receive only a free and liberal Annuitie from my Right
Honorable Patron, the Lord Denny; upon whose only charges also my Assistent in
these holy Labors has been ever both provided and maintained; A truth which
the Town and Country can witness with me: How could I therefore ever make
here any such agreement, how could that agreement offend, how could that
offense be reproved? Many encouragements have I had from my gracious Master,
never yet any rebukes.

For my estate (blessed be GOD and the King) it is such as affoords me no
cause of complaint, much of thankfulness; yet more transcending my merits,
then the exigence of my charge: And is this Fellows eye evil, because my
Masters is good?

The Arithmetic and Po^ of my Libeller are much alike; his sums are as false
as himself. For my Sheep and Beasts, they might soon have been counted: I
was never the Master of one Sheep in all my life; they are Flocks of another
nature, whereto I have devoted my thoughts: As for Beasts, if this good piece
had been ever mine, I should perhaps have had four; whereas now (since the
World must needs know my store) I have but three. Judge now, Reader, whether
thou find in the whole Clergy of this Kingdom, yea, in thine own skin, a
man to whom a Libell of this nature may with less color, yea possibility of
truth be applied* Is not this then a worthy scrap of wit and honesty for some
grave Benchers to strive for Copies of for some Gentlemen that should be not
unwise, not irreligious* to make themselves merry with ^ter all the venom of
(...) what I was, perhaps (...) should I doubt the (...) me for the (...) In
the mean time I cannot but be sorry to see, that some Professors of Religion,
should so lightly be won to the belief of idle slanders against those, which
are ready both with Hand and Tongue to maintain the causes of GOD, and
sincerely desirous to live that Gospel which they preach. If there be any one
of them whose good-name is Libell-proofe, let him make sport at my wrong; but
if the greatest innocence and holiness of Earth, or Heaven, be no protection
against mis-report, let him not without indignation intertayne those unjust
reproaches of another, which may, perhaps, ere to morrow, be his own: Had this
Libeller written Him, or Me, Traitor, or Murderer, or whateuer other
Malefactor, I know no defense but Head and Shoulders, and the Conscience of
innocence: Neither can I promise my self security, that hereafter the worst
crimes shall not be laid upon me; But, far be it from honest Ears and
Eyes to encourage villainy. For me, my heart can accuse it self of many sins
before my GOD, but for Covetousness, I ever detested it as a most sordid and
vn-schollerlike vice, and such, as if I could think it lurked any where within
me, I should hate my self. If then some malicious Papist, finding no just
quarrel to be picked at my life, have thought good to cast upon me this
pleasant and false disgrace, let not the Favorers of the Gospel second him in
my causeless Persecution. For my Libeller, whosoever he is he may secretly
please himself with this poor flash of spightfull wit, but the GOD of Heaven
(my just Auenger) shall one day find him out, and pay my arrerages to his cost*
Unto that righteous Judgment I appeal, and since the Author cannot be known^
expect with patience to be righted in the Star Chamber of Heaven*

In the former sheets which came late to my view, I found also these Errata.
In the Epist. Dedicat. for Gregory Martin, read Doctor Martin. page 2^2. l.
4. for kind, r. no kind. page 342. l. 11. for satisfied, r. falsified.

Besides, the Reader must pardon diverse errors and mistakings of the Press in
the Latin, as

Viduatis page 78. mach^neris p. 82. m^rg. sine, for sin^ p. 117. ^ran, ^or Br^
p. 84. marg. These ibid. Epithamium p. ^9^. Pall^dij p. 1^8. P^n^ for P^rr^ p.
2^^. Praesbyteris p. 308. marg.


