KING JAMES his Encomium OR A Poem, in memory and commendation of the High
and mighty Monarch JAMES; King of great Britain. France, and Ireland etc. our
late Sovereign, who deceased at Theobalds. upon Sunday the 27. of March. 1625.

By Francis Hamiltoun, of Silvertown-hill.

Rev. Chap. 14. verse 13. Then I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me,
Write, Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord from hence-foorth: Yea,
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun. 1626.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
SON.
Whether thy chance, or choice makes thee to look,
(Right reverend Reader) on this Poem penned:
Accept my first essay; this little book
Despise it not: nor spare it to amend:
So shall thou thanks receive, and gain a friend,
And for thy pains have praise, the just reward
Of such as virtue favor, and befriend
The just and good intent. Nor misregard
One little Talent (being rightly used
To virtues praise) which shall not bring disgrace
To the possessour. Talents ten abused
Makes the abuser loose them, and his place.
One little Talent with right use I crave,
Rather then Talents ten hid up to have.
SEVEN CROWN
SON ^
THE Heathen Poets wh^ (...)
(Blinded with bastard (...)
Sung praise in Poems, in the (...)
To such as they alleged man (...)
Against their foes in field: o^ (...)
Prosperity and peace: falsely (...)
To Idols vain, and Fortun^ (...)
Welfare and honor, and the (...)
As honey Bees, let Christian (...)
The wholesome honey from (...)
Nor wasp-like suck poison the^ (...)
Benumde with sloth, learn their (...), or Creeds,
One God we must adore, in person ^ree
Distinguished: who divided cannot be.
SON. 2.
ONE God we must adore, in persons three,
Distinguished: who can never be divid'd:
And only he through Christ adored must be,
Who Heaven and Earth, and all therein does guide.
Little availes his gifts, where wants his grace,
His saving grace in Christ our Souls delight:
And that's our joy, that we shall see his face,
When he shall all his foes with Scepter smite,
They shall all prove as potters shards, when he
Shall with his Word, the sword of justice kill,
And with his powers rod shall crushed be,
And fried in fiery flames for ever still.
Who would enjoy Christ's face must fight the field
Against sin and Satan, and must never yield.
SON. 3.
WHo would enjoye Christ's face must fight the field
Against Sin and Satan, till their life shall end.
Its horrible Apostasy to yield,
Great glory through Christ Jesus to contend
Against his foes, the foes of our Salvation;
And persecuting Dragon, who was cast
From out of Heaven (as John by revelation
Made known to Christians, many years since past.)
And beaten back by Gods most mighty word
In Wilderness, Church pinnacle and mountain:
Where Christ with his transscindent two edgd sword
Beat Satan back, of all our sins the fountain.
And in the end for ever did confute him:
And by his death triumphantly refute him.
SON. 4.
CHrist in the end for ever did confute him
By his own death: and did in triumph rise
Ascending to the Heaven, with Saints about him
For to prepare a place for his, and prise.
Avoyde thou subtle Satan, since overcome?
But do thou still assault until the end:
Although thou know that Christ defrayed the sum
Of Gods Decalogue, and does his Saints defend:
Which though he knows, yet strives he to molest.
Christ's little ones, the apple of his eye:
And still does tempt, illude, delude, suggest
Sin upon sin, yet would seem friend to be.
Behold our Captane Christ shall him confound
So much the more in pains of Hell profound.
SON. 5.
BEhold our Captain Christ shall him confound,
So much the more as he himself advances
Against him, and His: for at the trumpets sound
(Whilst Christ in Heaven his holy Saints inhaunceth)
He shall repaye his spightfull plotted treason
To the least farthing: and the wicked shall
(Whom he seduced has against all reason)
Grye hills and mountains, come, upon us fall:
Then with that measure, which the damned has met
To Christ's dear Saints, they shall receive the dowble:
Then shall Hells pit be shut, and Hells dark net
Shall hold for ay such as Christ's Saints did trouble.
Then yowling, mourning, woe and lamentation,
Shall sease on Satan, and the Damned nation.
SON. 6.
THen yowling, mourning, woe and lamentation,
Shall sease on Satan in full strength and measure;
And on the falling Angels, and that Nation
Of damned Div'lish reprobates: whose treasure,
Shall be the fire of Hell, which goes not out,
And gnawing worm of Conscience never dying,
Of Gods great wrath, the mighty thunderbolt
Shall pierce them through and through; from which no flying.
Go howl and weep, the day does now approach,
Wherein the coals of fire, which you did heap
On your own heads, these sins which you did broach,
Shall make you gnash your teeth, lament and weep.
Then shall they say, are those Christ's holy Saints,
Whom we so often have vexed with our vaunts.
SON. 7.
THen shall they say, are those Christ's saved Saints?
Whom we esteemed the off scowrings of Earth:
Against whom so often we gloried of our tants;
Esteeming them not worthy mortal breath.
Take pity on your selves, ye wicked men,
And strive yet if ye can to enter in
In the right way to Heaven, least ye as then
Debarred be for your omissions sin.
Let elect Saints in trembling, love, and fear,
In faith and true repentance watch and pray:
Praise God in zeal, in wisdom persevere
Until the end, attending on that Day;
That Day wherein God shall make even our ods,
And Heathen Poets damn with fained Gods.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE.
To all true Christians, to my Country of Great Britain, my native Soil of
Scotland, and to that famous, and worthy Town of EDINBVRGH.
And especially to the two magnanimous, and worthy Lords, JAMES Marquess of
Hamiltoun, etc.
And GEORGE Lord Chancelour of SCOTLAND.
MAgnanimous Lords with duetifull respects
This Pilgrims Poem, FRANCK to you directs,
Wishing your Lordships daigne to patronize it,
What FRANCK affoords, let favor infranchize it.
My loyal love (though I be much destressed)
From praising Virtue should not be suppressed,
And how much more in Kings its eminent,
So much the more to praise it should be bent,
Each generous genius. Since (conjectures past)
True tacticke practicke teaches us at last,
That JAMES the Just has both begun and ended,
In mercy, peace, and grace now much commended,
And since so often installed on a Throne,
His happy Head was honored with a Crown,
Till that nor Crowns, nor Kingdoms to him given
Could keep his Soul on Earth now crowned in Heaven,
Who having left of his own royal race
A royal, loyal Prince to fill his place.
(And having him in Christian Schools vptrained,
Till he true virtue, and Religion gained,
So that in tender age he did surmount
All Christian Princes in the best account)
In Peace and true Religion has laid down,
Three Swords, three Scepters, and a triple Crown.
Shall he so much was praised whilst he lived
For virtue loved; and who so much was grieved
At vices of this age, now being gone,
Bequeath his virtues to oblivion?
No; since both rich and poor so well were pleased,
His memory must needs be eternized.
My Muse must praise such virtues as did dwell
Within his Soul, (which made him so excel)
Which we must imitate, and always strive
Wisely to use our Talents (whilst we live)
By his example, who defunct, does rest
In Heaven with him, in whom he put his trust.
The virtues of the living, men should praise,
That more and more we may true virtue raise:
Till like the grain of mustard seed it grow,
And all the World abundantly ore-flow:
True virtues praise I heartlie do intend,
Till that my breath, and mortal life shall end:
And so much more to praise it shall be bent,
As I do find it true and eminent.
Your L. loving Friend to be commanded in all Christian duties Fr. Hamiltoun.

To the right magnanimous and worthy Lord, JAMES, Marquess of Hamiltoun, etc,
SON.
HEroicke Hamlton, FRANCK to thee affoordeth,
With heartlie Love the praise of JAMES his worth
Our King defunct, and since my soul concordeth
With CHARLES his virtuous valor, I send forth
My hearts desire in prayer to my God,
That he our Sovereign CHARLES may still defend
In Christ's Religion: so that his abode,
May in beginning, in the midst, and end
Be always, and for ever with our Lord,
And Savior joined, by holy inspiration
Of Gods good spirit, so that he not debord,
From the right way, which has to Heaven relation:
But that in him his grace abundantly,
With the right use, and incresse he supply.
Your L. loving friend and kinsman to honor and serve your L. Fr. Hamiltoun.

To the right magnanimous and worthy Lord, Sir George Hay, of Kilfawnes
Knight, Lord Chancelour of Scotland.
HEroicke HAY, I know nothing so strong,
As bands of Love which virtue has conbind:
And if I should not virtue praise, I wrong
My self more than I wrong true virtues friend:
That I may neither wrong I do intend
To praise and love the virtuous: dead, or living,
King JAMES and CHARLES our King, I must commend:
King JAMES in Heaven: King CHARLES for it striving.
Magnanimous Lord even you, and I, and all
Must strive for Heaven, and whilst we breath, must fight
Against sin and Satan: least we catch a fall
From Heaven to Hell, and so may lose our right.
Christ's colors now are flying in the field,
And woe to such as shall to Satan yield.
Your L. loving friend to honor and serve your L. Fr. Hamiltoun.

KING JAMES his Encomium,
FRom Earth to Heaven, our Sovereign James departs.
Ravished to Joy, who ravished the hearts
Of mortal men, by virtue, and is gone
From death, to life, that such may follow on
By his example, to our Sovereign Lord,
Of Heaven, and Earth: who mercy does afford,
To Penitents: who of their sins think shame:
Baptized, and believing in the Name
Of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
Of whom, not one, for ever, shall be lost.
Should not our heavenly Sovereign Savior,
Who sent us such a King, in blessed hour:
As Lantern light, to lead us, and to leave,
His Son a burning Lamp, by him to give
All Christians cause of Courage which are true,
against Athests, Papists, Machiavellian crew?
Should he not praised be, aye more and more,
Calling our King to his Eternal store
Of heavenly glory, perfect Joy and Love,
Making him reign for aye with him above:
Has left us yet a Lawful Loyal King,
Such one, as from his Royal Loins did spring.
Whill as we do reduce to meditation,
How none was like King James in any Nation
In all his time, nor any known to be
So learned, Religious, wise a King as he.
Whose Grace was grave, whose words were wise, and few,
Whose looks were lovely, merciful, and true:
Whose visage sage, heart humble, meek of mind:
Bounty, and virtues beauty, there combined.
Whose body Chaste, with cheerful Countenance,
Whose blessed breast wise counsels did dispense:
By trusty tongue of honored head, inditing,
What well became a Royal pen in writing.
Whose potent Poems, (winged with puissant speed)
From a celestial temper did proceed.
Writing of wars, or of a civil Story.
Affected truth, despised mortal glory.
Parent of Peace, of potent Poets Prince,
Religious, Royal, and Renowned defense
Of faithful Christians, against the Romish Whore,
In thought, word, deed, like Camp, or Castle sure.
Could all the world such Phoenix King afford?
Such Royal, Loyal, Learned, Religious Lord?
No: Nor should I degener from my kind,
And so refrain to praise a virtuous mind.
Heroicke Hampton praised a foreign King,
For love of Virtue which in him did spring:
Mis-construed: and rewarded with a cuffe,
Was made to change his soil for's counter-buffe.
And worthy Wallas was content to part,
For love of King and Country, from his heart.
Shall I deduce my pedigree from such,
And not befriend true virtue even as much
In the defunct, or living? however it go,
By grace of God it was, is, shall be so:
That I true virtue praise, extol, and love,
(In thought, word, deed) which comes from heaven above,
According to my power, and skill, till death:
My will shall be as fervent whilst I breath.
And what is nor to my power, nor skill permit,
My God (of mercy) will dispense with it:
And by his grace (of love) he gives me,
In and through Christ, my will he'ill rectify:
Which sinful nature always would pervert,
Were not my God, by grace, reformes mine heart.
I pass not what some perverse people say;
Nor mumbling Momus shall my pen affray:
Nor who so lust to jest, to mock or scorn me,
Or seek by fraud, or falsehood to forlorn me,
By poison, or by powder-plotted-treason,
Or fairded fair pretenses, bent against reason.
I tell them all, That Christ my Lord and Master,
Can well avenge his little ones disastre.
And that it better were for them to be
Bound to a Millstone, and cast in the sea.
Then to injure, or do malicious-wrong
Unto the least which do to Christ belong.
Except they do repent, amend and find
Faith, true repentance, love, and zealous mind.
O if Christ's little ones were known to be
By worldlings, as the aple of his eye.
Durst they injure, molest, wrong, or offend
The least of those that on the Lord depend.
All is not gold that glisters, nor all good
Which masked is with goods Similitude.
Behold the end, so may you learn to know
How good it is to walk in God his law.
Could any King (since yet the world began)
Have said as blessed JAMES, who in Britain Rang
In true Religion, fifty years and eight
A crowned King, a Magazine well fraught:
Sent from the Heaven to propagate true peace,
All where through his Dominions, but release.
The holy Spirit his Comforter did stand,
Guarding his Soul, with his almighty hand,
And now when Sin and Satan made assault:
The shield of Faith in Christ, fred his default.
And quenched those fiery darts with sacred blood,
Which Christ for James had shed upon the Rood.
His counting book of Conscience did occur,
For to control his Faith, and bar the door
(Or gates of Heaven) for his sinful transgression,
But he, by true repentance, and confession,
(Through faith in Christ) to God: by's mercies look
Had all his sins scrapt out of Conscience book.
Upon his head, the helmet of Salvation,
Upon his breast (to save him from damnation)
The breastplate of true righteousness, through faith
In Christ his Savior, who him sav'de from wrath,
And did the joys of Heaven for him procure,
Giving him Faiths true shield: to make him sure,
His loins he girt with Truth: his feet he shod
With Peace-preparing Gospel of our God,
Watching and praying, in his Spirit, assuring
His Soul by perseverance, and enduring
Till his last breath: Who thus and thus could say,
Death can dissolve this Mansion house of clay,
But against my Faith, my love, my hope, my zeal,
To kill my Soul: there can no death prevail.
I know my sins are great, and that they might
Justly bring on an everlasting Night
Upon my Soul: but my Redeemer lives:
My God, my Lord, who all my sins forgiveth,
And me releives from all such hellish pain,
As would my Soul and body aye have slain.
Christ was my comfort, now is, and shall be
My All in All, in his Aeternitie:
My faith is firm, and in Religion right,
My hope in him, through his own mercies might.
Who has directed, and protected me,
In the right way of true fidelity.
So calling for the blessed Bread and Wine,
(External signs of mysteries divine,
The Sacramental seals of his Salvation,
And tokens given of true justification:
Making true mention of our Saviors death,
And how he has his Saints redeemde from wrath)
He them receives, upon the selfsame day,
Wherein he first did Englands Scepter sway,
The third day after that he had received
The Sacrament, which he sincerely craved,
The twenty sixth of March, being Saturday,
Yet the Jews Sabbath, who did Christ betray:
A day for rest ordaind at the Creation,
That therein God should have by every Nation
Adored been, according to the rites
Contained in the ancient holy writes:
And kept till Christ did from the dead arise,
To gain to all his Saints heavens glorious Prise:
Which day the Jews (while as from Christ they swerve)
Do keep as holy, for they so deserve,
For crucifying of the Lord of glory,
Renouncing Jesus Christ, and's sacred story.
Of saving grace) who does Salvation give
To all baptized who in him believe.
The noontide of this Jewish Sabbath past,
About two hours, King James lost speech at last.
After that he his Princely son resolved
And often kissed, longing to be dissolved.
And though approaching Death did him assail.
So that his speech had now begun to fail.
Yet whilst they read, or pray (as Christ commands)
He lifting up his eyes, his arms, his hands,
Gave clear consent: and what he could not speak,
His sighing Soul did from Christ Jesus seek.
The twenty sixth of March (Saturday) gone,
The Jewish Sabbath changed for this reason,
Our Savior rose, having made satisfaction
To God his justice for all sinful action
Of all his Elect, in thought, word, and deed:
And for all sin original did proceed
From our preceding parents whosoever,
From Adam, Eve, and from them all together,
Triumphing over Satan, Sin, Death, Hell.
That he and his in heaven might ever dwell.
On the first day, as then was, of the week,
Before that Mary Magdalen did seek
The Tomb of Christ, wherein he was interred,
Calling him for the Gardner, (having erred)
Which day all Christians do our Lords day call,
Religiously observing it, withal
Sincerity, moved by the good example
Of the Apostles, preaching in the temple:
And by the warrant of Gods word, in writ,
Saint John being ravished in his spirit on it.
Heard a great voice, as of a trumpet sound,
Which Alpha and Omega did resound:
Commanding him to write within a book
What he did see, (that they thereon might look)
And send it to the Churches seven, which were
In Asia: Ephesse, Smyrne, Pergame, Thyatire: Rev. 1.10.11.

To Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea,
Where now the Turk reigns, cruelties Idea.
Even on that day Christ Jesus did arise
From death, to gain heavens glory for a prise,
To him, and all his Elect, through his merit,
On that Lords day, King JAMES did heaven inherit.
The Holy One in persons three distinguished,
One God, and indivisible extinguished
His mortal life, and life immortal gave him,
And did in new Jerusalem receive him.
The three times nint, or nine times third of March,
The twenty seventh, King James his soul did march
Amongst those Angels, and those Saints of God,
Which have with our Redeemer their abode.
The thousand year, six hundred twenty five,
Since our sole Savior took on mortal life,
Immortal life prevailing over breath,
Made him triumph over sin, shame, hell and death.
O is he gone? and shall we not bedew
His Tomb with tears, did peace and love renew,
So often? Shall he for such rare virtues sake
As rang in him (which many Christians lack)
Forgotten be? No, till this world shall end,
Our pens and poems shall King James commend.
And were it not that heavens did so decree,
Our prayers yet had stayed Deaths destiny.
But that his maker would such Soul embrace,
As loved and longed to see his Saviors face.
To render thanks, and everlasting praise,
Always to him who did through Christ him raise,
Unto such Glory as he shall adore,
And never cease to praise the Lord therefore.
We wail not KING JAMES Nor need we him lament,
Whose Soul in Heaven, before his oil was spent,
Whose Lamp, gave Light, and Lantern like did lead,
By his example, rightly to proceed:
Both Kings, and Kaesars, Monarchs of the Earth,
Princes, and Pears, as well in life as death.
We wail not KING JAMES who for the heavenly Joys,
Has left to dally with all earthly Toys.
We wail not KING JAMES whose Joy surmounteth more
Now in one hour, then all his days before.
We wail not KING JAMES Great Britains Jewel fair,
Thrice Crowned King, amongst Kings a Phoenix rare.
We wail not KING JAMES who rendered to his race,
Three Kingdoms Crowns, to enjoy in heaven his place.
We wail not KING JAMES whose potent pen refuted
The Foes of Christ, and has them much rebuted.
We wail not KING JAMES who writ those thornie cares,
Which Crowns and Scepters, in their compass bears.
We wail not KING JAMES who Mysteries unfolded,
Which John in Pathmos I Will, in trance beholded.
We wail not KING JAMES whose Daemoniacke story,
Discovered many vices, and vain Glory.
We wail not KING JAMES nor need we to deplore one,
Who did afford such a Basilike Doron.
We wail not KING JAMES, who learn'dly did rehearse,
King David's Psalms in his own royal verse
We wail not KING JAMES, whose Name, whose Fame, whose worth,
Is more and more by learned men set forth,
Even Vorstius, and the Cardinals record,
King JAMES a Learned, and Religious Lord.
We wail our want of such a worthy King,
Yet more we joye, since he in Heaven does reign.
Whose Corpse though now interred in the dust,
Shall rise with Jacobs, and with Jobs the just.
Nor need we curse such mountains as Gilboah,
Nor wail such waters, as our Father Noah.
Nor need we wail private or public crime
Wrought in our native Soil at any time.
Nor valleys vaunting monstruous-marching might,
Of foreign foes, or homebred household spite:
Nor thundering Cannons, nor the Trumpets sound,
Nor Turkish spyte, which else where does abound.
Nor Papists plots, with Powder-plotted treason,
Prepared against him, and his, against all reason.
Nor Spanish-Papist policies disguised,
Deliberat, and long before advised,
Which masked with the show of friendly love,
Like crafty Serpent, cunningly to move:
And so to lurk amidst brave Britains bowres,
Crossing our Gardens, tripping in our Towers:
Into our pleasant Palaces approaching,
And on our lives, Lands, Liberties enchroching,
Accusing and accrochjng, and seducing,
Our Nobles, and our commountie abusing
With Gundomerian-Gunnes to make us g^ne,
And lose our lives, before we see our want,
Our God, and Savior, did such things prevent,
And to such Parent of our peace has sent,
In peace a Messenger to take James breath,
His Generall-muster-master mortal Death:
Bounding Deaths limits, that he no more could,
But bring to dust (of dust) his earthly mould.
Maugre the Hells: no second Death, nor terror
Durst sease on him, nor no affrighting horror,
Durst so attempt his breast, as for to Judge
In his heroicke Heart one faithless grudge.
Firm was his Faith, and franck his forttiude,
Through and in Christ, who for him shed his blood.
For Adams and for Eva's curious lust,
By Gods decree; dust must return to dust,
First Adam through his fall damnation brought,
Christ second Adam our Salvation wrought,
Spoyler of Death, more than Methusalem,
No Babell Builder, but Jerusalem,
Jerusalem the New, prepared of God,
Where Saints amongst his Angels have abode,
Through Jesus Christ: By whom James justified,
Here a crowned King: hence a King glorified.
Whilst here he range, he justice did affect,
Truth, Love, and Peace: he much more did respect
Religion, right and reason, Chastity:
Than any King on Earth, with clemency:
Nor Glory vain, nor greed, nor gold, nor gain
Gould make him from the hope of heaven refrain:
Nor trust in treasure, which Earth could afford:
For why his trust was in the living Lord.
King James, thy blames are buried and forgot:
Thy Faith, Fame, Name, claim Crown without a spot.
Now blessed Jacob, rest in Heaven, and sing,
The everlasting praise of Christ thy King:
The King of Kings, thy God, the Lord of Hosts,
Was, is, and shall be: to whom the Worlds coasts
Subjected are? Did thou the Scriptures quote
To praise thy God? did thou thy pen devote:
Lo many pens of virtuous men express
Thy worthy parts; thy praise for to incresse?
Wast thou of modest mind, of body chaste,
Religious, learned: thou joy'st the interest.
Thy Clemency, thy bounty and thy Love:
And such true virtues, sent thee from above:
Return to thee much more abundantly
Good Name, good Fame, since virtue can not dye.
Thy pleasant Poems, learned, and profound,
Shall till the World have end, thy worth resounds
And counter-check such ignorant prophaine,
As Cuckooe-glorious mock the inspyred vain
Of Christian Poets: who in sacred verse,
The praise of Christ, and of his Church rehearse.
Those learned works, which from thee did proceed,
Such ignorants vaineglorie shall deride:
As jest at learning, and esteem it folly
To be trained up in Christian Schools most holy:
And shall move others also to deplore
This vicious Age: And praise God evermore:
Who as he gave the Kingdoms, Scepters, Crowns,
So gave he wisdom, which thee now renownes.
Those earthly things too little for thy mind:
He gave, then took, when he had thee refinde,
And in exchange a Crown of glory gave thee,
And did in Heaven for evermore receive thee,
That thou to him might sing that sacred Song,
Which does Gods Angels, and Christ's Saints belong
Right faithful Stewart, Kings may learn by thee,
To serve their God, while as they Stewarts be
Here of alitle: with the Virgins wise,
Attending on their Master, and their prise:
With burning Lamps, till that they hear the call
Of their Bridegroom, and with him enter all
In Heaven, that they may Crowns receive, makes sure
In joye and glory, ever to endure.
O Potent Patron, of all virtues true,
Who did for thine, Sin, Hell and Death subdue,
Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man: my Savior sweet,
Inspire me with the wisdom of thy Spirit:
That I with Faith and zeal, may think, speak, write,
With wisdom work, and with discretion dite
Thy praise and glory, for thy gifts so good,
Which thou to thine have given, through thine own Blood.
And for? (since it has pleased thee to call,
King James to Heaven) thou Charles make to all
True Christian subjects, a true Patron be,
A Father, and a friend to piety,
To virtues valor, and to right and reason,
A friend to peace of conscience: foe to treason
Committed against Christ, and's sacred Saints,
By men, which of their sins and vices vaunts.
O we unworthy justly did deserve,
That thou had sent a King, to make us swerve
From true Religion! but thou did prevent,
Our miscrie with mercy, and have sent
A Royal, Loyal, Learned, Religious Prince,
Magnanimous, and mighty for defense
Of all true Christians: Whom good God decore
With wisdom, that in zeal he thee adore,
In Love, Faith, Fear, Obedience to thy will,
Aye more and more, till he thy will fulfill.
We did deserve, and did by sin procure,
That thou should not have suffered to endure:
That Royal race of faithful Stewarts line,
For that we did so often against thee repine.
If for our sins thou had cut with the stock,
The seed and siplings and made us a mock
To all the World; Yet we much more deserved,
Who by our sinful lusts, so often have swerved,
From the obedience of thy Law, and will,
Our fleshly sinful pleasures to fulfill.
And but thy mercy is so eminent,
All perils of thy people to prevent,
We had been made a prey to every Nation,
For our contempt, and for our provocation.
For our contempt of thy most sacred Word,
Provoking thee to wrath, long-suffering Lord.
Infinite thou; not willing to contend
Against flesh infirm: did grace and mercy send
Through Jesus Christ, in whom we are well eased,
Through whom, with us thou can not be displeased.
Aeternall truth, who gave to James to be,
Royal on Earth, Religious toward thee,
Extend thy blessings unto his succession,
Do not repel our earnest intercession
O Lord our God: That so we may sing praise,
Aye more and more to thee, who did him raise.
Now need we pray no more for James, since gone:
Exempt from prayer; and exempt from moan.
Direct our hearts therefore to praise thee for him,
And pray that in King Charles thou do restore him.
Restore him in such virtues, and such grace,
Elisha-like in good Eliah's place,
With double portion of thy holy Spirit,
Confirming Faith, conferring grace to unite
His whole affection, both of soul and heart
Rightly to thee, so that they never part.
Make the good motions of thy Spirit him guide,
Supreme Essence; who can not be divide.
Thy wings be his protection, grace, and power,
In the assalt of all temptations hour.
And if his sins (which God forbid) become
Notorious black, or thick, or dark, or dim,
Or like such clouds, as does the Sun obscure,
Dissolve them Lord, and let not them endure.
King of all Kings; so make thy mercies shine,
In, through, and by Christ, that he know he is thine:
So that he do repent, return, amend,
In wisdom, love, faith, zeal till life shall end.
New gifts, new graces daily to him grant,
In such abundance, so that he naught want.
Incresse in him what is good; and take away
All sin which may his soul seduce, or slay.
Most mighty Lord from throne of mercies grace,
Exempt him not; so that thou hyde thy Face.
Stand by him Lord, and save him from such error
Of mind, as may procure his conscience terror.
From damned defection, and from all disgrace,
Good Lord deliver Charles, in each case.
Remember not his sins: but pardon give,
Exalt him by thy grace, and him relieve
From danger of all foes against him repine,
Who would him trap in trains which they propine.
Be his defense against all storms, and charms:
Remember Lord to keep him in thine arms,
From all assalts be thou his strong refuge,
Save him from all temptations, and from grudge.
Grant Lord he cause amend what is amiss
In all his Kingdoms; so that thou do bless
Both him, and them; and all to him belong.
Maintain us: and avenge us of foes wrong,
Except they do repent, amend, return;
And so leave off to make thy Saints to mourn.
The royal reign of Charles we recommend
To thee O Lord of Hosts: O Lord defend,
In right Religion; his royal Realms all,
His subject Princes, Nobles great and small.
His foreign Friends, and favorits reward,
And unto all pertain him, be a guard.
His generous Gentles, bless thou whosoever,
His loyal subjects, that they not swerve, nor sever.
Prevent him, and all his from Heaven above,
With saving grace, with mercy peace and love.
In all temptations hour must come to try
(Thy Saints on Earth, who do on thee rely.)
O let not foes prevail against thee, nor Atheists,
Nor none of their own merite-vaunting Papists,
Robbing the Lord of Love, and life his glory:
With Soule-ficke-fairded fictions making sorry,
Praying, and causing others for to pray,
In tongues unknown not knowing what they say:
Suffer not foes, sin, Satan, so t'assalt,
That thine from thee or slide, or fall, or halt:
From fear or force of foreign foes or plots,
Preserve King Charles and his from all their shots.
And from their crafty carriage, which is known,
Now to be like to bladders, which are blown.
Conspyring against our King, and Countries good,
Exulting when by errors they illude.
Abusing sacred Name, calde Jesuits,
Who rather ought to be calde Gibeonites.
Deluding men with worse than rotten bread,
In stead of such as Souls, and bodies feed.
Respecting the proud Pope, and his cursed train,
More than Christ's glory: which they do restrain,
Whilst craftelie they derogate from Christ,
And arrogate unto their perverse Priest.
Distich.
King Charles takes up, what did King James lay down,
Three Swords, three Scepters, and a triple Crown.
On King James the defunct dead to sin and living for ever to righteousness.
On the living King Charles, dying to sin, living and to live
for ever to righteousness.
On the perverse Pope living to sin, dying and to dye for ever
to righteousness, except he repent and convert to the Truth.
Francis Hamiltoun his first Essay. Feb. 7. 1626. *

A Poetical Ecphrase and Paraphrase on the 13 verse of the 14 chapter of S.
John's Revelation
SAying to me from Heaven a voice hear I,
Write, Blessed are they, which in the Lord do die
From hence forth: yea, the Sprit says, for they rest
Them from their labors, and their works (whilst blessed)
Do follow them: * -- (even their reward is such
According to their works, little or much.)
Not for their works, for they do much debord
From the commands, and will of Christ our Lord:
Although good works from his good Sprit proceed,
And as from him are perfect works indeed:
Yet in all mortal men by sinful nature,
Are more or less infect'd with sins foul feature:
And as in sinful man they cannot merit,
That man the joys of Heaven for aye inherit.
Through faith in Christ, our Savior God and Man
Heavens joys we gain, which Christ unto us wan.
Yet must we have good works, as fruit which show,
The goodness of the tree whereon they grow,
Least we be like to fruitless trees; which cut
Are cast in fire: For to each tree its root
The axe is laid, and if they bring not forth
Good fruit, they are cut down as nothing worth.
But to be cast in hell amongst the Devils,
The Authors; and suggesters of our evils.
The triumph of every true Christian defunct.
O death where is thy sting,
O grave where is thy victory, now shaw:
O all your strength through sin was in Gods Law,
Which Christ fulfilled: (My King.)
Through faith which Christ inspired by his Sprit,
I now with him do rest,
And shall aye praise my God and Savior sweet,
No more with sin oppressed.
Song to the comfort of every true Christian.
BLyth may he be, though his death do arrest him,
Has his sins dashed out of the books of accounting.
Blyth may he be, though his friends have oppressed him,
Finds by true faith, true spiritual joys surmounting.
Earthly things, though prompt in pomp, like to flowers are fading,
When the Arch-Angell sounds his Trumpe, no time for dissuading.
Death when past, brings at last, either joy or sorrow,
Then respect, does neglect, one moment to morrow.
Time then is gone, and no more can return,
Time can no more as then deiect nor advaunce thee.
Heaven or in Hell, man must dwell, joy or mourn,
Even as a tree cut down to dye, shall thy death inhaunce thee.
Chance and Fortune have no place: God for all provideth,
Sinful life, or mercies grace, makes what man betideth.
Life or death, after breath, from which is no returning,
God does guide, and provide, mirth for those are mourning.
If thou to day, hear his voice who does says,
Better now thou weep for sin, nor to laugh for pleasure:
Banish therefore away, all shifts of delay,
Turn, repent thee with tears, to be kept in his treasure:
Mind'st thou to have, knock, seek, and crave, for the time is sliding,
Knock, he will open: seek, thou shall find; ask whiles thy Lord is biding
He will grant, thou naught want, who so dear has bought thee,
He will redress, thy distress, who so much has sought thee.
Go then and count, though thy sins do amount
The sand of the sea, like red crimfie, thou repenting,
Thy faith shall surmount, or them thou recount,
If thy abode be with God, who likes not thy tormenting:
Whiter then the whitest snow he shall make thy being,
Who obedience to his law craves, but not thy dying.
As he lives, so he swears, he has no delight in
Sinners death, if from wrath, they return or smiten.
Lo as a Hen calls her Birds to defend,
He calling cries, more then twice or thrice, for repentance,
Harden not thy heart, least he depart in end,
And sometime thou hear, in thine ear, this fearful sentence.
Go ye cursed into hell, where damned Devils are dying,
And from heaven he you repel (for your sins and lying)
Kiss his son, our Savior sweet: Brace him by returning,
Rest at your redeemers feet, till he end your mourning.
What though a day, or a month, or a year,
Cross thy desires with imagined discontentings,
Can not the change of an hour from all fear,
Crown thy delights with ten thousand true contentings.
Worldly honor, beauty, wealth, like unto flowers are fading,
Painted pleasures posting pelf: from true joys dissuading.
But when grace, guides there place, then in seemly sorting:
Love, faith, truth, zeal and ruth, makes them all comforting.
What if at morn, at noone-tide, or evening,
Thy God shall recall thee: art thou not content than,
Time to regard when he is befreanding,
Think not that he will save thee, without thy consent man.
Turn he from thee, look for wrath: for he is all-seeing,
No repentance after death: but aye life or dying.
Heaven or in Hell, man must dwell: thence is no returning,
Glore or grief, without relief, always joy or mourning.
Make thy abode in this world with thy God,
By faith, fear, love, zeal, prayer, praise, and repenting
Thy sins, which blinds thy soul with such load,
As seem against heaven, with the Devils, or their evils, indenting.
Would thou ring with thy King, in heaven at his appearance,
Here thou must fight, as a Christian knight, by faith and perseverance.
Triumphs joys, fred from noyes, there we will find aye byding,
Crowns of glore, evermore, which are never slyding.
Then new heaven, and new earth, when gone's all breath
Create shall be by infinity, both former not remembered,
In the town, of renown, where is no death,
Saints shall dwell, fred from hell, and be no more dismembered.
Saint John saw that town, out of heaven coming down, new Jerusalem,
From God prepared (in this compared, to Methusalem,
The spoyler of death, where is no wrath) as a bride for her husband,
Full of glory and joy, Love freeing from noy, many thousand.
There Saints shall remain where is nothing filthy,
The City pure gold, like glass (free from mould) transparant,
The foundation of the walls of the City,
Were garnished with all sorts of precious stones (apparent)
1 Jasper, 2 Saphyr, 3 Chalcedone, 4 Emeraude, 5 Sardonixe, 6 Sardius one,
7 Chrysolite, 8 Beril, 9 Topas one: 10 Chrysophras, 11 Iacinth, 12 Amethist
stone.
Twelve gates, twelve pearls, each gate of one pearl was (apparent)
And the streets of the City pure gold, as glass, transparant.
God and the Lamb are the Temple therein,
There no need of the Sun, nor shining moon, where Tri-unitie,
For the glory of God did it lighten,
And the Lamb is the light thereof (most bright Infinity,)
And the people saved, shall there be received, and shall walk in its light,
and the kings of the earth, shall bring (after death) to it their glory and
might
and the gates of it shall by day not be shut, for there shall be no night there,
And the honor and glore of the gentiles evermore, unto it shall be brought there.
There shall enter in it nothing unclean,
Nor that does work lies (falsehood to lurk) or abomination,
But only those who are written (and seen)
In the Lambs book of life (where is no strife) there rests al contentation:
In him who believe, was dead and does live for aye, and in his purchesse,
Who has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churchs,
To him that overcommeth:
To him will I give for ever to live, and with me to have abode,
And to eat of the tree, of life we shall see, in the midst of the paradise of
God.
Exhortation to all true Christians for the praising of our Savior.
KIng CHARLES our King come now and sing,
Exult for joy before thy King,
The King of Kings, thy God and Lord,
And let thy soul and heart accord
To magnify and to extol
Thy King, who does his foes control.
Mine heart rejoices whiles I hear,
How Christian like thou do thee bear:
Obedience offering to Christ's will,
By life and conversation still:
The sacrifice of Thankesgiving,
With prayers offering to thy King,
Through Jesus Christ thy Savior sweet,
Who thee protecteth with his Sprite.
When God King David had advaunced,
Before God's Ark good David daunced
With all his might, for he reiosed
In God, in whom he still reposed.
Great Britain with the Ocean sea
Environed, come now, and with me,
Sing praise and glore to Christ our Lord,
Who grace, peace, mercy does afford.
Come learned, and come Laickes all;
Come Nobles, Gentles, great and small,
Come rich, come poor, come every creature,
Conformed in true Christian feature.
Now let us sing in songs the praise,
Of God, who Charles our King does raise,
And does devouring pests repel,
Captiving Satan, Sin, Death, Hell,
The World, (and whatsoever gaine-stood
His glory) through his precious blood
Who by the power of his Sprite,
Does his own Saints to him unite.
Come Scotland, and exult for joy,
Praise Christ who does prevent thy noy:
And Charles thy Sovereign Lord has sent,
Apparent perils to prevent.
Come Edinburgh renowned for worth:
The town wherein I had my birth:
Thou City situate on a mountain,
(Wherein does flow the lively fountain
Of Christ's Evangell) for whom Christ,
Is Sacrifice, and King, and Priest.
Come, come, all Christians true, resound
The praise, and glory so profound,
Of God our Lord, of Christ our King,
Who moff triumphantly does reign.
Let men and Angels all agree
To praise his glorious Majesty:
Extol the name of Christ our Lord,
And from his will do not debord.
O Christians true, O Saints of God,
Whiles here on earth you have abode,
Suffer for Christ, and for his sake,
If need require, all things forsake
Which does to mortal life pertain,
For he does all in all contain.
Who every moment does thee view,
For love of Christ, O Christian true
If need require, if just occasion,
Afford thy lives sincere oblation.
O Christian rather then thou slide
From Jesus Christ (who from his side
His royal precious blood made fall
To save the faithful great or small,
Who do believe in him through grace,
Sent by his Sprit, for to deface
Satan, sin, shame, the world, death, hell,
That such with him may always dwell.)
Forsake thy father and thy mother,
Forsake thy sister and thy brother
Forsake thy children, health, wealth, wife,
Thy credit, and thy mortal life,
Or whatsoever's to thee dear,
Lo he shall recompense thee here,
And hence give million millions more,
Which he in heaven has laid in store
For thee (true Christian) and for thine
An Oceant of true joys; propine
Surpassing thought of mortal man.
For let man think all that he can,
And speak and write, it to define,
Man in this life can not attain
Unto the thousand millions part
Which he shall have in soul and heart
When the Arch-Angell shall with sound
Of Trumpet, raise the dead from ground,
And Christ with his eternal sentence
Shall doom pronounce, when as repentance
Shall after that no time receive,
Though damned could give what Christ did crave,
Then after that there is be no time,
For time shall then run out of time,
As does that Angel testify Rev. 10.5.6.

To John, whom John in trance did see,
Which swear by him (who life us gives)
For ever and for ever lives:
Who Heaven, earth, sea, and all therein
Created. (Who subdued sin,
Through Jesus Christ, and his great store
Of grace) That time shall be no more.
Come all true Christians now whiles time,
Does pardon to your sins proclaim.
Return again to Christ our Lord,
And from his will no more debord.
Come, come, and joyfully resound
The praise of Christ, who does abound
In love, in mercy, peace and grace,
And shall make us to see his face
In joy and glory, who contend
Against sin and Satan, till he end
This mortal life, and to us give
For evermore with him to live.
Michael the Dragon cast from Heaven,
And Babels whore shall als be driven,
And dashed strongly down to dust,
The Antichrist whom God has cursed:
O she is fallen in Gods sight,
And daily falling through his might.
The glory of her pomp and pride,
Must yield to Christ, and to his Bride.
Gods Israel. O Christians true,
Come shoute for joy, and still renew
A battery to proud Babels wall,
Till that presumptuous Harlot fall.
Would God mine eyes might see her dashed
And dung to dust, who long has fash'd
The Bride of Christ. O Lord of might,
Grant we may shortly see that sight.
O mighty Lord, delay not long,
Behold thy little ones in throng,
And front of battle, fighting still,
Attending thy command and will.
How long, how long, remember Lord,
Thy Saints (with whom we do accord)
Under thy throne, who call and cry,
How long, how long, do thou delay
For to avenge us of our wrongs?
But thou Lord know what best belongs
Unto thy glory; which fulfill,
According to thine holy will.

