ONE OF THE SERMONS Preached to the Lords of the High Court of Parliament, in
their solemn Fast held on Ashwednesday, Feb. 18.

And by their appointment published:

By Ios: Exon.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Nath. Butter.

1629.

Acts 2. 37, 38, 40. 37, Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren what
shall we do?

38, Then said Peter unto them, Repent and be baptized, etc. etc.

40. And with many other words did he testify, and exhort them, saying, Save
your selves from this untoward generation.


WHo knows not that Simon Peter was a Fisher? that was his trade both by Sea
and Land, if we may not rather say, that as Simon, he was a Fisherman, but, as
Peter, he was a fisher of men; He that called him so, made him so; And surely
his first draught of fishes, which, as Simon, he made at our Saviors command,
might well be a true type of the first draught of men, which, as Peter, he
made in this place; for, as then, the nets were ready to crack, and the ship
to sink, with store; so here, when he threw forth his first drag net of
heavenly doctrine, and reproof, three thousand souls were drawn up at once.
This text was as the sacred cord, that drew the net together; and pulled up
this wondrous shole of conuerts to God; It is the sum of Saint Peter's Sermon,
if not at a Fast, yet at a general humiliation, which is more and better; (for
wherefore fast we but to be humbled? and if we could be duly humbled,
without fasting, it would please God a thousand times better, then to fast
formally, without true humiliation; Indeed, for the time, this was a feast, the
feast of Pentecost; but for the estate of these Jews, it was dies cinerum, a
day of contrition; a day of deep hunger, and thirst after righteousness, Men
and brethren, what shall we do? Neither doubt I to say, that the festiuity of
the season added not a little to their humiliation; like as we are never so
apt to take cold, as upon a sweat: and that wind is ever the keenest, which
blows cold out of a warm coast; No day could be more afflictiue then an
Ashwednesday, that should light upon a solemn Pentecost; so it was here: Every
thing answered well; The Spirit came down upon the^ in a mighty wind; and
behold, it has ratled their hearts together; the house shook in the descent,
and behold here, the foundations of the soul were moved; Fiery tongues
appeared, and here their breasts were inflamed; Cloven tongues; and here their
hearts were cut in sunder. The words were miraculous, because in a
supernatural, and sudden variety of language; the matter divine, laying before
them both the truth of the Messiah, and their bloody measure offered to that
Lord of life, and now Compuncti cordibus, they were pricked in their hearts.
Wise Solomon says, The words of the wise are like goads, and nails; here they
were so; Goades, for they were, compuncti, pricked; yea, but the goad could not
go so deep, that passes but the skin; they were nails, driven into the very
heart of the auditors, up to the head; the great Master of the Assembly, the
divine Apostle had set them home, they were pricked in their hearts. Never were
words better bestowed. It is an happy blood-letting that saues the life, this
did so here: we look to the sign commonly in phlebotomy, it is a sign of
our idle and ignorant superstition, Saint Peter here saw the sign to be in the
heart, and he strikes happily, Compuncti cordibus, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Oh, what sweet Music was this to the Apostles ear? I dare say, none but
heaven could afford better; what a pleasing spectacle was this anguish of their
wounded souls? To see men come in their zealous devotions, and lay down their
moneys (the price of their alienated possessions) at those Apostolic feet,
was nothing to this; that they came in a bleeding contrition, and prostrated
their penitent and humbled souls at the beautiful feet of the messengers of
peace; with Men and brethren what shall we do? Oh when, when shall our eyes be
blessed with so happy a prospect? How long shall we thunder out Gods fearful
judgments against wilful sinners; how long shall we threaten the flames of
hell to those impious wretches, who crucify again to themselves, the Lord of
life, ere we can wring a sigh, or a tear from the rocks of their hearts or
eyes? Woe is me that we may say too truly, as this Peter did of his other
fishing; Master, we have travailed all the night and caught nothing. Surely, it
may well go for night with us, whiles we labor and prevail not. Nothing?
not a soul caught? Lord what is becomne of the success of thy Gospel? Who
has believed our report, or to whom is the arm^ of the Lord revealed? Oh God,
thou art ever thy self, thy truth is eternal, hell is where it was; if we be
less worthy then thy first messengers; yet what excuse is this to the besotted
world, that through obdurednesse and infidelity it will needs perish? no man
will so much as say with the Jews, What have I done, or with Saint Peter's
auditors, what shall I do? Oh foolish sinners, shall ye live here always;
care ye not for your souls; is there not an hell that gapes for your stubborn
impenitence? Go on, if there be no remedy, go on, and dye for ever; we are
guiltless, God is righteous, your damnation is just; But, if your life be
fickle, death vnaauoydable, if an everlasting vengrance be the necessary reward
of your momentany wickedness, Oh turn, turn from your evil ways; and in an
holy distraction of your remorsed souls say, with these Jews, Men and
brethren what shall we do? This from the general view of the occasion; we
descend to a little more particularitie.

Luke, the beloved Physician, describes Saint Peter's proceeding here, much
after his own trade; as of a true spiritual physician; who finding his
Countrymen the Jews in a desperate, and deadly condition, gasping for life,
struggling with death, enters into a speedy and zealous course of their cure;
And first he begins with the Chyrurgicall part; and finding them rank of
blood, and that foul, and putrified, he lets it out (compuncti cordibus)
where we might show you the incision, the vein, the lancet, the orifice, the
anguish of the stroke: The incision, compuncti, they were pricked; The vein in
their hearts; Smile not now, ye Physicians, if any hear me this day, as if I
had passed a solaecisme, in telling you these men were pricked in the vein of
the heart, talk you of your Cephalica, and the rest, and tell us of another
cistern from whence these tubuli sanguinis are derived; I tell you again (with
an addition of more incongruities still) that God and his divine Physicians do
still let blood in the median vein of the heart; The lancet is the keen and
cutting reproof of their late barbarous crucifixion of their holy and most
innocent and benign Savior; The orifice, is the ear, (when they heard this:)
what ever the local distance be of these parts; spiritually, the ear is the
very surface of the heart; and whosoever would give a medicinal stroke to the
heart must pass it through the ear, the sense of discipline and correction:
The anguish bewrayes it self in their passionate exclamation; Men and brethren
what shall we do?

There is none of these, which my speech might not well take up, if not as an
house to dwell in, yet as an Inn to rest and lodge in; but I will not so much
as bayt here; only we make this a through fare tothose other sacred
prescriptions of saving remedies: which are three in number. The first is,
euacuation of sins by a speedy repentance (...); The second, the sovereign
bath or lauer of regeneration, Baptism. The third, diet^ticall and
prophylacticall receipts of wholesome caution: which I mean (with a
determinate praeterition of the rest) to spend my hour upon, Save your selves
from this untoward generation. But, ere I pitch upon this most useful and
seasonable particularity, let me offer to your thoughts the speedy application
of these gracious remedies; The blessed Apostle does not let his patients
languish under his hand in the heats and colds of hopes and fears; but so soon
as ever the word is out of their mouths, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
he presently administreth these sovereign receipts, Repent, be baptized, save
your selves. In acute diseases wise physicians will leese no time; only delay
makes some distempers deadly. It is not for us to let good motions freeze under
our fingers; How many gleeds have dyed in their ashes, which if they had been
speedily blown, had risen into comfortable flames? The care of our zeal for
God must be sure to take all opportunities of good; This is the Apostles
((...)) serving the time; that is, observing it; not for conformity to it when
it is naught, (fie on that baseness, no let the declining time come to us,
upon true and constant grounds, let not us stoop to it, in the terms of the
servile yeeldance of Optatus his Donatists, Omnia pro tempore, nibil pro
veritate) not, I say, for conformity to it, but for advantage of it; The
emblem teaches us to take occasion by the forelocke, else we catch too late.
The Israelites must go forth and gather their Manna, so soon as it is fallen;
if they stay but till the Sun have raught his noone-point, in vain shall
they seek for that food of Angels. Saint Peter had learnt this of his Master;
when the shoale was ready, Christ says, Laxate retia, Luke 5. 14. what should
the net do now in the ship? When the fish was caught, Christ says, Draw up
again, what should the net do now in the Sea? What should I advise you
Reverend Fathers and brethren (the Princes of our Israel, as the Doctors are
called, Judges 5. 9.) to speak a word in season; what should I presume to put
into your hands, these apples of gold, with pictures of silver? What should I
persuade you (to these (...)) to wing your words with speed, when the necessity
of endangered souls calls for them? Oh let us row hard whiles the tide of
grace serves; when we see a large door, and effectual opened unto us, let us
throng in, with a peaceable and zealous importunity to be sure; Oh let us
preach the word (...) In season, out of season; and carefully watch for the
best advantages of prevailing, and when the iron of men's hearts is softened by
the fire of Gods Spirit, and made flexible by a meet humiliation, delay not to
strike, and make a gracious impression, as Saint Peter did here Repent, be
baptized; Save your selves from this untoward generation.

Now to the maine, and all-sufficient Recipe for these feeling distempers; save
your selves. This is the very extracted quintessence of Saint Peter's long
Sermon; in which alone is included and united the sovereign virtue of
Repentance, of Baptism, of whatsoever help to a converting soul; so as I
shall not need to speak explicitly of them, whiles I enlarge my self to the
treating of this universal remedy, Save your selves from this untoward
generation.

Would you think that Saint Luke has given me the division of this, whether
Text, or, sermon of Saint Peter? ye shall not find the like otherwhere; here it
is clearly so: (...). He testifies, he exhorts; he testifies what he thinks of
the times; he exhorts or beseeches, (as the Syriacke turns it) to avoid their
danger; both of them, as St. Austen well, refer to this one divine sentence:
The parts whereof then, are in Saint Lukes division; Peter's reprehensory
attestation, and his obtestation; His reprehensory attestation to the common
wickedness, (...); His obtestation of their freedom and indemnity, (...);
Save your selves.

To begin with the former; what is a generation? what is an untoward
generation? Either word has some little mist about it; The very word,
generation, has begot multiplicity of senses: without all perplexednesse of
search, we will single out the properly intended for this place; As times, so,
we in them, are in continual passage; every thing is in motion; the Heavens
do not more move above our heads, in a circular revolution, then we here on
earth do by a perpetual alteration; now all that are contained in one list of
time, whether fixed, or uncertain, are a generation of men; Fixed; so Suidas
vnder-reckons it by seven years; but the ordinary rate is an hundred; It is a
clear text, Genesis 15. 16. But in the fourth generation, they shall come hither
again; when is that? (to the shame of Galatinus, who clouds it with the fancy
of the four kinds, or manners of man's existence:) Moses himself interprets
it, of four hundred years, verse. 13. Uncertain; so Solomon; One generation
passes, another comes; The very term implies transitorinesse: It is with
men, as with Raspices; one stalk is growing, another grown up, a third
withered, and all upon one root; Or, as with flowers, and some kinds of flies,
they grow up, and seed, and dye; Ye see your condition, oh ye great men of the
earth, It is no staying here; Orimur, morimur; after the acting of a short part
upon this stage, ye must withdraw for ever; make no other account, but, with
Abraham, to serve your generation, and away; ye can never more fitly hear of
your mortality then now, that ye are under that roof which couers the
monuments of your dead, and forgotten Progenitors.

What is an untoward generation? (...) It is promiscuously turned froward,
perverse, crooked; The oppositio^ to (...) is, (...) All is as one, what ever
swarues from the right is crooked; The Law is a right line, and what
crookedness is in nature, frowardness, and untowardness is in morality.
Shortly, there is a double crookedness and untowardness; One negative, the
other, positive; The first, is a failing of that right we should either have,
or be; The second, a contrary habit of vicious qualities; and both these, are,
either in credendis, or agendis; In matter of faith, or matter of fact. The
first, when we do not believe, or do what we ought; the second, when we
mis-beleeue, or mis-liue.

The first is an untowardness of omission; the second of commission. The
omissi^e untowardness shall lead the way; and that, first, in matter of
belief. This is it whereof our Savior spoke to the two Disciples in their
warm walk to Emaus, O fools, and slow of heart to believe; whereof the
proto-martyr Stephen to his auditors, ((...);) The stiff neck, the
uncircumcised ear, the fat heart, the blinded eye, the obdurate soul (quae
nec mouetur precibus, nec cedit minis, as Bernard) are wont to be the
expressions of this untowardness.

If these Jews, then, after so clear predictions of the Prophets, after so
miraculous demonstrations of the divine power of Christ; after so many graves
ransackt, dead raised, devils eiected, limbs and eyes new-created; after such
testimonies of the star, Sages, Angels, God himself; after such triumphs
over death and hell, do yet detrect to believe in him, and to receive him for
their Messiah, most justly are they, in this first kind, (...) a froward
generation; And so is any Nation under heaven, that follows them in the steps
of their peevish incredulity, more or less; shutting their eyes upon the
glorious light of saving Truth; like that sullen Tree, in the Indies, which,
they say, closes it self against the beams of the rising Sun, and opens
only to the dampish shades of the night; where we must take this rule with
us; a rule of most just proportion; that the means of light to any Nation
aggrauate the haynousnesse, and damnablenesse of their unbelief: The time of
that ignorance God regarded not, but now: says Saint Paul to the Athenians,
Acts 17. If I had not comne, and spoken to them, they should have had no sin;
says our Savior, Ioh. 15. 22. Those that walk in Cimmerian, in Egyptian
darkness, it is neither shame, nor wonder, if they either err, or stumble;
but, for a man to stumble the Sun in the face, or to grope by the walls at
noone in the midst of Goshen, is so much more hateful, as the occecation is
more willing.

The later, which is the negative untowardness in action, is, when any Nation
fails palpably in those holy duties of Piety, Justice, Charity, which the
royal Law of their God requires. Of this kind are those usual complaints;
The fear of God is not before their eyes. God looked to see if there were any
that looked after God, and behold there was none; The righteous is perished
from the children of men; Behold the tears of the oppressed, and none
comforted them. The Prophets are full of these querulous notes; there is not a
page of them free; yea hardly shall ye meet with one line of theirs, which
does not brand their Israel with this defect of holiness.

From the negative, cast your eyes upon the positive crookedness, or
untowardness; That is, in matter of faith, the maintenance of impiety,
mis-beleefe, heresy, superstition, atheism, and what ever other intellectual
wickedness. In matter of fact, Idolatries, profane carriage, violation of Gods
days and ordinances; disobediences, murders, adulteries, thefts, drunkenness,
lies, detractions, or any other actual rebellion against God. Behold, I have
drawn forth before you an hellish rabble of sins, enough to mar a world;
what ever Nation now or succession of men abounds either in these sinful
omissions, or these heinous commissions; whether in matter of judgment, or
manners, is (...) an untoward generation; That which makes a man crooked, or
untoward, makes a generation so; for what is a generation, but a resultance of
men? their number does not vary their condition. But let not our zeal (as it
often does) make us uncharitable; when a whole generation is taxed for
untowardness, think not that none are free, No, not one, says the Psalmist;
by way of seruent aggrauation; All seek their own, says the Apostle; all, in
comparison: but, never times were so over grown with iniquity, as that God
has not left himself some gracious remainders; when the theeuish Chaldeans
and Sabeans have done their worst, there shall be a messenger, to say I am
escaped; Never was harvest or vintage so curiously inned, that some gleanings
were not left in the field; some clusters among the leaves: But these few, if
they may give a blessing to the times, yet they cannot give a style; the
denomination still follows the greater (though the worse) part; let these be
never so good; the generation, is, and is noted for evil. Let me therefore
here commend to your better thoughts these three emergent considerations: 1.
The irreparable wrong, and reproach that lewd men bring upon the very ages and
nations where they live. 2. The difference of times, and ages, in respect of
the degrees of evil. 3. The warrant of the free censure of ill-deseruing
times, or Nations.

It were happy if the injury of a wicked man could be confiued to his own
bosom, that he only should fare the worse for his sins; (...) etc. as the
Greek rule runs; If it were but selfe-do, selfe-haue, as the old word is;
But as his lewdness is (like some odious sent) diffused through the whole room
where he is; so it reaches to earth and heaven; yea to the very times and
generations, upon which he is unhappily fallen. Doubtless there were many
worthy Saints in these very times of Saint Peter; there was the blessed mother
of Christ, the paragon of sanctity; there was a beauye of those devout, and
holy dames that attended the doctrine, bewailed the death, and would have
embalmed the corpse of our blessed Savior; there were the twelve Apostles; the
seventie Disciples; the hundred and twenty names that were met in one room at
Jerusalem, Acts 1. 25. The ^iue hundred brethren that saw Christ after his
glorious and victorious resurrection; besides those many thousands, that
believed, through their word, in all the parts of Judea, and Galslee, yet, for
all that, the Apostle brands this with (...), an untoward generation.

It is not in the virtue of a few to drown the wickedness of the more; If we
come into a field that has some good plenty of corn, and some store of weeds,
though it be red with poppy, or yellow with ca^locke, or blew with wild bottles
or scabious, we still call it a corn field; but, if we come into a
barne-floore, and see some few grains scattered amongst an heap of chafe, we
do not call it a corne-heape, the quantity of the offall deuoures the mention
of those insensible grains: Thus it is with times, and nations; A little good
is not seen amongst much ill; A righteous Lot cannot make his City to be no
Sodom; wickedness as it helps to corrupt, so to shame a very age. The Orator
Tertullus, when he would plead against Paul, says, We have ^ound this man
((...)) a pestilence^ Act. 24. 5. Foolish Tertullus, that mistook the Antidote
for the poison, the remedy for the disease* but had S. Paul been such ^s thy
mes-prison supposed (...) he had been such as thy unjust (...) now makes thy
self, ((...)) the plague of thy people* A (...) ^ he infects the world with
sin, the very age with infamy; Malus vir malum publicum, is not a more old,
then true word; Are there then in any nation under heaven lewd miscreants,
whose hearts are Atheists, whose tongues are blasphemers, whose bodies are ^
stews; whose lips are nothing but a factory of close villainy; let them please
themselves, and let others (if ye will) applaud them for their beneficial
contributions to the public affairs, in the style of bonu^ ciui^ a good
patriot; as men whose parts may be useful to the w^^le-publike; but, I say,
such men are no better then the bane of their Country, the stayne of their age;
Turpis est pars quae suo toti ^on ^^n^e^it as G^rson well; It is an ill member,
for which all the body fares the worse: Hear this then, ye glorious sinners,
that brag of your good affections, and faithful services to your dear
Country; your hearts, your heads, your purses, your hands (ye say) are pressed
for the public good; yea, but are your hearts godless? are your lives filthy?
let me tell you, your sins do more disseruice to your nation, then your
selves are worth: All your valor, wisdom, subsidiary helps cannot
counterpoise one dram of your wickedness; Talk what ye will; sin is a
shame to any people, says wise Solomon; ye bring both a curse, and a dishonor
upon your Nation; It may thank you for the hateful style of ((...)) a froward
generation: This, for our first observation.

Never generation was so straight, as not to be distorted with so me powerful
sins, but there are differences; and degrees in this distortion; even in the
very first world were Giants, as Moses tells us Genesis 6. 4. which, as our
Mythologists add, did ((...)) bid battle to heaven.

In the next, there were mighty hunters; proud Babel-builders; after them
followed beastly Sodomites; It were easy to draw down the pedigree of evils
through all times, till we come to these last, which the holy Ghost marks out
for perilous; yet some generation is more eminently sinful then other; as the
Sea is in perpetual agitation, yet the Spring tides rise higher then their
fellows; hence Saint Peter notes this his generation with an emphasis of
mischief ((...)) here is a transcendency of evil; what age may compare with
that, which has embrued their cruel hands in the blood of the Son of God?
That roaring Lion is never still, but there are times, wherein he rages more,
as he did and does in the first, in the last days of the Gospel. The first,
that he might block up the way of saving truth; The last, for that he knows
his time is short. There are times that are poisoned with more contagious
heresies, with more remarkable villainies, It is not my meaning to spend time
in abridging the sacred Chronologies of the Church, and to deduce along the
cursed successions of damnable errors from their hellish original; only let
me touch at the notable difference betwixt the first, and the last world; In
the first (as Epiphanius observes) (...), there was neither diversity of
opinion, nor mention of heresy, nor act of idolatry, (...): only piety, and
impiety divided the world; whereas now, in the last (which is the wrangling and
techy dotage of the decrepit world) here is nothing but unquiet clashings of
opinion, nothing but foul heresy, either maintained by the guilty, or imputed
to the innocent, nothing but gross idolatry in paganism, in mis-beleeuing
Christianity; and (woe is me that I must say it) a colored impiety shares too
much of the rest; My speech is glided, ere I was aware, into the third head of
our discourse; and is suddenly fallen upon the practice of that, which S. Peter's
example here warrants, the censure of ill deserving times: which I must crave
leave of your honorable and Christian patience, with an holy and just freedom,
to prosecute.

It is the peevish humor of a factious eloquence to aggrauate the evils of
the times; which, were they better then they are, would be therefore cried down
in the ordinary language of malecontented spirits, because present; But, it is
the warrantable, and necessary duty of S. Peter, and all his true Evangelical
successors, when they meet with a froward generation, to call it so.

How commonly do we cry out of those querulous Michaiahs, that are still
prophesying evil to us, and not good? No theme but sins, no sauce but
vinegar: Might not one of these galled Jews of S. Peter's auditory have started
up; and have thus challenged him for this tartness; what means this hard
censure? why do you slander the time? Solomon was a wise man, and he says,
Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were better then these?
for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this: this is but a needless
rigor; this is but an envious calumny: The generation were not untoward; if
your tongue were not uncharitable. The Apostle fears none of these currish
oblatrations; but contemning all impotent mis-acceptions, calls them what he
finds them, A froward generation: And well might he do so; his great Master
did it before him, an evil and adulterous generation; and the harbinger of
that great Master fore-ranne him in that censure, O generation of Vipers, Mat.
3. 7. and the Prophets led the same way to him in every page. And why doenot
we follow Peter in the same steps wherein Peter followed Christ, and Christ
his forerunner, and his forerunner the Prophets? Who should tell the times of
their sins, if we be silent? Pardon me, I beseech you, most noble, reverend,
and beloved hearers; necessity is laid upon me; in this day of our public
mourning, I may not be as a man in whose mouth is no reproves. Oh let us be
thankful for our blessings, wherein, through the mercy of God, we outstrip all
the nations under heaven; but withal, let us bewail our sins, which are so
much more grievous, because ours. Would to God it were no less unjust, then
unpleasing to complain of this as an untoward generation; There be ^oure
things that are wont both to make up and euince the prauity of any generation;
(woe is me that they are too apparently met in this) multitude of sins,
magnitude of sins, boldness of sin, impunity of sinning; Take a short view
of them all: you shall see that the multitude is such, as that it has covered
the earth; the magnitude such, as has reached to heaven; the boldness such as
out-faceth the Gospel, the impunity such as frustrates the wholesome laws under
which we live.

For the multitude, where is the man that makes true conscience of any the
Laws of his God? and if every man violate all the laws of God, what do all
put together? our forefathers sins were but as drops, ours are as torrents.
Instance in some few; Cannot we our selves remember, since a debaucht Drunkard
was an Owl among birds, a beast of men, a monster of beasts; abhorred of men,
shouted at by children? Is this sight now any news to us? Is not every Tauern
a stye of such swine? Is not every street indented with their shameful
staggerings? Is there not now as much spent in wanton smoke, as our honest
forefathers spent in substantial hospitality?

Cannot we remember, since oaths were so geason, and uncouth, that their sound
startled the hearer, as amazed at the strange language of treason against the
God of heaven* now they fill every mouth, and beat every ea^e in a neglected
familiarity? What should I tell you of the ouergrowne frequence of oppressions,
extortions, injurious and fraudulent transactions, malicious suites; the
neighbor walls of this famous adjoining Palace can too amply witness this
truth, whose roof if (as they say) it will admit of no Spiders, I am sure, the
floor of it yields venom enough* to poison a Kingdom: What should I tell you
of the sensible declination to our once loathed superstitions; of the common
trade of contemptuous dis-obediences to lawful authority, the scornful
vnderualuing of Gods messengers; the ordinary neglect of his sacred ordinances;
what speak I of these and thousands more? There are Arithmeticians that have
taken upon them to count how many corns of sand would make up the bulk of
heaven and earth; but no Art can reckon up the multitude of our provoking
sins.

Neither do they more exceed in number, then magnitude; Can there be a greater
sin then Idolatry? Is not this (besides all the rest) the sin of the
present Romish generation? One of their own confesses (as he well may) that
were not the bread transubstantiate, their Idolatry were more gross, then the
heathenish; lo, nothing excuses them but an impossible figment* Know, O ye
poor, ignorant seduced souls, that the bread can be no more turned into God;
then God can be turned into bread, into nothing; the very omnipotent power of
God bars these impious contradictions. My heart trembles therefore and bleeds
to think of your highest, your holiest devotions. Can there be a greater sin
then robbing of God? This is done by our sacrilegious Patrons: Can there be a
greater sin then tearing God out of heaven with our bloody and blasphemous
oaths; then the affamishing of souls by a wilful, or lazy silence; then
rending in pieces the bowels of our dear Mother the Church, by our headstrong,
and frivolous dissentions; then furious murders; then affronts of authority?
These, these are those huge mountains which our Gyantlike presumption roles
upon each other, to war against heaven.

Neither are the sins of men more great, then audacious; yea it is their
impudency that makes them heinous; bashful offenses rise not to extremity of
evil; The sins of excess as they are opera tenebrarum, so they had wont to
be night-workes, They that are drunken are drunk in the night, says the
Apostle; now, they dare, with Absaloms beastliness, call the Sun to record:
Saint Bernard tells us of a Demon meridianus, a nooneDeuill, out of the vulgar
mis-translation of the 90. Psalm; Surely, that ill spirit walks about busily,
and haunts the licentious conversation of inordinate men.

Unjust exactions of griping Officers had wont to c^eepe in under the modest
cloak of voluntary courtesy, or fair considerations of a befriended
expedition, now they come like Elies sons, Nay but, Thou shall give it me
now, and, if not, I will take it by force, 1 Samuel 2. 16.

The legal thefts of professed usurers, and the crafty compacts of sly
oppressors, dare throw down the gantlet to justice; and insolent disobediences
do so to authority; And when we denounce the fearful judgments of God
against all these abominable wickednesses; the obdured sinner dares ieere us
in the face, and* in a worse sense ask the disciples question, Domine quando
fient haec; Master when shall these things be? yea their selfe-flattering
incredulity dare say to their soul, as Peter did to his Master, Favor thy
self, for these things shall not happen to thee.

Neither, lastly, would sin dare to be so impudent, if it were not for
impunity; it cannot be but cowardly, where it sees cause of fear; Every hand
is not to be laid upon evil; If an error should arise in the Church; it is not
for every unlearned tradesman to cast away his yard-wand, and take up his pen;
Wherefore serve Universities, if every blew apron may at his pleasure turn
Licenciate of Divinity, and talk of Theological questions which he
understands not, as if they were to be measured by the elle. O times! Lord
whither will this presumption grow? Deus, omen, etc. If folly, if villainy be
committed in our Israel, it is not for every man to be an Officer; Who made
thee a Judge? was a good question, though ill asked. But I would to God we had
more cause to complain of the presumption of them who meddle with what they
should not, then the neglect of the^ who meddle not with what they should; Woe
is me the floodgates of evil are (as it were) lift open, and the full stream
gusheth upon us; Not that I would cast any aspersion upon sacred sovereignty;
No, blessed be God for his dear anointed; of whom we may truly, and joyfully
say, that in imitation of him whom he represents, he loves justice, and hates
iniquity; It is the partiality or slacknesse of the subordinate inferior
executions that is guilty of this preualence of sin; what can the head do
where the hands are wanting? to what use is the water derived from the
cesterne, into the pipes, if the cock be not turned? What auailes it that
children are brought to the birth, if there want a midwifry to deliver them?
Can there possibly be better Laws, then have in our times been enacted,
against drunkenness? where, or when are they executed? Can there be a better
Law made for the restraint of too too common oaths? who vrges, who pays that
just mulct? Can there be better laws against wilful Recusancy, against
Symony, against Sacrilege? how are they eluded by fraudulent euasions? Against
neglect of Divine Service; yet how are they slighted? against the lawless
wandering of lazy vagabonds; yet, how full are our streets, how empty our
Correction-houses? Lastly, (for it were easy to be endless) can there be
better laws then are made ^or the punishment of fornications, adulteries, and
all other fleshly inordinatenesses? how does bribery and corruption smother
these offenses, as if the sins of men served only to enrich covetous
Officers? Now, put all these together, the multitude, the magnitude, the
boldness, the impunity of sin, and tell me whether all these do not make
this of ours, generationem prauam, a froward generation; So as we may too well
take up Esayes complaint, Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters. Esa. 1. 4. Honorable and
beloved, how should we be humbled under the hand of our God, in the sense of
our many, great, bold and lawless sins? What sackcloth, what ashes can be
enough for us? Oh that our faces could be covered with confusion; that we
could rend our hearts, and not our garments; Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep, and thus Save your selves from this froward generation.

And so from St. Peter's attestation to their wickedness, we descend to his
obtestation of their redress, Save your selves. We must be so much shorter in
the remedy, as we have been longer in the disease. The remedy is but of a
short sound, but of a long extent, (...). I urge not the passiuenesse of this
advise; that it is not, Save your selves, but, Be ye saved: God is jealous of
ascribing to us any power unto good; we have ability, we have will enough to
undo our selves; scope enough to hell-ward; neither motion nor will to good;
that must be put into us by him that gives both posse, and velle, and posse
velle; power to will, and will to do. This (Saving) comprises in it three great
duties, Repentance for our sin; Auoidance of sinners; Reluctation to sin and
sinners.

Repentance. Perhaps, as St. Chrysostom, and Cyril think, some of these were
the personal executioners of Christ; If so, they were the worst of this
generation; and yet they may, they must save themselves from this generation,
by their unfeigned repentance: Howsoever, they made up no small piece of the
evil times, and had need to be saved from themselves, by their hearty
contrition; Surely those sins are not ours, whereof we have truly repented;
The skin that is once washed is as clean from soil, as if it had never been
foul; Those legal washings, and rinsings showed them what they must do to
their souls, to their lives; This remedy, as it is universal, so it is
perpetual; the warm waters of our tears, are the streams of Jordan to cure
our Leprosy, the Siloam to cure our blindness, the poole of Bethesda to cure
all our lamenesse, and defects of obedience; Alas, there is none of us but have
our share in the common sins; The best of us has helped to make up the
frowardness of our generation; Oh that we could vn-sin our selves by our
seasonable repentance; Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye
double minded.

Auoydance is the next; Auoidance of all unlawful participation; There is a
participation natural, as to live in the same air, to dwell in the same
earth, to eat of the same meat; this we cannot avoid, unless we would go out
of the world, as St. Paul tells his Corinthes. There is a civil participation,
in matter of commerce, and humane necessary conversation; This we need not
avoid with jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics. There is a spiritual
participation in moral things, whether good, or evil: In these lies this
(...); and yet, not universally neither; we are not tied to avoid the services
of God, and holy duties for the commixture of lewd men, as the foolish
Separatists have fancied; it is participation in evil that we are here
charged to avoid; although also entireness, even in civil conversation, is
not allowed us with notoriously wicked and infectious persons; The Israelites
must hye them from the Tents of Corah; and, Come out of her my people. Chiefly,
they are the sins from which we must save our selves, not the men; if, not
rather, from the men for the sins; Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, says St. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 12. commenting upon this (...)
of St. Peter.

There is nothing more ordinary with our Casuists, then the nine ways of
participation, which Aquinas, and the Schools following him have shut up in
two homely verses, Iussio, consilium, etc. The sum is, that we do not save
our selves from evil, if either we command it, or counsel it, or consent to
it, or sooth it, or further it, or share in it, or dissuade it not, or resist
it not, or reveal it not; Here would be work enough (you see) to hold our
preaching unto St. Paul's hour, midnight; but I spare you, and would be loath
to have any Eutychus: Shortly, if we would save our selves from the sin of the
time, we may not command it, as Iezebel did to the Elders of Iesreel; we may
not advise it, as Ionadab did to Amnon; we may not consent to it, as Bathsheba
did to David; we may not sooth it, as Zidkijah did to Ahab; we may not
further it, as Ioab did to David; we may not share in it, as Achitophel did to
Absalom; we may not forbear to dissuade it, as Hira^ the Adullamite to Judah;
to resist it, as partial Magistrates; to reveal it, as treacherous
confessaries.

But, of all these, (that we may single out our last and utmost remedy) here
must be a zealous reluctation to evil; All those other negative cariages of
not commanding, not counselling, not consenting, not soothing, not abetting,
not sharing, are nothing without a real oppugnation of sin. Would we then
thoroughly quit our selves of our froward generation? we must set our faces
against it to discountenance it; we must set our tongues against it, to
control it; we must set our hands against it, to oppose it; It goes ^arr^
that of the Apostle, Ye have not yet resisted unto blood striving against
sin, Heb. 12. 4. Lo here is a truly heroical exercise for you great Ones;
to strive against sin, not ad sudorem only, as Physicians prescribe, but ad
sanguinem; Ye cannot better bestow your selves then (in a loyal assistance of
sacred authority) upon the debellation of the outrageous wickedness of the
times. These are the Dragons, and Giants, and Monsters, the vanquishing whereof
has moralized the Histories of your famous Progenitors. Oh do ye consecrate
your hands, and your hearts to God in beating down the headstrong powers of
evil; and as by repentance, and auoydance, so, by reluctation, S^ue your
selves from this untoward generation.

Now, what need I waste the time in dehorting your Noble and Christian
ingenuity from participation of the Epidemicall sins of a froward generation?
It is enough motive to you, that sin is a base, sordid, dishonorable thing;
but, withal, let me add only one dissuasiue from the danger, employed in the
very word Save; for how are we saved but from a danger? The danger both of
corruption, and confusion.

Corruption; ye see before your eyes that one yawning mouth makes many; This
pitch will defile us; One rotten kernel of the Pomegranate infects the
fellows; Saint Paul made that verse of the heathen Poet, Canonical, Evil
conversation corrupts good manners; What woeful experience have we, every day,
of those, who by this means from a vigorous heat of zeal, have declined to a
temper of lukewarm indifferency and then, from a careless mediocrity, to all
extremity of debauchednesse; and of hopfull beginners, have ended in incarna^e
devils? Oh the dangerous, and insensible insinuations of sin; If that crafty
tempter can hereby work us but to one dram of less detestation to a
familiarly inured evil, he promises himself the victory; It is well noted
by Saint Ambrose, of that chaste Patriarch Joseph, that, so soon as ever his
wanton Mistress had laid her impure hand upon his cloak, he leaves it behind
him, that he might be sure to avoid the danger of her contagious touch; If the
Spouse of Christ be a Lilly among thorns; (by the mighty protection of her
omnipotent husband) yet take thou heed, how thou walk amongst those thorns,
for that Lilly: Shortly* would thou not be tainted with wickedness,
abhor the pestilent society of lewd men; and by a seasonable subduction,
thus, Save thy self from a froward generation.

The last and utmost of all dangers is confusion; That charge of God by Moses
is but just, Numb. 16. 18. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these men, and
touch nothing of theirs, lest ye perish in all their sins; Lo, the very
station, the very touch is mortal. Indeed, what reason is there to hope or to
plead for an immunity; If we share in the work, why should we not take part
of the wages? The wages of sin is death; If the storke be taken damage
faisant with the Cranes, she is inwrapped in the same net, and can not
complain to be surprised. Qui cum lupis est, cum lupis vlulet, as he said;
He that is with wolves, let him howl with wolves: If we be fratres in malo,
brethen in evil, we must look to be inuolued in the same curse; be not
deceived; honorable and beloved, here is no exemption of greatness; nay,
contrarily, eminence of place aggrauates both the sin, and the judgment;
when Ezra heard that the hand of the Princes and Rulers had been chief in
that great offense, then he rent his clothes, and tore his hair, Ezra 9. 3.

Certainly this case is dangerous and fearful, whersoeuer it lights; Hardly
are those sins redressed that are taken up by the great; Easily are those
sins diffused, that are warranted by great examples: The great lights of
heaven, the most conspicuous Planets, if they be eclipsed, all the Almanacks of
all Nations write of it; whereas the small Stars of the Galaxy are not
heeded; All the Country runs to a Beacon on fire, no body regards to see a
shrub flaming in a valley; Know then, that your sins are so much greater, as
your selves are; and, all the comfort that I can give you with out your true
repentance, is, That mighty men shall be mightily tormented; Of all other men
therefore be ye most careful to keep your selves untainted with the common
sins; and to renew your covenant with God; No man cares for a spot upon a
plain, russet, riding suit; but we are curious of a rich robe, every mote
there is an eyesore; Oh, be ye careful to preserve your honor from all the
foul blemishes of corruption; as those that know virtue has a greater share
in nobility, then blood; Imitate in this, the great frame of the Creation,
which still, the more it is removed from the dregs of this earth, the purer it
is; Oh save ye your selves from this untoward generation, so shall ye help
to save your nation from the imminent judgments of our just God* so shall ye
save your souls in the day of the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one infinite God, be all honor, and glory
ascribed, now, and for ever.

FINIS.

