A COMMON APOLOGY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND: Against the unjust Challenges of
the ouer-iust Sect, commonly called Brownists. Wherein the grounds and
Defenses, of the Separation are largely discussed: OCCASIONED, BY A Late
Pamphlet published under the name, Of an Answer to a Censorious Epistle, Which
the Reader shall find in the Margent. By I. H.

LONDON Printed for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Bull-head. 1610.

TO OUR GRACIOUS AND BLESsed Mother, the Church of ENGLAND. THE MEANEST OF HER
Children Dedicates this her Apology, and wishes all Peace and Happiness.
NO less then a year and a half is past (Reverend, Dear, and holy Mother)
since I wrote a loving monitory letter to two of thine unworthy Sons; which (I
heard) were fled from thee in person, in affection, and somewhat in opinion:
Supposing them yet thine in the maine substance, though in some circumstances
their own. Since which, one of them has washed of thy Font-water as unclean,
and has written desperately both against thee, and his own fellows: From the
other, I received (not two months since) a stomakful Pamphlet; besides the
private injuries to the monitor, casting upon thine honorable name blasphemos
imputations of Apostasy, Antichristianisme, Whoordome, Rebellion: Mine own
wrongs I could have contemned in silence, Meam iniuriam patie^tertuli
impietatem contra Spo^sam Christi far non potui. Hier ad Vigilant.
but, For Sions sake, I cannot hold my peace: If I remember not thee, O
Jerusalem, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. It were a shame, and
sin for me, that myzeale should be less hot for thine innocence, then
theirs to thy false disgrace. How have I hastened therefore to let the world
see thy sincere truth, and their perverse slanders. Unto thy sacred name then
(whereto I have in all piety devoted my self) I humbly present this my speedy
and dutiful labor: whereby I hope thy weak Sons may be confirmed, the
strong encouraged, the rebellious shamed: And if any shall still obstinately
accurse thee, I refer their revenge unto thy Glorious Head, who has espoused
thee to himself, in truth and righteousness: Let him whose thou art, right
thee: In the mean time, we thy true sons, shall not only defend, but
magnify thee: Thou may be black, but thou art comely: the Daughters have
seen thee, and counted thee blessed; even the Queen, and the Concubines, and
they have praised thee: thou art thy Welbelouedst, and his desire is toward
thee: So let it be, and so let thine be toward him for ever; and mine toward
you both, who am the least of all thy little ones,

IOS. HALL.

A COMMON Apology against the Brownists.
SECTION. I.
The entrance into the work.
IF Truth and peace (Zacharyes two companions) had met in our love, Zach. 8. 19.
this Controversy had never been; the seuering of these two has caused this
separation; for while some unquiet minds have sought Truth without Peace,
they have at once lost Truth, Peace, Love, us and themselves. God knows how
unwillingly I put my hand to this unkind quarrel: Nothng so much abates the
courage of a Christian, as to call his brother adversary: Matthew. 18. 7.
We must do it; woe to the men by whom this offense comes: Yet by how much
the insultation of a brotherly enemy is more intolerable, and the grief of
our blessed mother greater, for the wrong of her own; So much more cause I see
to break this silence: If they will have the last words, Otho Frising. ex
Philon. Vr. Chaldaeorum Ruffiin. Eccl^s. hist. l. 2. c. 26.
they may not have all. For our carriage to them: They say, when Fire the God
of the Chaldees had devoured all the other wooden Deities, that Canopis set
upon him a Caldron full of water, whose bottom was devised with holes stopped
with wax, which no sooner felt the flame, but gave way to the quenching of
that furious Idol. If the fire of inordinate zeal, conceit, contention have
consumed all other parts in the separation, and cast forth (more then
Nebuchadnezers furnace) from their Amsterdam hither; Dan. 3.
it were well if the waters of our moderation and reason could vanquish, yea
abate it: This little Hin of mine shall be spent that way: we may try and
wish, but not hope it: The spirits of these men are too-well known, Vid.
Treatis of certain^ godly Minist. ag. Bar.
to admit any expectation of yeeldance: since yet, both for prevention and
necessary defense this task must be undertaken, I crave nothing of my Reader
but patience and justice: of God, victory to the truth: as for favor, I wish
no more then an enemy would give against himself: With this confidence I enter
into these lifts, and turn my pen to an Adversary, GOD knows, whether more
proud or weak.

SECTION. II.
The Answerers Preamble.
IT is a hard thing even for those which would seem sober minded men in cases
of controversy, 1. Retorted. S^p.
to use soberly the frowns and disaduantages of causes and times: It is a hard
thing even for sober minded men in cases of controversy, to use soberly the
advantages of the times: upon which whilst men are mounted on high, they use to
behold such as they oppose too ouerlie, and not without contempt; and so are
often times emboldened to roll upon them as from aloft very weak and
weightlesse discourses, thinking any slight and slender opposition sufficient
to oppress those underlings, whom they have (as they suppose) at so great an
advantage. Upon this very presumption it comes to pass, that this Author
undertakes thus solemnly and severely to censure a cause, whereof (as
appears in the sequel of the discourse) he is utterly ignorant: which had
he been but half so careful to have understood, as he has been forward to
censure, he would either have been (I doubt not) more equal toward it, or
more weighty against it.
whereby whiles men are dei^cted and trodden down, they use to behold their
opposites mounted on high, too repiningly, and not without desperate envy: and
so are oftentimes moved, to shoot up at them as from below, the bitter arrows
of spightfull and splenish discourses, thinking any hateful opposition
sufficiently charitable, to oppugn those adversaries, which have them (as they
feel) at so great an advantage: upon this impotent malitiousnesse, it comes
to pass that this aunswerer undertakes thus severely and peremptorily, to
censure that charitable censure of ignorance, which (as shall appear in the
sequel) he either simply, or willingly understood not: and to brand a dear
Church of Christ with Apostasy, Rebellion, Antichristianisme: What can be more
easy then to return accusations?

2. Confuted.
Your Preamble (with a grave bitterness) charges me with 1. Presumption upon
advantages, 2. Weak and weightlesse discourse, 3. Ignorance of the cause
censured: It had been madness in me to write, if I had not presumed upon
advantages, but of the cause, of the truth, not of the times: Though (blessed
be God) the times favor the truth, and us: if you scorn them and their
favors, complain not to be an underling: Think that the times are wiser,
then to bestow their favors upon wilful adversaries; but in spite of times,
you are not more under us in estate, then in conceit above us: so we say the
Sun is under a cloud, we know it is above it. Hier. Marco. presbyt. De
cauernis cellularum damnamus orbem; in sacco and cinere volutati de Episcopis
sententiam ferimus: Quid facit sub tunica paenitentis regius animus?
Would God ouerlinesse and contempt were not yours, even to them which are
mounted highest upon best desert; Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 9. Haec sunt initia
haereticorum, vt sibi placean:, vt praepositum superbo tumore contemnant.
Harison once theirs, in Psalm. 122. of Brown. Antichristian pride and bitterness.
Bredw. pref. M Brinsly his pref. to the 2. part of the VVatch. Optat. Mil. de
Donat. Collegae non eritis, si^o litis, fratres estis etc.
and now you that have not learned sobriety in just disaduantages, tax us,
not to use soberly the advantages of time: there was no gall in my pen, no
insultation, I wrote to you as brethren, and wished you companions: there was
more danger of flattery in my style, then bitterness: wherein used I not my
advantages soberly? Not in that I said too much, but not enough; Not in that I
was too sharp, but not weighty enough; My opposition was not too vehement, but
too slight and slender: So, strong Champions blame their adversary, for
striking too easily: you might have forborne this fault, it was my favor that
I did not my worst: you are worthy of more weight, that complain of ease. The
discourse that I rol'd down upon you, was weak and weightlesse; you shall
well find this was my lenity, Disclaimed by themselves. Answer against
Broughton page. 21.
not my impotence. The fault hereof is partly in your expectation, not in my
letter: I meant but a short Epistle, you looked belike for a volume, or
nothing; I meant only a general monition; you looked for a solid prosecution
of particulars: It is not for you to give taskes to others pens. By what Law
must we write, nothing but large Scholasticall Discourses? Such Tomes as
yours: May we not touch your sore unless we will lance, and search it? I was
not enough your enemy; forgive me this error, and you shall smart more: But
not only my omissions were of ignorance, but my censures, though severe and
solemn: An easy imputation from so great a Controuler: I pardon you, and take
this as the common lot of enemies. I never yet could see any Scribler so
unlearned, as that he durst not charge his opposite with ignorance; Separat.
schism. M. Giff. an ignorant Priest. Bar. p. 64. Confer. of D. And. and M.
Huchius. with Barrow.
If Dr. Whitaker, M. Perkins, M. Gyfford, and that Oracle of our present times,
Dr. Andrews, went away content with this liuerie from yours; how can I repine?
If I have censured what cause I knew not, let me be censured for more then
ignorance, impudency: but if you know not what I censured (let all my trust
lie on this issue) take both ignorance, boldness, and malice to your self: Is
your cause so mystical* that you can fear any man's ignorance? What Cobbler or
Spinster has not heard of the maine holds of Brownisme? Am I only a stranger
in Jerusalem? If I know not all your opinions, pardon me: Your own have not
received this illumination; M. Spr. 3. (...). siderat.
I speak boldly, not your self; Every day brings new conceits, and not one
day teaches, but corrects another, Iren. l. 1. Per singulos. dies nouum aliquod
adsectant. etc.
you must be more constant to your selves, ere you can vpbraide ignorance or
avoid it: But whether I knew your prime fancies, appears sufficiently by a
particular discourse, which above a year since was in the hands of some of
your Clients, and I wonder if not in yours: Shortly; am I ignorant? If I were
obstinate too, you might hope (with the next gale) for me, your more equal
adversary, at Amsterdam. As I am; my want of care and skill, shall (I hope)
loose nothing of the truth by you, nor suffer any of your foul aspersions
upon the face of Gods Church and ours.

But whiles we strive; who shall be our Judge? The Christian Readers: who are
those? Presume not, ye more zealous and forward Country men, that you are
admitted to this Bench: so far are we mere English, from being allowed
Judges of them; that they have already judged us to be no Bar. Confer. with
Hutchins. fo. 1. Brown estat^ of true Christians Defense of true Christians
against the Doct. of Oxford. Johnson (against Jacob.) passim. Bar. against
Gyfford.
Christians: We are Goats and Swine, no Sheep of God: since then none but
your Parlour in the West, and Amsterdam, must be our Judges, who (I beseech
you) shall be our adversaries? God be judge betwixt you and us, and correct
this your unchristian uncharitableness. Sepa. As this Epistle is come to mine
hands, so I wish the answer of it may come to the hands of him that occasioned
it: Entreating the Christian Reader, in the name of the Lord, impartially to
behold without either prejudice of cause, or respect of person, what is written
on both sides, and so from the Court of a sound conscience to give just
judgment.


SECTION. III*
The parties written to, and their Crime.
I Wrote not to you alone: To M. Smith and M. Rob. Ringleaders of the late
separation at Amsterd.
what is become of your partner, yea, your guide? Woe is me, he has renounced
our Christendom with our Church: and has washed of his former water, with
new: and now condemns you all, for not separating further, no less then we
condemn you for separating so far. As if you could not be enough out of
Babylon, unless you be out of your selves. Charact. of the Beast, written by
M. Smith. Pref. Be it known therefore to all the separation, that we account
them in respect of their constitution to be as very an Harlot, as either her
Mother the Church of England, or her Grandmother Rome is etc. Iterato
Baptizatus scienter, it erato Dominum crucifigit. De consecr. did. 4. Qui vis
etc.
Alas miserable countrymen, whither run you? Religion has but his height,
beyond which is error and madness: He tells you true, your station is
unsafe, either you must forward to him, or back to us.

The crime of separation, how great.
I objected separation to you: yet not so extreme as your answer bewrayes: a
late separation, not the first; my charity hoped you less ill, then you will
needs deserve: you grant it odious, because it casts imputation of evil upon
the forsaken: Of evil? Yea of the worst, an estate incurable and desperate. He
is an ill Physician that will leave his patient upon every distemper, his
departure argues the disease helpelesse; were we but faulty, as your Landlord
Churches, your own Rules would not abide your flight: Hence the Church of
England justly matches Separatists with the vilest persons: GOD himself does
so: who are more vile then Patrons of evil? Sep.
yet no greater woe, is to them that speak good of evil, The crime here
objected is separation, a thing very odious in the eyes of all them from whom
it is made: as evermore casting upon them the imputation of evil, whereof all
men are impatient: And hence it comes to pass^ that the Church of England can
better brook the vilest persons continuing communion with it, then any
whomsoever separating from it, though upon never so* just and well grounded
reasons. Vid. Johnson Preface to his Inquiry. Esaias. 5. 20.
then those that speak evil of good: So, wise Generals punish mutinous
persons, worse then Robbers or Adulterers: M. Penry in his Disc. of this
subject.
So Corah and his company (a Story cunningly turned upon us by your Martyr)
for their opposition to Moses were more fearfully plagued then the Idolatrous
Israelites: Number. 16 31. ^xod. 32. 30.
These sins are more directly against common society, the other more
personal: and if both have like iniquity: yet the former have both more
offense and more danger: And if not so, yet who cannot rather brook a lewd^
servant, then an undutiful son, though pretending fair colors for his
disobedience? At least, you think the Church of England thinks her self Gods
Church, as well as your Saints of Amsterdam: You that so accurse Apostacy in
others, could ye expect she should brook it in you?

But your reasons are just and well grounded: every way of a man is right in
his own eyes: Said we not well, Prou. 21. 2.
that thou art a Samaritane, and have a Devil, say the Jews? What Schism
ever did not think well of it self? For us: we call heaven and earth to
record, your cause has no more justice then your selves have charity.

SECTION. IIII.
The kinds of separation, and which is just.
YEt there is a commendable and happy separation, Sepa. And yet separation
from the world, and so from the men of the world, and so from the Prince of the
world that reigns in them, and so from whatsoever is contrary to God, is the
first step to our communion with God, and Angels, and good men, as the first
step to a Ladder, is to leave the earth.
from the world, from the Prince, and men of the world, and whatsoever is
contrary to God: who doubts it? (...).
There were no heaven for us without this, no Church; which has her name given
by her father and husband of calling out from other. Out of the Egypt of the
world does God call his sons: But this separation is into the visible Church
from the world, not (as yours) out of the Church, because of some particular
mixtures with the world: or (if you had rather take it of profession) out of
the world of Pagans and Infidels, into the visible Church, not out of the world
of true (though ^aultie) Christians into a purer Church. That I may here at
once for all give light to this point of separation: we find in Scripture a
separation either to good, or from evil: To good, Number. 18. 14:
so the Levites were separated from among the children of Israel to bear the
Arc, Number. 16. 9.
and to minister: Deuteronomy. 10. 1.
so the first borne, Exodus 13. 12.
first fruits, and Cities of refuge: Leuit. 15. 21.
So Paul was ((...)) separated, which some would have allude to his
Pharisaisme, Deuteronomy. 4. 41.
but has plain reference to Gods own words (Act. 13. 2.) separate me
Barnabas and Saul: Romans 1. 1.
Though this is rather a destination to some worthy purpose, (...).
then a properly called separation.

From evil, whither sin or sinners: From sin, so every soul must eschew
evil, whether of doctrine or manners, and disclaim all fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, whither in himself or others. 1 Thessalonians. vlt.
ad fin. Iere. 15. 19. Vide Tremel* and Iun.
So S. Paul charges us to hold that which is good, and abstain from all
appearance of evil: so Jeremy is charged to separate the precious (doctrine
or practice) from the vile. From sinners, not only practiced by God himself
(to omit his eternal and secret Decree whereby the elect are separated from
the Reprobate) both in his gracious vocation, sequestring them from nature and
sin, as also in his execution of judgment, whether particular, as of the
Israelites from the Tabernacles of Corah, or Universal, Number. 16.
and final, of the Sheep from the Goats; But also enjoined from God to men,
Mat. 15. ad fin. 2. Chro. 19 2. 1. Cor. 6. ad fin. Nulla cum malis Conuivia vel
colloquia misceantur, simusque ab ijs tam separati, quam sunt illi ab Ecclesia
Dei profugi. Cypr. l. 1. Epist. ad Cornel. 2.
in respect either of our affection, or of our yoke, and familiar society,
whereof Saint Paul: Be not unequally yoaked with Infidels, Come out from among
them, and separate your selves. In all this we agree: In the latitude of this
last only we differ: I find you call for a double separation, A first
separation in the gathering of the Church: A second, in the managing of it: The
first at our entrance into the Church, the second in our continuance: the first
of the Church, from Pagans and Worldlings, by an initiatory profession: The
second of lewd men from the Church by just censures: You speak confusedly of
your own separation, one while of both, another while of either single. For the
first, either confess it done by our Baptism, or else you shall be forced to
hold we must rebaptise: Char act. of Beast praef.
But of this Constitu^ine separation anon. For the second, of sinners, whether
in judgment or life, some are more gross, heinous, incorrigible: others less
notorious, and more tractable: those other must be separated by just censures:
not these: Which censures if they be neglected, the Church is foul and (in
your Pastors word) faulty, and therefore calls for our tears, John's. Inquir.
not for our flight. Now of Churches faulty and corrupted, some race the
foundation, others, on the true foundation build Timber, hay, Stubble: From
those we must separate, from these we may not. Peter's is eternal, Ioh. 6. 68.
Whither shall we go from thee, thou have the words of eternal life: where
these words are found, woe be to us if we be not found. Amongst many good
separations then, yours cannot be separated from evil, for that we should so
far separate from the evil, that therefore we should separate from Gods
children in the communion of the holy things of God, that for some (after your
worst done) not fundamental corruptions, we should separate from that Church,
in whose womb we were conceived, and from betwixt whose knees we fell to God:
H. Cl. Epistle before Treatis of sin ag. Holy Gh.
in a word (as one of yours once said) to separate not only from visible evil,
but from visible good, as all Antichristian: who but yours can think less
then absurd and impious? Grant we should be clean separated from the world,
yet if we be not, must you be separated from us? Neque propter paleam relinquim
are am Domini, neque propter pisces malos rumpimus retia Domini. August. Ep. 48.
Do but stay till God have separated us from himself: will the wise
husbandman cast away his Corne-heape for the chafe and dust? Shall the Fisher
cast away a good draught because his drag-net has weeds? Does God separate
from the faithful soul, because it has some corruptions, her Inmates, though
not her commanders? Certainly, if you could thoroughly separate the world from
you, you would never thus separate your selves from us: Begin at home,
separate all self-love, and self-will, and uncharitableness from your heart,
Answ. Counterpoyson p. 2.
and you cannot but join with that Church, from which you have separated: Your
Doctor would persuade us you separate from nothing but our corruptions: you are
honester, and grant it from our Church: it were happy for you, if he lied
not: who in the next page confutes himself, showing that you separate from us,
Counter p. p. 7 and 8. etc
as Christ from the Samaritans, namely from the Church, not the corruptions
only; and not as he did from the Jews, namely from their corruptions, not
from their Church: His memory saues our labor, and marres his Discourse.

SECTION. V.
The antiquity and examples of separation.
YEt if not equity, it were well you could plead age: This your separation in
the nature and causes of it (you say) is no less ancient then the first
institution of enmity betwixt the two seeds, you might have gone a little
higher, and have said, then our first parents running from God in the Garden,
Sep. The separation we have made in respect of our knowledge, and obedience, is
indeed late, and new yet is it in the nature and causes thereof as ancient as
the Gospel, which was first founded in the enmity which God himself put
betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent, Genesis 3, 15
or their separation from GOD by their sin: But we take your time, and
easily believe that this your late separation was founded upon that ancient
enmity of the seed of the serpent, ^useb: h^st Eccl:
with the woman's. That subtle Devil when he saw the Church breath from the
persecutions of Tyrants, vexed her no less with her own divisions: seeking
that by fraud, which by violence he could not effect. Hence all the fearful
Schisms of the Church, whereof yours is part. This enm^ty has not only been
successively contiuued, but also too visibly manifested by the actual (but
wilful) separation of heretics and Sectaries from the Chuch in all ages: But
I mistake you, yours is as ancient as the Gospel: What? that Euangelium
aeternum of the Friars? Hen: Steph. Ap^l. Herod. For A^t and monum. H. N. his
book Gal. 1. 6. Ephesians. 6. 17. Colos. 1 5. 1. Tin. 1. 11. (...).
whose name they accursedly borrowed from Revel. 14. 6. Or that Euangelium
regni of the Familists? Or that Euangelium aliud, whereof Saint Paul taxes his
Galatians? None of all these, you say; but as that Gospel of Peace, of Truth,
of Glory; so ancient, and never known till Bolton, Barrow, and Brown? Could
it escape all the holy Prophets, Apostles, Doctors of the old, middle, and
later world, and light only upon these your three Patriarchs? Perhaps Nouatus
or Donatus (those Saints) with their Schools had some little glimpse of it;
but this perfection of knowledge is but late and new: So, many rich mines have
lien long unknown, and great parts of the world have been discovered by late
Venturers. If this course have come late to your knowledge and obedience, not
so to others: For lo, it was practiced successively in the constitution and
collection of all true Churches, Sep. Which enmity has not only been
successively continued, but also visibly manifested by the actual separation
of all true Churches, from the world in their collection and constitution,
before the law, under the law, and under the Gospel, Genesis 4: 13, 14, 16 and 6.
1, 2, and 7: 1, 7. with 1 Pet: 3, 20, 21 and 12. 2 I^^ 20, 24, 26 Neh: 9, 2
Ioh: 17, 14, 16, Act. 2, 40, and 19, 9, 1: Cor 6, 17:
through al times, before the law, under the law, after it: We have
acknowledged many separations: but as soon shall you find the time past in
the present, as your late separation, in the ancient and approved You quote
Scriptures, though (to your praise) more dainty indeed then your fellows.
Iren. de Valentin. l. 1.
Who cannot do so? Ianumerabil^ multitudin^m scripturarum quas ipsi sin^erunt
afferunt ad stuporem insensatorum.
Who has not? Even Satan himself cytes the word against him which was the
word of his Father. Let us not number, but weigh your texts: The rather, for
that I find these as your Master-proofes, Vid. Preface to Master Jacobs and
Iohnsons Confer. and Bar. pass.
set as Challengers in every of your defenses: In Genesis 4. 13. Caine a bloody
Fratricide is excommunicated: In Genesis 6. 1. 2. The sons of God married the
daughters of men. In Genesis 7. 1. and 7. Noah is approved as righteous, and
enters the Arc: In 1. Pet. 3. 20, 21. The rest in Noah's time were disobedient,
and perished: What of all this? Alas, what mockage is this of the Reader, and
Scriptures: Surely, you even join Scriptures, as you separate your selves:
This is right as your Pastor, to prove all members of the visible Church,
Descript, of true visib. Ch:
elect and precious stones, cytes 1. K. 7. 9. where is speech only of Salomons
house in the Forest of Lebanon, his Porch for his Throne, his Hall, his Palace
for Pharachs daughter, and when he comes to describe the office of his
imaginary doctor thwacks fourteen Scriptures into the margent, Nihil autem
^irum fi and ex ipsius instrumento a^tentur argumenta, cum oporteat haereses
esse, quae esse non possent si non and perperam scripturae intelligi possent.
Tertull. de resur.
whereof not any one has any just color of inference to his purpose: and in
his discourse of the power of the Church (that he might seem to honor his
margent with show of textes) has repeated six places twice over in the space
of six lines. Ibid:
For these of yovrs: you might object the first to the Cainites not to us: So
Barrow terms Mast. Gyff. Re^ut. p. 102.
Cain was cast out worthily. Do we either deny, or utterly forbear this
censure? Take heed you follow him not in your voluntary exile to the land of
Nod. The second you might object to those mungrell Christians that match with
Turks and Pagans. There are sons of God, that is, members of the visible
Church, and daughters of men, which are without the bounds, mere Infidels; it
is sin for those sons to yoke themselves with those daughters. What is
this to us? Noah was righteous, Si Christianus Iudaicae praeuaricanti
carnaliter coniungatur, a commumone Ecclesiaesegregetur.
the multitude disobedient: Who denies it? yet Noah separated not from that
corrupted Church till the flood separated him from the earth, but continued an
ancient Preacher of righteousness, even to that perverse and rebellious
generation. But it suffices you that Caine and the Giants were separated from
the rest: Did. 28. q. 1 Cave. and cap. si quis Iudaicae, etc. 1. Pet. 3. 19.
2. Pet. 2. 5.
We yield it: what will follow hence save only that notorious malefactors
must be cast out, and professed Heathen not let into the Chruch? We hold, and
wish no less: your places euince no more. These, before the law: In Leuit. 20.
24. 26. God chose out Israel from other people: This was Gods act, not theirs:
a sequestring of his Israelites from the Gentiles, not of Israel from it self:
yours is your own, and from men, in all maine points, of your own profession:
But therefore Israel must be holy: If any man deny holiness to be required of
every Christian, let him feel your Maranatha. In Nehem. 9. 2. The Israelites
separated themselves from the strangers, which were Infidels: whether in their
marriage, or devotion: Neither Gods service, nor an Israelites bed was for
Heathens. This was not the constituting of a new Church, but reforming of the
old: If therefore you can parallel us with Pagans, and your selves will be
Jews, this place fittes you. Lastly, what if there be an hatred betwixt the
world and Christ's true Disciples, Ioh. 17. 14. 16? what if Peter charged his
auditors to save themselves from the errors and practice of that froward
generation, whose hands were yet freshly imbrued with the blood of Christ,
Act. 2. 40.? What if the same which Peter taught, Paul practiced, in separating
his followers from hearing some obstinate and blasphemous Jews, Act. 19. 9?
What if the Church of Corinth, were Saints by calling, 1. Cor. 1. 2? and
therefore must be separated from the yoke of Infidels, 2. Cor. 6. 17? Are these
your patterns? Are these fit matches for your brethren, baptized in the same
water and name, professing every point of the same true faith, using (for
substance) the same worship with you? He that says he is in the light, and
hates his brother is in darkness, 1. Ioh. 2. 9.

SECTION. VI.
What separation is to be made by Churches in their planting, or restoration.
BUT all these examples perhaps are not so much to warrant what you have
done, as to condemn the Church of England for what she has not done: for
such a separation she neither has made nor does make, Sep. Which separation
the Church of England neither has made, nor does make, but stands actually one
with althat part of the world within the kingdom, without separation: for which
cause amongst others, we have chosen by the grace of God, rather to separate
our selves to the Lord from it, then with it from him, in the visible
constitution of it.
but stands actually one with all that part of the world within the kingdom
without separation. Lo here the maine ground of this Schism, which your
Proto-Martyr Barrow hammers upon in every page; In his Preface to the Reader,
and in his causes of separ defended p. 4 Eiusdem p. 10 Resutat. of M. Gyff. p
22. and 2. Transgress. p 51, 52. and 55. 66 and 70. 85. and 86. etc.
an ill constitution: Thus he comments upon your words: For where such
profane confuse multitudes without any exception, separation, or choice were
all of them from public idolatry, at one instant received or rather compelled
to be members of the Church, in some parish or other, where they inhabited,
without any due calling to the faith by the preaching of the Gospel going
before, or orderly joining together in the faith, there being no voluntary or
particular confession of their own faith and duties made, or required of any,
and lastly no holy walking in the faith amongst them: who can say that these
Churches consisting of this people were ever rightly gathered or built,
according to the rule of Christ's Testament. In his words and yours I find both
a mis-collection, and a wrong charge. For the former: the want of noting one
poor distinction breeds all this confusion of doctrine, and separation of
men: for there is one case of a new Church to be called from Heathenisme to
Christianity, another of a former Church to be reformed from errors, to more
sincere Christianity; In the first of these is required indeed a solemn
initiation by Baptism, and before that, a voluntary and particular confession
of faith, and therefore a clear separation, and exception of the Christian,
from the Infidel: In the latter neither is new Baptism lawful (though some
of you belike of old were in hand with a rebaptization: Inconstanc^ of Brown
p. ^o. Inquiry into M. White, confessed by Fr. Johnson p. 63.
which not then speeding, succeeds now to your shame) nor a new voluntary and
particular confession of Faith besides that in Baptism (though very
commendable) will

ever be proved simply necessary to the being of a Church; so long as the
erring parties do actually renounce their doctrines, and in open profession
embrace the truth; and (as generally in the public confession) so
particularly upon good occasion give just testimonies of their repentance: This
is our case, we did not make a new Church, but mended an old: your Clifton is
driven to this hold by necessity of argument; Passag. 'twixt Clifton and Smith:
And concerning the constitution of the Churches, etc. But the constituting of
Churches now after the defection of Antichrist may more properly be called a
repairing then a constituting, etc. p. 60.
Otherwise he sees there is no avoiding of Anabaptisme: Mended, says your
Doctor, and yet admitted the miscelline rabble of the profane? Say now that
such separation were not made: Let some few be holy, and the more part
profane: Shall the lewdness of some disanul Gods covenant with others? This
is your mercy; Gods is more: who still held Israel for his, when but few held
his pure service: psalm. 106.
Let that divine Psalmist teach you how full the Tents of Israel were of
mutinous rebels in the desert; yet the pillar by day and night forsook them
not; and Moses was so far from rejecting them; that he would not endure God
should reject them to his own advantage: Look into the black censures, and
bitter complaints of all the Prophets, and wonder that they separated not:
Look into the increased mass of corruptions in that declined Church: whereof
the blessed eyes of our Savior were witnesses, and marvel at his silent and
sociable incuriousnesse: Matthew. 23.
yea his charge of not separating; ye know not of what spirit you are: Now
you fly to constitution, as if notorious evils were more to tolerable in the
continuance, then in the collection of assembles: Sar di had but a few names
that had not defiled their garments; Revel: 34.
God praises these, biddes them not separate from the rest; Thyatir^ suffers a
false Prophetess? the rest that have not this learning, Revel. ^. 24.
yet are bidden but to hold their own; not to separate from the Angel, which
has not separated Iezebel from the Church.

SECTION. VII.
What separation the Church of England has made.
YOur charge is no less injurious; that the Church of England has made no
separation: Concerning which, you have learned of your Martyr, and Overseers so
to speak, Bar. p. 22. and 55. Fr. John's. ag. M. H.
as if before her late disclamation of Popery, in Queen Elizabeth's time, she
had not been. Her Monuments could have taught you better, and have led you
to her ancient Pedigree not much below the Apostolic days, and in many
discents have showed you not a few worthy witnesses and Patrons of Truth; Act.
and Mon. passim.
all which with their holy and constant offspring it might have pleased you to
have separated from this imputation of not separating: Will you know therefore
how the Church of England has separated? In her first conversion she separated
her self from Pagans; in her continuance she separated her self from gross
heretics, and sealed her separation with blood: in her reformation she
separated her self from wilful Papists by her public profession of Truth,
and proclaimed hatred of error; and she daily does separate the notoriously
evil by suspensions by excommunications, though not so many as yours: Besides
the particular separations of many from the acknowledged corruptions, Troubl.
and excom. pa. 191 M. Spr. p. 1.
in judgment, profession, practice. All these will be auowed in spite of all
contradiction: with what forehead then can you say; the whole Church of England
has not at all separated?

After all your shifts and idle tales of constitution, you have separated from
this Church against the Lord, not with the Lord, from it: If there be Christ
with us, if the spirit of God in us, if Assemblies, if calling by the word: Fr.
Iun. lib. de Eccles.
whatsoever is, or is not else in the Constitution, there is whatsoever is
required to the essence of a Church, no corruption either in gathering or
continuance can destroy the truth of being, but the grace of being well: If
Christ have taken away his word and spirit, you have justly subduced* else you
have gone from him in us.

And when you have al done, the Separatists Idol, visible Constitution, will
prove but an appendance of an external form, no part of the essence of a true
Church: and therefore your separation no less vain then the ground, then the
Authors. Lastly, if our bounty should (which it cannot) grant, that our
collection was at first deeply faulty: cannot the Ra^ihabition (as the Lawyers
speak) be drawn back? Ratihabitio retroha^^, etc. Subsequens consensus
Jacob in Leam fecit cos coniuges, d. 29. q 1. S. sed obijcitur
In contracts (your own similitude) a following consent iustifies an act done
before consent, and why not in the contract betwixt GOD, and his visible
Church? Lo, he has confirmed it by his gracious benedictions, and as much as
may be in silence, given us abundant proofs of his acceptance: That
after-act, Bar. ag. Gyff
which makes your baptism lawful, why can it not make our Church?

SECTION. VIII.
Constitution of a Church.
BBut for as much as Constitution is the very state of Brownisme, Let us (I
beseech you) inquire a little into the Complexion of your Constitution: Whether
Physic, or Law, or Architecture have lent you it: sure I am, it is in this
use, Apocryphal: Never man used it thus scrupulously till your times: Though,
what need you the help of Fathers or Schools, new words must express new
Paradoxes. It is no treason to coin terms: What then is Constitution? Your
Doctor can best tell us: As the Constitution of a Commonwealth, H. Answ.
Counter p. p. 17^
or of a City is a gathering or uniting of people together into a civil
policy: So (says he) the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Israel, and of
the City of God, the new Jerusalem, is a gathering and uniting of people into a
Divine Polity: The form of which Polity, is Order: which Order is requisite
in all actions, and Administrations of the Church, as the Apostle shows, and
specially in the Constitution thereof: So that next unto faith in God, it is to
be esteemed most necessary for all holy societies. Colos. 2. 5.
Hence Paul rejoiced in the Colossians order and faith: To this Constitution
therefore, belong a people as the matter, secondly, a calling or gathering
together as the form, whereof the Church consists. The Constitution of the
Church of England is false in both: Why so? Ha^^ we not a people? Are not
those people called together? To prevent this, you say our Constitution is
false, not none: Why false? Because those people have neither faith, Tertull.
de Prescript.
nor order. For faith first: Who are you, that dare thus boldy break into the
Closets of God, Tu vt homo extrimsecus vitumquemque nosti, putas quod vides,
vides autem quonsque oculos habes, sed oculi Domini sunt alti, Homo in faciem,
Deus in praecordiae contemplatur.
the hearts of men? and condemn them to want that, which cannot be seen by
any but Divine eyes? how dare you intrude thus into the throne of your Maker?
Consider, and confer seriously: What faith is it, that is thus necessarily
required to each member in this Constitution? Your own Doctor shall define it:
Faith required to the receiving in of members, is the knowledge of the doctrine
of salvation by Christ 1. Cor. 12. 9. Gal. 3. 2. Now I beseech you in the fear
of God, Principles and inferences concerning the visible Chapter An. 1607, p: 13
lay by a while all unchristian prejudice, and peremptory verdicts of those
souls, which cost Christ as much blood as your own: and tell me ingenuously,
whether you dare say, that not only your Christian brethren with whom you
lately conuersed, but even your forefathers, which lived under Queen
Elizabeth's? first confused reformation, knew not the doctrine of salvation by
Christ: if you say they did not, your (...) judgment shall be punished
fearfully, by him whose office you usurp. As you look to answer before him
that would not break the bruised Reed; nor quench the smoking Flax, presume
not thus above men and Angels: If they did, then had they sufficient claim
both to true Constitution and Church: But this faith must be testified by
obedience, so it was: If you think not so, yours is not testified by love:
Both were weak, both were true: Weakness in any grace or work, takes not away
truth: Their sins of ignorance could no more (...) Gods covenant with them,
them multiplicity of wives with the Patriarchs.

SECTION. IX.
Secondly* Order.
What wanted they then? Nothing but Order; Part of Constitution, how far
requisite, and whether hindered by Constraint.
and not all Order, but yours: Order, a thing requisite and excellent, but let
the world indge whether essential: Consider now, I beseech you in the bowels
of Christ Jesus, whither this be a matter for which heaven and earth should be
mixed: whether for want of your Order, all the world must be put out of all
Order, and the Church out of life and being: Nothing (say we) can be more
disorderly, then the confusion of your Democracy, or popular state (if not
Anarchy^) Where all (in a sort) ordain and excommunicate; We condemn you not
for no true members of the Church: what can be more order (...) (by your own
confusions) then the (...)* D. (...) Brownists. Brow^ (...) of true Christians
Inquir into M. White.
Church at Amsterdam, which yet you grant but faulty, If there be
disproportion and dislocation of some parts, is it no true humane body? will
you rise from the feast, unless the dishes be set on in your own fashion? Is
it no City, if there be mud-walles halfe-broken, low Cottages unequally built,
no state house? But your order has more essence, then you can express; and is
the same which Politicians in their trade call ((...)) an incorporating into
one common civil body; Answ. ibid. Arist. Pol. 3: c: 1.
by a voluntary union, and that under a lawful government: Our Church wants
both: wherein there is both constraint, and false office. Take your own
resemblance and your own asking: Say that some tyrant (as Basilius of Russia)
shall forceably compel a certain number of subjects into Mosco, and shall
hold them in, by an awful Garrison, forcing them to new laws and Magistrates,
perhaps hard and bloody: They yield, and making the best of all, live
together in a cheerful communion, with due commerce, loving conversation,
submissiue execution of the enjoined laws: In such case, Whether is Mosco a
true City, or not? Since your Doctor cytes Aristotle; let it not irke him to
learn of that Philosopher, Arist. Pol: 3: c. 1:
who can teach him, that when Clisthenes had driven out the Tyrants from
Athens, and set up a new Government, Edesius and Frumentius pueri a Meropio
Tyrio-Philosoph^ in Indian deportati, postea ibi Christianam religionem
plantarunt. Ruffin. l. 1. ^ 9. Faemina i^ter Iberos.
and received many strangers, and bondmen into the Tribes, it was doubted, not
which of them were citizens, but whither they were made Citizens unjustly. If
you should find a company of true Christians in utmost India, would you stand
upon terms, and inquire how they became so? VVhiles they have what is
necessary for that heavenly profession; what need your curiosity trouble it
self with the means?

SECTION. X.
Constraint requisite.
YOu see then what an idle plea constraint is in the Constitution of a City,
the ground of all your exception: But it is otherwise in Gods City, the
Church; why then does his Doctor ship parallel these two? And why may not
even constraint it self have place in the lawful constitution or reformation
of a Church? Did not Manisses after his coming home to God, 2. Chron. 33. 16
charge and command (...) to serve the Lord God of Israel? Did not worthy
Josiah when he had made a covenant before the Lord, 2. Chr. 34. 32. 33
cause all that were found in Jerusalem, and Benjamin to stand to it, and
compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their God? What have
Queen Elizabeth, 2. Chron. ^5. 13:
or King James done more? or what other? Did not Asa upon Obeds prophecy,
gather both Iudae and Benjamin, and all the strangers from Ephraim, Manasses,
and Simeon, and enact with them, that whosoever would not seek the Lord God
should be slain? Bar. ag. Ciff. Brow. Reform. without. tarry: Green wood
Confer with Cooper. Brow. refor: without tar. Confer. with D. And* M. Hutch*
Confer. with D. An. Refor. without tar.
What means this perue^snesse? You that teach we may not stay Princes leisure
to reform, will you not allow Princes to urge others to reform? What crime is
this, that men were not suffered to be open Idolaters, that they were forced to
yield submission to Gods ordinances? Even your own teach that Magistrates may
compel infidelles to hear the doctrine of the Church; and Papists, you say
elsewhere (though too roughly) are infidells: But you say, not to be members of
the Church: Gods people are of the willing sort: True, Neither did they compel
them to this: They were before entered into the visible Church by true Baptism,
Ber. Fides Suadenda non: cogenda. Counterpois.
though miserably corrupted. They were not now initiated, but purged: Your
(...) Doctor (...) us from Bernard that faith is to be (...), to be compelled
yet let him (...) that the guests must be compelled to come in, Dixit
Paterfamilias seruis Quoscunque inueneritis, cogite intrare etc. Aug. ^p. 48.
though not to eat when they are come. Compelled, not by persuasions; for these
were the first inuitation^, therefore by further means; Though this conceit
has no place with us; where men were urged not to receive a new faith, but to
perform the old; Pless. de Eccles. c. 10
to abandon that wicked Idolatry which had defiled them; Augustine. Quod si
cogiper legem aliquem vel ad bona licuisset, vos ipsi miseri (...) nobis ad
fidem purissimam cogi debuistis, sed absit a nostra conscientia, vt ad (...).
and to entertain but that truth, which the very power of their Baptism
challenge that their hand* But this was the old song of the Donatists; Far be
it from our conscience to compel any man to the faith. If God did not draw us,
and by asweat violence bend our wills to his, when should we follow him? Either
you have not read, or not cared for the practice of the ancient Church, and
Augustines resolution concerning the sharp penalties, imposed upon the
Donatists (would God none of your kindred) in his time, August. Epist. 48.
(...). 68. Qui freneticum ligat, and qui (...) Quod (...) umus sanctum est.
with his excellent defenses of these proceedings.

SECTION. XI.
Constitution of the Church of England.
But tell us then, what should have been done? The Gospel should have been
every where preached; Bar. and Greenew. pas^im:
All conuer^s should have been singled out, and have gi^en a voluntary and
particular confession of their faith, and repentance: I answer you: The
Gospel was long and worthily preached in the days of King Edward; enough to
yield both Martyrs to the stake, and professors to the succeeding times: Were
their holy Sermons, their learned writings, and their precious blood (which was
no less vocal) of no force? Afterward, in the beginning of famous Queen
Elizabeth's reparation, what confluence was there of zealous Confessors
returning now from their late exile? How painefully and Divinely did they
labor in this Vineyard of God? How did they (with their many holy Partners,
which had shrouded themselves during that storm of persecution, in a dangerous
secrecy) spread themselves over this land, and each-where drew flocks of
hearers to them, and with them? Is all this nothing to their ungrateful
posterity? If you murmr that there was no more, take heed least you forget
there were so many: for us, we do seriously bless God for these, and triumph
in them.

All this premised; now comes a Christian Edict from the State, that every man
shall yield obedience to this truth, wherein they had been thus instructed:
It was performed by the most, whose submission, what was it but an actual
profession of their faith, and repentance? And since such was their face, who
dares judge of their hearts? More then this, if ever can be showed absolutely
necessary in such a state of the Church to the very Constitution, and repaired.
Being thereof, I do here vow never to take the Church of England for my mother.

We know, H. answ. Counterp.
and grieve to see how scornfully your whole Sect, and amongst the rest, your
resolute Dr. turns over these gracious entrances and proceedings of these two
royal and blessed Reformers; and whom should he find to raise his scoffs
upon, but that Saint-like Historian Master Fox? Act and Monum. Edit. 5. p.
1180.
Now (says Master Fox) a new face of things began to appear, as it were in a
Stage, new Players coming in, the old thrust out: Counterp. 226.
Now (says your Doctors Comment) new Bishops came in, as Players upon the
old Stage of the Popish Church, as if the Church were no whit altered, but the
men: Shall we say this is too much malice, or too little wit, and conscience?
Even in the Lord Protectors days, that holy man reports, that after the
Scriptures restored, and Masses abolished, greater things followed these
softer beginnings, in the reformation of the Churches: Learned and godly
Divines were called for from foreign parts, P. Martyr. P. Fagius. Bucer. etc.
a separation was made (though not so much willing, as wilful) of open and
manifest adversaries from Professors, whether true or dissembled: Commissioners
were appointed to visit every several Diocese. Every Bench of them had
several godly and learned Preachers to instruct the people in the truth, and
to dissuade them from Idolatry and Superstition. The Popes Supremacy not
thrust, but taught down: All wil-worshippe whatsoever, oppugned by public
Sermons: Images destroyed, Pilgrimages forbidden, the Sacraments enjoined to be
reverently, and holily ministered, Ecclesiastical persons reformed in life, in
doctrine: Processions laid down, Presence and attendance upon Gods word
commanded, the holy expending of Sabbath days appointed, due preparation to
Gods table called for, set times of teaching inioyened to Bishops and other
Ministers, all shr^nes and Monuments of Idolatry required to be utterly taken
from public and private houses: Six Arti. 1547
All this, before his Parliament: By that, all bloody laws against Gods truth
were repealed, zealous Preachers encouraged, so as (says that worthy
Historian) God was much glorified, Page 1182. Col. 2. 60.
and the people in many places greatly edified: What need I go further then
this first year? Hear this and be ashamed, and assure your selves that no man
can ever read those holy Monuments of the Church but must needs spit at your
separation. After that sweet and hopeful Prince, what his renowned sister
Queen Elizabeth did, the present times do speak and the future shall speak,
when all these Murmurers shall sleep in the dust. The public disputations,
zealous Preachings, restaurations of banished religion and men, extirpations of
Idolatry, Christian laws, wise and holy proceedings, and renewed covenants
with God, are still fresh in the memories of some, and in the ears of all, so
as all the world will justly say, you have lost shame with truth, in denying it:
Yea to fetch the matter yet further, If the Reader shall look back to the
days of their Puissant Father King Henry the eight, Act. and. Monum Page 999.
and 1000.
he cannot but acknowledge (especially during the time of Queen Anne, and
before those six bloody Articles) a true face of a Church (though ouer-spreade
with some morphue of corruptions) and some commendable forwardness of
Reformation: for both the Popes Supremacy was abrogated, the true doctrine of
Justification commonly taught, confidence in Saints untaught, the vanity of
Pardons declared, worship of Images and Pilgrimages forbidden, learned and
godly Ministers required, their absences and mis-demeaners inhibited, the
Scriptures translated, publicly and privately enjoined to be read, and
received, the word of God commanded to be sincerely and carefully preached:
Act and Monum Edit. 5. p. 1002.
and to all this, holy Master Fox adds for my conclusion, such a vigilant
care was then in the King and his Council, how by all ways and means to
redress Religion, to reform errors, to correct corrupt customs, to help
ignorance, and to reduce the mis-leadings of Christ's Flock, drowned in blind
Popery, superstitious customs, and Idolatry to some better form of
Reformation, whereunto he provided not only these Articles, Precepts,
Injunctions above specified, to inform the rude people, but also procured the
Bishops to help forward the same cause of decayed doctrine, Bar. ag. Gyff.
Conference. with Sperin. and M. Egerton.
with their diligent preaching, and teaching of the people. Go now and say,
that suddenly in one day, by Queen Elizabeth's trumpet, Greenw. and Bar. Arg. to
M. Car. twr. M. Trauers, M. Chark.
or by the sound of a Bell, in the name of Antichrist, all were called to the
Church: Go, say with your Patriarch that we erect Religions by Proclamations,
Brown Reform. without. tarrying.
and Parliaments.

Upon these premises I dare conclude, and doubt not to maintain against all
Separatists in the world that England (to go no higher) had in the days of
King Henry the eight, a true visible Church of God, and so by consequent their
succeeding seed was by true Baptism justly admitted into the bosom thereof,
and therefore that even of them without any further profession, Gods Church was
truly constituted: If you shall say that the following Idolatry of some of
them in Queen Mary's days excluded them: Consider how hard it will be to
prove that Gods covenant with any people, is presently disanulled by the
sins of the most, whether of ignorance, or weakness; and if they had herein
renounced GOD, yet that GOD also mutually renounced them. To shut up your
Constitution then: There is no remedy: Either you must go forward to
Anabaptisme, M. Smith ag. R. Clifton.
or come back to us: All your Rabbines cannot answer that charge of your
rebaptized brother: If we be a true Church, you must return, If we be not
(as a false Church is no Church of GOD) you must rebaptise: If our Baptism be
good, Principl. and I^fer. page 11.
then is our constitution good. Thus your own Principles teach. The outward
part of the true visible Church is a Vow, Promise, Oathe or Covenant betwixt
GOD and the Saints: Now I ask, Is this made by us in Baptism, or not? If it
be, then we have (by your Confession (for so much as is outwardly required) a
true visible Church: so your separation is unjust: If it be not, then you must
rebaptise: for the first Baptism is a nullity: and (if ours be not) you were
never thereby as yet entered into any visible Church.

SECTION. XII.
The Aunswerers title.
AS for the title of Ringleader, wherewith I styled this pamphleter; if I have
given him too much honor in his Sect, I am sorry: Perhaps I should have put
him (pardon an homely, but in this sense, not vnusall word) in the tail of
this Train: Perhaps I should have endorsed my Letter to Master Smith, Separ.
To the Title of Ringleader, wherewith it pleases this Pistler to style me, I
answer that if the thing I have done be good, it is good and commendable to
have been forward in it; if it be evil, let it be reproved by the light of
Gods word, and that God to whom I have done that I have done, will (I doubt
not) give me both to see, and to heal mine error by speedy repentance: if I
have fled away on foot, I shall return on Horseback: But as I durst never
s^t foot into this way, but upon a most sound and vnresist able conviction of
conscience by the word
and his shadow; So I perceive he was: Whatsoever, whither he lead or follow,
God meets with him: If he lead: Behold I will come against them that
prophecy false dreams (says the Lord) and do tell them, Ier. 23. 32.
and cause my people to err by their lies. If he come behind; Thou shall not
follow a multitude in evil (says God). Ezech. 13. 2. of God (as I was
persuaded) so must my retyring be wrought by more solid reasons from the same
word then are to be found in a thousand such pretty pamphlets and formal
flourishes as this is
If either, or both, or neither, If he will go alone; Woe unto the foolish
Prophets (says the Lord) which follow their own spirits, and have seen
nothing. Howsoever, your evil shall be reproved by the light of Gods word:
Your coni^^ction I cannot promise, your reproof I dare, If thereupon you shall
find grace to see and heal your errors, we should with all brotherly
humbleness attend on foot upon your return on Horseback; but if the sway
of your mis-resolued conscience be heady and irresistable, and your retyring
hopeless; these not solid reasons, these pretty pamphlets, these formal
flourishes shall one day be fearful and material evidences against you
before that awefull Judge, which has already said, That judgments are
prepared for the scorners, Pro. 9. 21.
and stripes for the back of fools.

SECTION. XIII.
The Apostacy of the Church of England.
I professed to bestow pity and sorrow upon you and your wrong: Separ. Your
pitying of us, and sorrowing for us, especially for the wrong, done by us, were
in you commendable affections, if by us justly occasio^ed; but if your Church
be deepelye drencht in Apostacy, and you cry Peace Peace, when sudden and
certain desolation is at hand, it is you that do wrong, though you make the
complaint: and so being cruel toward your selves, and your own, whom you
flatter: you cannot be truly pitiful toward others whom you bewail.
You entertain both harshly, and with a churlish repulse: What should a man do
with such dispositions? Let him stroke them on the back, they snarle at him;
and show their teeth: Let him show them a Cudgel, they fly in his face: You
allow not our actions, and return our wrong; Ours is both the injury and
complaint: How can this be? You are the agents, we sit still, and suffer in
this rent: Yet (since the cause makes the Schism) let us inquire, not whose
the action is, but whose the desert: Our Church is deep drencht in Apostacy;
and we cry Peace, Peace: No less then a whole Church at once, and that not
sprinkled, or wetshod, but drencht in Apostacy? What, did we fall off from
you, or you from us? Tell me, were we ever the true Church of God? And were we
then yours? We cannot fall unless we once stood: Was your Church before this
Apostacy? Show us your ancestors in opinion: Name me but one that ever taught
as you do; and I vow to separate: Was it not? Then we fell not from you: Every
Apostacy of a Church must needs be from the true Church; A true Church, and
not yours? And yet can there be but one true; See now whether in branding us
with Apostasy, you have not proved yours to be no true Church: A Treatise of
the Ministry of England, against M. H page 125.
Still I am ignorant: Queen Mary's days (you say) had a true Church, which
separated from Popery, chose them Ministers, served God holily, from thence
was our Apostacy: But, were not the same also (for the most part) Christians
in King EDWARD'S days? Did they then, in that confused allowance of the
Gospel, separate? Or (I pray you) were Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper and the
rest, parts of that Church, or no? Was there any other ordination of Ministers
then from them? Reject these, and all the world will hiss at you; Receive
them, and where is our Apostacy? What Antichristianisme have we, whereof these
were freed? But you leap back (if I urge you far) from hence to the
Apostles times, to fe^ch our once true Church from far, that it might be
dear: You shall not carue for us: we like not these bold ouer-leapes of so
many Centuries: I speak boldly, you dare not stand to the trial of any Church,
since theirs: Now, I hear your Doctor say this Challenge sauors of Rome:
Antiquity is with you, a Popish plea: H. Amsworth in his fore-speech to his
Count.
We have willingly taken up our adversaries, at this (by pretense, their own)
weapon: You debar it in the conscience of your own novel singularity: Yet
your Pastor can be content to make use of Tertullian alone against all Fathers;
That such things are justly to be charged with vanity, Inqu. into Wh. Tertul.
l. de Orat
as are done without any precept either of the Lord or of the Apostles: Tert.
l. de praescript.
And, the Apostles did faithfully deliver to the nations the Discipline they
received of Christ, So de Virginib, Veland. That no contin^ance of time can
prejudice Truth.
which we must believe to be the tumultuary Discipline of the refined
house-full at Amster dam: What? all in all ages, and places till now Apostates?
Say if you can, that those famous Churches, wherein Cyprian, Athanasius,
Ambrose, Hierome, Austen, Chrysostom, Sime reprehendas errantem, patere me
quae so errare cum talibus, Aug. Hi^r.
and the rest of those blessed lights lived, were less deep in this Apostasy
then ours? O Apostaticall Fathers, that separated not! yea, say if you dare,
that other reformed Churches are not over the Ankles with us in this Apostasy?
What hard news is this to us, when as, your Oracle dare say not much less, of
the Reformed Churches of Netherlands, with whom you live? Thus he writes: For
not hearing of them in other Congregations in these countries; this I answer,
That seeing by the mercy of God, Fr. Iohnsonin his An^w. to T. Wh p. 26.
we have seen and forsaken the corruptions yet remaining in the public
Ministration, and condition of these Churches (if they be all like to these of
this City), we cannot therefore partake with them, in such case, without
declining and Apostasy from the truth, which we have our selves already
received, and professed. See here, to partake with them in Gods service is
Apostasy; Aunsw ag. Broughton, p. 17 These Dutch Chapter offend not only in
practical disorders, but in their Constitution, Gouerament w^^sh p, etc.
If so in the accessoryes, Alas, what crime is in the principal? It were but
Apostasy to hear an English Sermon; a Dutch is no less: Woe is you that you
dwell still in Meshech: Good men; it were not more happy for you then the
Church, that you were well in heaven. No less then Apostasy? Let no Reader
be appalled at so fearful a word, this is one of the terms of Art
familiar to this way: Find but any one page of a Duch printed volume without
Apostasy, Excommunication, Commingling, Constitution, and suspect it not
theirs: Heresy is not more frequent at Rome, then Apostasy at Amsterdam, nor
Indulgences more ordinary there, then here Excommunications. Common use makes
terrible things easy: Their own Master Sl. for holding with the Dutch
Baptism, and read-prayers is acknowledged to be cast our for an Apostate:
Troubl. and Excom. at Amsterd. p. 10.
yea their Doctor Mr. A^nsworth is noted with this mark from themselves: there
is much latitude (as happy is) in their Apostasy: For when Stanshall Mercer
and Jacob Johnson were to be chosen Officers in their Church, Brown charged
with it by Bar. Letter. to M. Egert.
and exception was taken by some at their Apostasy, answer was made, It was
not such Apostasy as debarred them from office, it was but aslippe. ^. Johnson
ibid. p. 194.
John Mark (whether, as Isychius and Theophilact think, the blessed
Evangelist, or some other holy Minister) is by the whole Parlour at Amsterdam,
branded with this same Apostasy; who departed indeed, but from Paul in his
journey, not from Christ in his faith, Fr. Johnson Inq.
and therefore his ((...)) is expounded by ((...)) Act. 15. 38. why do we think
much to drink of an Evangelists cup? Act. 15. 38. Departing. ^. not going
with them
Yet let this ignorant Epistler teach his censorious answerer one point of his
own (that is the Separatists) skill: and tell him that he objects two crimes
to one poor Church, which are incompatible; want of Constitution and
Apostasy. Thus writes your Master of us: If it were admitted (which can never
be proved) that they sometimes had been true established Churches. Bar.
Pres. to the Separation d^fend. In his observations p. 251. We do not there
condemn the parish Assemblies as separated from Christ, but tr^ue them not as
yet gathered to Christ. So Conser. ^^th Sperin. p. 9. Fr. Johnson. Inquir. page
36.
Lo here, we never had true Constitution, therefore we are not capable of
Apostasy: If we once had it, and so were true Churches, hear, what your
Pastor says: As Christ gives to all true Churches their being, so we must
leave it unto him to take it away, when, and as he pleases. And therefore
since he has not removed his Candlestick, H. Bar. Obseruat. 242.
nor taken away his Kingdom, No faults disanull the being of a Church, until
contempt of Gods word be added thereunto after due conviction* The faults and
errors of a Church may be severely reproved and convinced according to the
quality thereof, and yet the Church not be condemned. N. B. Job. ^4. 19.
in spite of all objected Apostasies, we still continue so: and by consequent
your separation upon this ground is most unjust. An Apostate had wont to be
the fearful surname of damned Julian: Tortus was an easy accusar, to whom
yet, we may say with Elihu, Number dicis regi, Apostata? Behold now so many
Apostates as men: Holy Cyprian describes him by forsaking Christ's colors, and
taking up arms for Gentilisme in life, or herefie in judgment: And Augustine
tells us, there cannot be a greater sin then Apostasy; making elsewhere
this sinner, worse then the Infidel And the old vulgar can give no worse
term to ((...)) where he finds it, yea to ((...)) rebels themselves. What
does this brand to a Church, Vulg. edit. C^pr. Epi ad Cornel. Non est maius
pechcaatum quam Apostat are a Deo. Aug. in Ps. 18.
not Christian only (though you deny it) but famous: Of whom is truly
verefied (after all your spleen) that which the spirit writes to the Angel of
Ephesus: Laborasti and non Defecisti: Say if you can, what Article of the
Christian, and Apostolic faith have we renounced? What heresy maintain we?
Prou. 6. 12. Job 34. 18. Ezec 2. 3. Apocal. 2. 3, Thou have labored, and not
given in.
Wherein have we run from the tents of Christ? What hold we that may not
stand with life in Christ, and salvation? We challenge all men and Devils in
this point, for our innocence: Distinguish, for stark shame of so foul a
word; or (which is better) eat it whole; and let not this blemish be left upon
your soul and name in the Records of God, Tert^l. de Pat, Si hominibus
Pla^^t^r, Dominus offenditur, sivero illud entimur and laboramus vt (...) dco
piacere, and (...) and maledicta debemus humana contemnere.
and the world; that you once said of a Church too good for yours, Drencht in
apostasy. If we cry Peace, whiles you cry Apostasy; surely we flatter,
whiles you rail: betwixt these two dangerous extremes, we know an wholesome
mean, confessed by M. Ioh^s. loc. seq.
so to approve that we foster not security: so to censure, that we neither
revile, nor separate: and in one word, to do that which your Pastor could
exhort the separators from your Separation (for even this Schism has
Schisms) If we should mislike, yet to rest in our differences of judgment,
Inq. of Th. White p. 65.
and notwithstanding peaceably to continue with the Church: Had you taken this
course, you should neither have needed to expect our pity, nor to complain of
our cruelty. Surely, whether our love be cruel, or not, your hatred is,
whereof, take heed least you hear from old Jacob, Gen 49. 7.
Cursed be their wrath for it was fierce, and their rage for it was cruel.

How can you expect compassion, Sep.
when you breath fire, But I will not discourage you in this affection, least
we find few in the same fault: the most in stead of pity and compassion,
affoording us nothing but fury and indignation. Cypr. de s^^^plic. prael. Quid
facit in cord Christiano luporum seritas and canum rabies? August. Confess. l.
9. c. 9. Qual^a solet eructare turgens indigesta discordia?
and write gall? Never mention the fury of others indignation, till the
venomous and desperate writings of Barrow and Greenwood be evther worn out
with time, or by the Thunderbolts of your (not rare) censures be struck down
to hell, whence their maliciousness came. I forbear to recapitulate, how much
rather had I help to bury, then to revive such unchristian exprobrations?

SECTION. XIIII.
The Separatists acknowledgements of the graces of the Church of England.
INgratitude and unnaturalness to your Mother is objected, Se^.
In that you fly from her, The first action laid against us, is of
unnaturalness and ingratitude toward our mother the Church of England, for our
causeless separation from her: to which unjust accusation, and triuiall
querimony, our most just defense has been, and is, that to our knowledge we
have done her no wrong: we do freely, and with all thankfulness acknowledge
every good thing she has and which our selves have there received.
yea now (woe is me) that you spit in her face, and mark her for an harlot:
Would God the accusation were as far from being just, as from being
triuiall: Yet perhaps you intend it not in the lightness of this charge, but
the commonnesse: you have caused me to smart for my charity, yet I forbear it
not: What is your defense? That you have done her no wrong, to your knowledge.
Modestly spoken, but doubtfully: we know your wrong, but we know not your
knowledge: it is well if your wrong be not wilful: an ignorant wrong is both in
more hope of amends, and of mercy: But is not this caution added, rather for
that you think no hard measure can possibly be a wrong to so vile a Church? I
ask, and would be denied: No, you do freely, and with all thankfulness
acknowledge every good thing she has: Whatsoever you do to us, I will not
any more in favor of you, wilfully wrong my self: you have bidden men now to
take you as a complete Separatist: and speak this for your self and yours.
Let the Reader now judge, whether the wrong of your Sect be wilful; and
acknowledgment of our good, free and thankful. Your first false-named Martyr
shall give the first witness of the titles of our Church: H. Bar. Praef. to the
separ. defended,
Who (says he) that were not drunk and intoxicate with the Whores cup;
could affirm this confuse Babell, these cages of unclean Birds, Causes of
separ. def. p. 12. Confer. with D. Andr.
these prisons of foul and hateful spirits, to be the Spouse of Christ? And
elsewhere, he calls the people of our Church Goats and Swine. Is this any
wrong to your knowledge? The same Author: They have not (says he) in their
Churches any one thing in their practice and proceedings, not one pin, nail,
Praef. to separ. def.
or hook according to the true pattern: Do you not now freely and
thankefully acknowledge our Churches good things? What is more ordinary with
him, and his brother in evil I. Greenewood, then to call our worthy Ministers
Baals Priests, Gyff. refuted touch Donat. Obseruat. of M. H. Bar. p. 239.
Cainites, the marked servants of Antichrist, sellers of the Whores wares,
worshippers of the Beast. Is this yet any wrong to your knowledge? Pastor
Johnson sticks not to say, that the Ministry and worship of the Church of
England were taken out of the Whores cup: Fr. John's. Reas. 9, ag. M. Iac. p.
74.
and plainly styles our Church (as which of you do not?) daughter of the
great Babylon, that mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth: John's.
ag. M. Iac. Except. 3. Nota Been.
yet more; That Hierarchy, Worship, Constitution and Government, which they
profess and practice, being directly Antichristian, do utterly destroy true
Christianity, so as their people and Churches, cannot in that estate be judged
true Christians: Do you not now freely and thankfully acknowledge our good
things? What can any Devil of hell say worse against us then this, That we are
no Christians? Or what good can there be in us, if no true Christianity? Ibid.
If we denied every Article of the Christian Creed: if we were Mahumetans (as
your good Pastor sticks not to compare us), if the most damned Heretics
under heaven, what could he say but no Christians? Your teacher and Pastor
(which is a wonder) agree: For your Doctor Ainsworth makes this one head of his
poisonous Counterpoyson, Counterpoys. page 127. and 131.
that Christ is not the head, Mediator, Prophet, Priest, King of the Church of
England: You, their Disciple are not yet promoted to this height of immodestie;
yet what are your good things? Even to you, we are Apostates, Traitors, Rebels,
Babylonish: This is well for a learner: Hereafter (if you will hear me) keep
our good things to your self, and report our evil.

Yea, that your uncharitableness may be above all examples, monstrous; You
do not only deny us any interest in the Church of Christ, but exclude us
(what you may) from all hope and possibility of attaining the honor of
Christendom: For when a godly Minister protested to Master Barrow, the truth
of his ministry; upon the approbation also of his people, he received this
answer from him: Bar. Confer. With M. Sperm as Bar hims has written it. page
9
Though you had such allowance, it could nothing avail, but rather overthrow
your Ministry; they being as yet ungathered to Christ, and therefore neither
may not in this estate choose them a Minister, nor any exercise a Ministry
unto them, without heinous sacrilege, O desperate judgment; we neither are
Christians, nor can be: No Christianity without faith, no faith without the
Ministry of the word, no word to us without sacrilege: What are we, Fr. Job.
7. Reas. aga. Iac p. 64. G. John's. Praef. to the Pastor.
that the very offer of bringing us to God should be criminal? These are your
acknowledgements of our good: Who have learned of your Pastor to kiss and
kill all at once: to bless and curse with one breath: your mercies are cruel.

SECTION. XV.
The unnaturalness of some principal Separatists.
BUT who can wonder at your unnaturalness to the Church, Russin. l. 2. Eccl.
hist. c, 3.
that hears what measure you mete to your own? Error is commonly joined with
cruelty: Aug. Epist. and Possid. in vita Aug.
The outrageous demeanures of the Circumcelliones in Augustines time; and more
then barbarous tyranny of the Arrians before him are well known by all
Histories, Eusebius hist. eccl. Damnis grauissimis and caedibus afficiebant,
armati diuersis telis.
and not enough by any: God forbid, that I should compare you to these. Hear
rather of Nouatus, the father of a not-vnlike Sect, of whom Cyprian reports,
Socrates l. 2. c. 22. and 30.
that he would neither bestow bread on his father alive, nor burial on him
dead, but suffered him both to starve and stink in the street: Cypr. l. 2. Ep.
8. Nouati pater in vico fame mortuns nec postea ab illo sepultus. Sic Optat. l.
1. Purpurus Donatista occidit sororis filios etc. G. John's. Discourse of
troubles and Excommunications at Amsterdam printed 1603
and for his wife (least he should be merciful to any) he spurned her with
his heel, and slew his own child in her body: What need I seek so far? I
grieve to think and report, that your own Pastor has paralleled this
cruelty: His own brother (which is no less sauadge) though one of your Sect,
is the public accuser and condemner of him in this crime to all the world: who
after a pitiful relation of his eight years quarrels with him, and four
years excommunication, in his Epistle before a large volume to this purpose,
writes thus: Ibid. p. 5.


After all these, has not our kind, careful, and old Father come a long
journey to make Peace? Has he not labored with you, the Elders and the
Church, to bring you to peace? Has he not used the help and counsel of the
Reformed Churches herein? Yet will you not be reclaimed, but adding that sin
above all, have also ^^^strously excommunicated your father, the peace-seeker,
etc. and straight; How often desired he you (as if he had been the son, and
you the father) even with tears, that you would repent. In a word, how came he
and I to your door, showing you that it might be (upon his departing) you
should see his face no more, etc. Yet you forced him by your ill dealing, still
to leave upon you, his curse, and all the curses written in Gods book against
unthankful and disobedient children. Thus far a brother concerning a
brother, against father and brother; Other strangely-vnkind vsages of both, I
had rather leave to the discovery of Master White, and this miserable
plaintiue, Discovery of Brownisme. Vid. G. John's. book.
who have written enough to make an enemy ashamed: But whereupon was all this
fearful broile in a pure Church? For nothing but a little lace, and
whale-bone in his wives sleeue. The Trojan war could not be slaundered with
so weighty a beginning. Inq. into Th. Wh. Discou.
As for your Elder, Daniel Studly (whom your Pastor so much extolleth) if
Master Whites Apostasy may be your shift against his relation; let him speak
who should have been a fellow-elder with him, banished for your truth, though
erected by your censure: Same Epist. p. 15
Mark (says G. John's. of this Studly) how the Lord has judged him with
unnaturalness to his own children, suffering them to lie at other men's feet,
and hang on other men's hands, They say Fi^^a ^ponsae.
whiles he, his wife, and her daughter fared daintily, and went prankingly in
apparel, even in this place of banishment. It is no joy to me to blazen these,
Mihi accusatio etiam vera contra fratrem displ^cet Hieron. aduersus Ruffin.
or your othersins; would God they were fewer, and less in us all. Only it
was fit the world should know, as how undutiful you are to your common parent,
so that Father, Brother, Children bear part with your mother in these your
cruelties.

SECTION. XVI.
what the Separatists think themselves beholden to the Church of England for.
IF then such be the good things of our Church; What good can you acknowledge
to have received from her? Bar. exam. before the Archb. and L. Anderson Brown
state of Christians d. 39 Qui non habet quod det, quomodo det? vox Donat. Opta.
l. 1
Nothing gives what it has not: A Baptism perhaps; Alas, but no true
Sacrament, you say: yea the seal of gracelesnesse and mischief; As little are
you beholden to the Church for that, as the Church to you, for your good
acceptance: Why are you not rebaptized? You that cannot abide a false Church,
why do you content your selves with a false Sacrament? especially, since our
Church, being not yet gathered to Christ is no Church, and therefore her
baptism a nullity. Barrow. supra.


What else do you owe to the liberality of this Step-dame? You are close; your
Pastor is lavish for you both; who thus speaks of himself, and you, and us:
Fr. ^^hns. ag. M. I^cob p. 41. (...). 2.
I confess that whiles I was Minister in your Church of England, I stood in an
Antichristian estate, yet doubt I not, but even then, being of the Elect of God
I was partaker through faith, of the mercy of God in Christ to salvation, but
as for you (Master Jacob and his Fellow Christians) whiles you thus remain,
you cannot in that estate approve your selves to have the promise of salvation.
Behold here, the Church of England gave you but an Antichristian estate; if God
give secret mercy, what is that to her?

Gods superabundant grace does neither abate ought of her Antichristianisme,
Sep.
nor move you to follow him in covering, The superabundant grace of God
covering and passing by the manifold enormiti^s in that Church wherewith these
good things are inseparably commingled, and wherein we also through ignorance
and infirmity were inwrapp ed.
and passing by the manifold enormities in our Church, wherewith those good
things are inseparably commingled: Your own mouth shall condemn you: Does God
pass over our enormites, and do you stick, yea separate? Does his grace cover
them, and do you display them? Have you learned to be more just then your
Maker? Or if you be not above his justice, Why are you against his mercy? God
has not disclaimed us by your own confession; you have prevented him. If
Princes leisures may not be stayed in reforming, yet shall not Gods in
rejecting? Your ignorance inwrapped you in our errors: his infinite wisdom
sees them, and yet his infinite mercy forbeares them: so might you at once
have seen, disliked, stayed: If you did not herein go contrary to the courses
of our common God, how happy should both sides have been? yea how should there
be no sides? How should we be more inseparably commingled, then our good and
evil?

But should you have continued still in sin that grace might have abounded?
Sep.
God forbid: But what the^? should we still have continued in sin, that grace
might have abounded? If God have caused a further truth like a light in a dark
place, to shine in our hearts, should we still have mingled that light with
darkness, contrary to the Lords own practice? Ge. 1. 4. and express
precept, 2. Cor. 6. 14.
you might have continued here without sin (save your own) and then grace
would no less have abounded to you, then now your sin abounds in not
continuing: What need you to surfeit of another man's Trencher? Others sins
need no more to infect you, then your graces can sanctify them. As for your
further light, suspect it not of God: suspect it to be mere darkness: and if
the light in you be darkness, Genesis 1. 2.
how great is that darkness? What? so true and glorious a light of God, and
never seen til now? No worlds, times, Churches, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Es. 5. 20. VVoe to them that put darkness for light.
Martyrs, Fathers, Doctors, Christians ever saw this truth look forth besides
you, until you? External light was Gods first creature, and shall this
spiritual light, Es. 59. 9.
whereby all Churches should be discerned come thus late? Mistrust therefore
your eyes, and your light: and fear Isayes woe, and the Jews miserable
disappointment: we wait for light, but lo it is darkness, for brightness,
but we walk in obscurity.

SECTION. XVII.
The Motherhood of the Church of England, how far it obliges us.
THE Church of England is your mother, to her small comfort; she has borne
you, and repented. Alas, you have given her cause to power out Jobs curses upon
your birthday, by your not only forsaking but cursing her: Stand not upon her
faults, which you shall never prove capital: Deu. 21. 22* 23.
Note only the best Parent might have brought forth are bellious son to be
stoned. What then? Sep.
Do we prefer duty to piety, But the Church of England (say you) is our
Mother, and so ought not to be avoided* But say I, we must not so cleave to
holy mother Church, as we neglect our heavenly father, and his commandments,
which we know in that estate we could not but transgress, and that heynously,
and against our consciences, not only in the want of many Christian
Ordinances, to which we are most straightly bound, both by Gods word and our
own necessities.
and so plead for our holy mother Church, that we neglect our heavenly Father,
yea offend him? See what you say: It must needs be an holy mother that cannot
be pleased without the displeasure of God: A good wife, that opposes such an
husband: a good son that vpbraides this unjustly: Therefore is she a Church,
your mother, holy, because she bred you to God, cleaues to him, obeyes his
commandments, and commands them. And so far is she from this desperate
contradiction, that she voweth not to hold you for her son, unless you
honor God as a father. It is a wilful slander, that you could not but
heynously transgress under her: I dare take it upon my soul, that all your
transgression which you should necessarily have incurred by her obedience, is
nothing so heinous, as your vnchariblenesse in your censures and disobedience.
Conscience is a common plea even to those you hate: we inquire not how strong
it is, but how well informed: not whether it suggest this, but whereupon. To
go against the conscience is sin, to follow a misinformed conscience is
sin also: If you do not the first, we know you are faulty in the second: He
that is greater then the conscience will not take this for an excuse: But
wherein should have been this transgression: Matter Ecclesia, matter est etiam
matris nostrae.
so unavoidable, heinous, against conscience? First in the want of many
Ordinances, to which we are most strictly bound, Aug. Ep. 38.
both by Gods word, and our own necessities.

SECTION. XVIII.
The want of pretended Ordinances of God, whether sinful to us: and whether
they are to be set up without Princes.
CAn you think this hangs well together? You should here want many of Gods
ordinances: why should you want them? Because you are not suffered to enjoy
them: who hinders it? Superior powers: Did ever man wilfully and heynously
offend, (...)
. for wanting of that which he could not have? What has conscience to do with
that which is out of our power? Is necessity with you become a sin, and that
heinous? David is driven to lurk in the wilderness, and forced to want the
use of many divine Ordinances: Nemo per exteriorem violentiam corrumpitur: si
interior innocentia custodiatur. c. ^. q. 3. Custodi. etc.
It was his sorrow, not his transgression, He complains of this, but does he
accuse himself of sin? Not to desire them had been sin, no sin to be
debat'd them: Well might this be Saul's sin but not his. Have you not sins
enough of your own, that you must needs borrow of others? But I see your
ground: You are bound to have these Ordinances; and therefore without Princes,
yea against them: so it is your transgression to want them in spite of
Magistrates, Ad docendum populum Israeliticum, omnipotens deus prophetis
praeconium dedi*, non regibus imperauit. Aug. l. 2. contr. Gau. c. 11. Bar.
causes of scpera, def. p. 6.
Gaudentius the Donatist taught you this of old; And this is one of the Hebrew
songs which Master B^rrow sings to us in Babylon, that we care not to make
Christ attend upon Princes, and to be subject to their laws, and government:
and his Predecessor (the root of your sect) tells us in this sense the kingdom
of heaven must suffer violence; and that it comes not with observation; that
men may say, Brow. Reform: without tarrying.
Lo the Parliament or lo the Bishops decrees: and in the same treatise. The
Lords kingdom must wait on your policy, Aug. contr. Petilia n. l. 2.
forsooth; and his Church must be framed to your civil state etc. Just as that
Donatist of old, Optatus Mileuit. lib. 3^
in Augustine, Quid vobis etc. What have you to do with worldly Emperors? and
as that other in Optatus: Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor
to do with the Church? Yea your Martyr fears not to teach us, Bar. 2.
Exa^^i^ nation before the L. Archb. and L. Chiefe-Iustice. compar. with his
reply to M. Gyff. Art. 5.
that Gods servants being as yet private men, may and must together build his
Church, though all the Princes of the world should prohibit the same upon pain
of death: Belike then you should sin haynously, if you should not be rebels:
The question is not, whether we should ask leave of Princes to be Christians;
but whether of Christian Princes we should ask leave to establish
circumstances of government: God must be served, though we suffer; our blood is
well bestowed upon our maker, but in patience, not in violence. Private
profession is one thing; Public reformation and iniunction is another; Every
man must do that in the maine: none may do this, but they of whom God says,
I have said, ye are Gods: and of them: There is difference betwixt Christian
and Heathen Princes: If (at least) al Princes were not to you Heathen: If these
should have been altogether stayed for, Religion had come late: If the other
should not be stayed for: Religion would soon be over laid with confusion:
Lastly, the body of Religion is one thing, the skyrts of outward government
another: that may not depend on men to be embraced, or (with loyalty)
prosecuted: these (upon those general rules Christ) both may, ^ Sam. 24. 6.
and do, and must: If you cut off but one lap of these with David, you shall
be touched: To deny this power to Gods Deputies on earth, what is it, Number. 16.
3.
but ye take too much upon you Mo^es and Aaron, all the Congregation is holy:
wherefore lift ye your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? See, if
herein you come not too near the walls of that Rome which ye so abhor and
accurse, Counter poys. p. 230.
in ascribing such power to the Church, 2. Chr. 13.
none to Princes. Let your Doctor tell you, 2. Chr. 14. and 15*
whether the best Israelites in the times of Abijah, 2. Chr. 29.
Asa, Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, Josiah, took upon them to reform without, 2. Chr.
30.
or before, 2. Chr. 34.
or against their Princes? Yea did Nehemiah himself without Artahshaht (though
an heathen King) set upon the walls of Gods City? Or what did Zerubbabel, and
Ieshua without Cyrus? Ezr. 2. and 3. 2.
In whose time Haggai and Zechariah prophesied indeed, but built not: And when
contrary Letters came from above, they laid by both Trowels and Swords: They
would be Jews still, they would not be rebels for God: Ezr. 4. 23. 24*
Had those Letters enjoined Swines flesh, or Idolatry, or forbidden the use of
the law, those which now yielded, had suffered, and at once testified their
obedience to authority, and piety to him that sittes in the assembly of these
earthen Gods. I urge no more: Perhaps you are more wise or less mutinous: you
might easily therefore purge your conscience from this sin, of wanting what
you might not perforce enjoy.

Say that your Church should employ you back to this our Babylon, for the
calling out of more Proselites: you are intercepted, imprisoned: Shall it be
sin in you not to hear the Prophesies at Amsterdam? The Clinke is a lawful
excuse: If your feet be bound, your conscience is not bound. In these
negatiues, outward force takes away both sin and blame, and alters them from
the patient to the actor: so that now you see your straight bonds (if they were
such) loosed by obedience, and ouer-ruling power.

SECTION. XIX.
The bonds of Gods word unjustly pleaded by the Separ.
BUT what bonds were these straight ones? Gods word and your own necessity:
Both strong and indissoluble where God has bidden, God forbid that we should
care for the forbiddance of men: I reverence from my soul (so does our Church
their dear Sister) those worthy foreign Churches which have chosen and
followed those forms of outward government that are every way fittest for
their own condition. It is enough for your Sect, to censure them: I touch
nothing common to them with you: August. Ep. 58* Pastores autem and doctores
qu^s maxim vt discernerem voluisti eosdem puto esse sicut and tibi visum est,
vt non alios Pastores, alios Doctores intelligeremus, sed ideo cum praedixisset
Pastores, subiunxisse Doctores, vt intelligerent Pastores ad officium suum
pertinere doctrinam Bar. ag. Gyff. inueighs for this cause against the
Consistory of Gene^a. Fr* John's. complaints of the Dutch and Fr. Churches.
Description of a visible Church, cannot make a Distinct. in the Definition of
their Offices.
While the world stands, where will it ever be showed out of the sacred book
of God, that he has charged. Let there be perpetual Lay Elders in every
Congregation: Let every Assembly have a Pastor and Doctor, distinct in their
charge and offices: Let all decisions, excommunications, ordinations be
performed by the whole multitude: Let private Christians (above the first
turn, in extremity) agree to set over themselves a Pastor, chosen from amongst
them and receive him with prayer, State of Christians 119.
and (unless that ceremony be turned to pomp and superstition) by imposition
of hands. Descript. of vis. Chapter H. Clap. Epist before his treatise of sin ag:
the holy Ghost. Brownists fourth Position.
Let there be Widdowers (which you call relieuers) appointed every where to the
Church-seruice Let certain discreet and able men which are not Ministers be
appointed to preach the Gospel and whole truth of God to the people.

All the learned Divines of other Churches are in these left, yea in the most
of them censured by you: Has God spoken these things to you alone? Plead not
Revelations, and we fear you not: Pardon so homely an example: As soon and
by the same illumination shall G. John's. prove to your Consistory the lace of
the Pastors wives sleeue, Trouble and ^xcom. at Amsterdam.
or rings, or Whalebones, or other amongst you (as your Pastor confesses) knit
stockings, or Cork-shooes forbidden flatly by Scriptures, Fr. John's. in a
Letter to M. Smith.
as these commanded. We see the letter of the Scriptures with you: you shall
fetch blood of them with strayning, ere you shall wring out this sense: No, no*
(M. R.) never make God your stale: Many of your ordinances came from no ^ier
then your own brain: Others of them though God acknowledges yet he imposed
not: Pretend what you will: These are but the cords of your own conceit, not
bonds of Christian obedience.

SECTION. XX.
The necessity of their pretended Ordinances.
THE first of these then is easily untwisted: your second is necessity: Then
which, what can be stronger? what law, or what remedy is against necessity?
What we must have, we cannot want: Oppose but the public necessity to yours:
your necessity of having, to the public necessity of withholding: and let one
of these necessities (like two nails) drive out another: So they have done,
and your own necessity (as the stronger) has prevailed; for that other
necessity might be eluded by flight: you have sought and found elsewhere,
what the necessity of our laws denied, and the necessity of your conscience
required. Nulla necessitas mayor est charitate. H^eron.
Beware lest unjustly: Sin is as strong bond to a good heart as
impossibility; Christians can not do what they ought not: Apol. ad Ruff.
Contrary to the laws of your Prince and Country, you have fled not only
from us, but from our Communion. Either is disobedience no sin, or might you
do this evil that good may come of it? But what necessity is this? simple and
absolute, or conditional? Is there no remedy but you must needs have such
Elders, Fr. Iun. de Eccl. Sed accidunt persaepe tempora quibus aut noua
Ecclesia generatur, aut altera pars interumpitur (scilicet (...)) et tamen
Ecclesia esse non d^sinit, forma nimirum essentiali adhuc permanente.
Pastors, Doctors, Relieuers, such Offices, such executions? Can there be no
Church, no Christians without them? What shall we say of the families of the
Patriarchs, of the Jewish Congregations under the law, yea of Christ and his
Apostles? Either deny them to have been visible Churches, or show us your
distinct Offices amongst them: But as yet (you say) they were not: Therefore
God has had a true Church (thousands of years) without them: Therefore they
are not of the essence of the Church: You call me to the times since Christ: I
demand then, was there not a worthy Church of God in Jerusalem from the time
of Christ's Ascension, till the election of the seven Deacons. Those hundred
and twenty Disciples, Act. 1. 15. and three thousand Conuerts, Act. 2. 41.
Those continual Troops that flocked to the Apostles, were they no true
Church? Let the Apostles and Evangelists be Pastors and Doctors: Act 7. beg.
Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 9. Meminisse diaconi debent quoniam Apostolos (id est)
Episcopos and praepositos Dominus elegit, Diaconos autem post ascensum Domini
in caelos Apostoli sibi constituerunt Episcopatus su and Ecclesiae ministros.
where were their Elders, Deacons, Relieuers? Afterward, when Deacons were
ordained, yet what news is there of Elders, till Act. 11? yet that of
Jerusalem was more forward then the rest: We will not (as you are wont) argue
from scriptures negatiuely: no proof yet much probability is in Saint Paul's
silence: He writes to Rome, Corinth, and other Churches: those his Divine
letters in a sweet Christian ciuility salute even Ordinary Christians: And
would he have utterly passed by all mention of these Church Officers amongst
his so precise acknowledgment of lesser titles in others, Romans 1. 8.
if they had been ere this ordained? yet all these more then true Churches, 1.
Cor. 1. 5.
famous some of them, rich, forward, and exemplary. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7.
Only the Philippian Church is styled with Bishops and Deacons, but no Elders
besides them. Gal* 4. 15.
The Churches of Christ since these, Phil. 1. 2.
(if at least you will grant that Christ had any Church till now) have
continued in a recorded succession through many hundreds of years: Search the
Monuments of her Histories: Show us where ever in particular Congregations all
these your necessary Offices (as you describe them) were either found or
required. It was therefore a new-no-Necessity that bound you to this course, or
(if you had rather) a Necessity of Fallibility: If with these God may be well
served, he may be well served without them. This is not that Vnum necessarium
that Christ commends in Mary: you might have sat still with less trouble, and
more thanks.

SECTION. XXI.
The enormities of the Church in common.
But besides that we ought to have had somewhat which we want, we have some
what which we should have wanted: Some? yea many Antichristian enormities. Sep.
To say we are absolute, and neither want nor abound, But also in our most
sinful subjection to many Antichristian enormities, which we are bound to
eschew as hell. Fr. John's. ag. M. Jacob. Bar. Gyff. refuted, i. Transgress p.
28.
were the voice of Laodicea or Tyrus in the Prophet: Our Church as she is
true, so humble: and is as far from arrogating perfection, as acknowledging
falsehood: If she have enormities yet not so many: or if many, not
Antichristian. Your Cham has espied ninety one nakednesses in this his Mother,
and glories to show them, All his malice cannot show one Fundamental error:
and when the foul mouth of your false Martyr has said all, they are but some
spots and blemishes, not the old running issues, and incurable botches of
Egypt: The particulars shall plead for themselves. These you eschew as hell:
While you go on thus uncharitably, both alike: Do you hate these more then
Master Smith, and his faction hates yours? His Character shall be judge: So do
we value your detestation as you his. It were well for you if you eschued these
enormities less, and hell more: Your sinful subjection to these unchristian
humors will prove more fearful then to our Antichristian enormities.

SECTION. XXII.
The Church of England, is the Spouse of Christ.
SHE may be your Mother (you say) and not the Lords Wife. Sep.
It is a good Mother that has Children and no husband: She is our Mother* o
may she be, and yet not the Lords wife, every mother of children is not a wife.
Ammi and Ruhae^ah were bidden to plead with their mother Apostate Israel, and
plead that she was not the Lords wife, nor he her husband. Ho. 2. 1. 2. Cypr.
de simpli^. Praelator, Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi, incorrupta est and
Pudica. 1. Kin. 12. 29. Hos. 2. 16. 2. 13.
Why did you not call her plain whore? Your old Emblem is, As is the Mother,
so is the Daughter. These are the modest circumlocutions of a good son; who
cares not to prove himself a bastard, that his mother may be marked for an
Harlot: Be you a true Lo-ammi, but England shall never (I hope) prove an
Apostate Israel: We have no Calves in our Dan and Bethel none of Iero^oams
Idolatry: We have still called God Ishi, and never burnt incense to Baalim:
It is your sinagogue that has fallen away from us, as Israel from Judah: But
these children were bidden to plead: Gods command shields them from the note of
ungracious. Abraham must sacrifice his son and this son must condemn his
Mother; show us either our equal desert, or your equal warrant. Where has
God proclaimed our Church not his? By whose hand has he published her divorce?
Sep.
You have shamed her womb, And though you forbid us a thousand times, yet must
we plead: not to exccuse our fault, but to justify our innocence: And that not
only nor so much in respect of our selves, as of the truth which without
sacrilege we maynot suffer to be condemned unheard. And if you yet hear her
not, rather blame yourselues as deaf, then us as dumb. Hierom. ad Eustoch.
Epitaph Paulae ex Psalm 67.
not she her bed, not God her demeanure.

Your tongues are your own, who can forbid you? We know you will plead and
excuse, and censure, and defend, till all the world be weary: we may pray with
Hierome to this sense that of the Psalmist Increpa Domine bestias calami: yet
we see your pens, tongues, and presses, busy and violent. I will not apply to
you that which Augustine of his Donatists. August. contr. Epist. Parmen. li. 1.
Though truth compel you to be dumb, yet iniquity will not suffer you to be
silent. But if you write whole Marts and worlds of volumes, you shall never be
able either to justify your innocence, or excuse your fault: In the mean time
the noise of your contentions is so great that your truth cannot be heard:
Learned Iunius, and our learned Divines, and neighbor Churches, Epistol.
Iuni. ad Separ.
have often heard your clamors, never your truth: So little have you of this and
so much of the other, that we are ready to wish (as he of old) either our
selves deaf or you dumb.

SECTION. XXIII.
How the Church of England, has separated from Babylon.
THe spirit of your Proto-Martyr would hardly have digested this Title of
Babylon, Giff. refut. 2. transg.
Mother of Gods people; Sep.
a murdering Stepmother, Is not babylon the mother of Gods people, whom he
therefore commands to depart out of her, least being partakers of her sins,
they also partake of her plagues. Revel. 18. 2. Answ. for^ speech to Counter
poys.
rather: She cannot be a Mother of Chil^ren to God, and no Church of God:
Notwithstanding, Gods people (would he say) may be in her, not of her. So
Babylon bore them not, but Sion in Babylon, But I fear not your excess of
charity: You fly to your Doctors challenge; and ask what we say against you
for us, which Rome will not say for her self against us: Will you justify this
plea of Rome, or not? If you will; why do you revile her? If you will not: why
do you object it?

Hear then what we say both to you and them, Sep.
our enemies both: And to conclude, what say you more against us, for your
mother the Church of England, then the Papists do for their mother and your
mothers mother, the Church of Rome, against you, whom they condemn as
vn-naturall bastards and impious Patricides in your separations from her, A
Simone Zelota Niceph. Alij a Ios. Arimath, cuius hic sepulchrum cernitur. Angli
Pascha Graeco more celebrarunt. Jacob Armin. Disp Cant. 8. 8. Fr. Iun. lib*
sing. de Eccle.
and yet the enemies of our enemies: First we disclaim, and defy your
Pedigree and theirs. The Church of Rome was never our Mothers Mother: Our
Christian faith came not from the seuen-hilles: Neither was derived either from
Augustine the Monk, or Pope Gregory. Britanny had a worthy Church before
either of them looked into the world: It is true that the ancient Roman Church
was Sister to ours: here was near kindred, no dependence: And not more
consanguinitie, then (while she continued faithful) Christian love: Now she is
gone a whoring, her chaste Sister justly spitteth at her: yet even still (if you
distinguish, as your learned Antagonist has taught you, betwixt the Church and
Papacy) She acknowledges her Sisterhood, though she refraines her
conversation: as she has many slavish and factious abettors of her known and
gross errors (to whom we deny this title) affirming them the body whereof
Antichrist is the head, the great whore, and mother of abominations; so again
how many thousands has she, which retayning the foundation according to their
knowledge, (as our learned Whitakers had wont to say of Bernard) follow Absalom
with a simple heart: all which to reject from Gods Church, were no better the^
presumptuous cruelty. It were well for you before God and the world, if you
could as easiely wash your hands of vn-naturall impiety, and trecherousnesse,
as we of bastardy and unjust sequestration. There can be no bastardy, where was
never any motherhood, we were nephews to that Church, never sons: unless as
Rome was the Mother city of the world, so by humane institution, we suffered
our selves to be ranged under her Patriarchall authority, as being the most
famous Church of the West: a matter of courtesy, and pretended Order; no
necessity, no spiritual obligation. As for our sequestration, your mouth and
theirs may be stopped with this answer: As all corrupted Churches, so some things
the Church of Rome still holds aright; a true God in three persons, true
Scriptures, though with addition, a true Christ, though mangled with foul and
erroneous consequences; true Baptism though shamefully deformed with rotten
traditions; and many other undeniable truths of God: some other things (and too
many) her wicked Apostasy has devised and maintained abhominably amiss; the
body of her Antichristianisme, gross errors, and (by just sequel) heresies;
their Popes supremacy, infallibility, illimitation, transubstantiation,
idolatrous and superstitious worship, and a thousand other of this branne: In
regard of all these latter, we profess to the world a just and ancient
separation from this false faith and devotion of the Romish Church; which
neither you will say, nor they shall ever prove, faulty: yea rather they have
in all these separated from us, who still irrefragably profess to hold with the
ancient, from whom they are departed. In regard of the other we are still with
them, holding and embracing with them what they hold with Christ: neither will
you (I think) ever prove that in these we should differ: As for our
communion, they have separated us by their proud and foolish excommunications:
if they had not, we would justly have begun: from their Tyranny and
Antichristianisme, from their miserable Idolatry: but as for the body of
their poor seduced Christians, which remain amongst them upon the true
foundation (as doubtless there are thousands of them which laugh at their
Pardons, Miracles, Superstitions and their trust in merits, reposing only upon
Christ) we adhere to them in love and pity, and have testified our affection
by our blood, ready upon any just call to do it more; neither would fear to
join with them in any true service of our common God: But the full discourse
of this point, Phil. Morn du Plesses. Lib. de Eccles. cap. 10.
that honorable and learned plesses has so forstalled, that whatsoever (...)
say, would seem but borrowed. Unto his rich Treatise I refer my Reader, for
full satisfaction: Would God this point were thoroughly known, and well weighed
on all parts. The neglect or ignorance whereof has both bred and nursed your
separation, and driven the weak and inconsiderate into strange extremities.

This say we for our selves in no more charity then truth: But for you; how
dare you make this shameless Comparison? Can your heart suffer your tongue to
say, that there is no more diffrence betwixt Rome and us, then there is betwixt
us and you? How many hundred errors, how many damnable heresies have we
euinced with you, in that (so compounded) Church? show us but one mis-opinion
in our Church that you can prove within the ken of the foundation? Let not
zeal make you impudent: Counterp. p. 171.
Your Doctor could say (ingenuously sure) that in the doctrines which she
professes, she is far better and purer then that Whore mother of Rome, and
your last Martyr yet better: 1. P^nry. Exam. before M. Fanshaw and Just. Young.
If you mean (says he) by a Church (as the most do) that public profession
whereby men do profess salvation to be had by the death and righteousness of
Jesus Christ, I am free from denying any Church of Christ to be in this land:
for I know the Doctrine touching the holy Trinity, the natures and Offices of
the Lord Jesus, free justification by him; both the Sacraments, etc. published
by her Majesty's authority, and commanded by her laws, to be the Lords blessed
and undoubted truths, without the knowledge and profession whereof no
salvation is to be had: Thus he with some honesty, though little sense. If
therefore your will do not stand in your light, you may well see, why we should
thus forsake their Communion, Fr. Iun. l. de Eccles. M. Hooker Eccles. pol. Du
Plesses. l. de Eccl Jacob. Armin. disput. D. Reynolds These. D. Field of the Chapter
Revel. 3. and 2.
and yet not you ours. Yet though their corruptions be incomparably more, we
have not dared to separate so far from them, as you have done from us for
less: Still we hold them even a visible Church, but unsound, sick, dying;
sick not of a consumption only, but of a leprosy or plague (so is the Papacy
to the Church) diseases, not more deadly then infectious. If they be not rather
in Sardies taking; of whom the spirit of God says, Thou have a name that thou
live, but thou art dead; and yet in the next words bidds them awake, and
strengthen the things which are ready to die. And though our judgment and
practice have forsaken their erroneous doctrines and service, yet our charity
(if you take that former distinction) has not utterly forsaken and condemned
their persons. This is not our coolness, but equality: your reprobation of us
for them, has not more zeal then headstrong uncharitableness.

SECTION. XXIIII
The Separation made by our holy Martyrs.
But how could you without blushing once name Cranmer, Sep.
Latimer, And were not Luther, Zuingli^ Cranmer, Latimer and the rest begot to
the Lord in the womb of the Romish Church, did they not receive the knowledge
of his truth when they stood actual members of it? who^ notwithstanding
afterward they forsook, and that justly for her fornications.
and those other holy-Martyres, which have been so often objected to the
conviction of your schism? Those Saints so forsook the Romish Church, as we
have done, died witnesses of Gods truth in that Church, from which you are
separated: Lived, Preached, governed, shed their blood in the communion of the
Church of England which you disclaim and condemn as no Church of God, as
merely Antichristian: Either of necessity they were no Martyrs, yea no
Christians, or else your separations and censures of us are wicked. Choose
whether you will; They were in the same case with us; we are in the same case
with them: no difference but in time: either their blood will be upon your
heads, or your own: This Church had then the same constitution, the same
confusion, the same worship, the same Ministry, the same government (which
you brand with Antichristianisme) swayed by the holy hands of these men of God;
condemn them, or allow us. For their separation: They found many main errors
of doctrine in the Church of Rome (in the Papacy nothing but errors) worth
dying for: show us one such in ours, and we will not only approve your
separation, but imitate it.

SECTION. XXV.
What separation England has made.
THE Church of England does not now wash her hands of Babilonish
abominations, Sep.
but rather shows they are clean. But here in the name of the Church of
England, you wash your hands of all Babylonish abominations, which you pretend
you have forsaken, and her for, and with them. And in this regard you speak
thus: The Reformation you have made of the many and maine corruptions of the
Romish Chapter we do ingenuously acknowledge, and de^ withal embrace with you all
the truths which to our knowledge you have received in stead of them* But Rome
was not built all in a day. (...) Hierom. Apol. aduers. Ruffi. 1. l. 1. ^tissa
est mihi ^audatio tua, id est accusatio mea. Bonum ex integra natura, malum ex
singulari defectu.
Would God they were no more foul with your slander then her own
Antichristianisme. Here will be found not pretenses but proofs of our
forsaking Babylon; of your forsaking us, not so much as wel-coloured pretenses:
You begin to be ingenuous; while you confess a reformation in the Church of
England: not of some corruptions, but many, and those many not slight, but
maine.

The gifts of adversaries are thankelesse: As Ierom said of his Ruffinus, so
may we of you, that you wrong us with praises: This is no more praise then your
next page gives to Antichrist himself. Leave out Many, and though your
commendations be more uncertain, we shall accept it: so your indefinite
proposition shall sound to us as general* That we have reformed the maine
corruptions of the Romish Church: None therefore remain upon us; but slight
and superficial blemishes, so you have forsaken a Church of a foul skin,
but of a sound heart, for want of beauty, not of truth.

But you say many, not All, that if you can pick a quarrel with one, you
might reject all: yet show us that one maine and substantial error, which we
have not reformed: and you do not more embrace those truths with us which we
have received, then we will condemn that falsehood which you have rejected: and
embrace the truth of that Separation which you have practiced.

The degrees whereby that strumpet of Babylon got on Horseback you have
learned of us, Sep.
who have both learned and taught, The mystery of iniquity did advance it self
by degrees, and as the rise was, so must the fall be. That man of sin, and
lawless man, must languish and die away of a consumption. 2. These. 2 8. And
what though many of the highest Towers of Babel, and of the strongest Pillars
also be demolished, and pulled down, yet may the building stand still, though
tottering to and fro (as it does) and only underpropped and vpheld with the
shoulder and arm of flesh, without which in a very moment it would fall flat
upon, and lie level with the earth.
that as Christ came not abruptly into the world, but with many presages and
prefigurations (The day was long dawning ere this Sun arose). so his
adversary (that Antichrist) breaks not suddenly upon the Church, but comes with
much preparation, and long expectance: and as his rise, so his fall must be
graduall, and leisurely: Why say you then, that the whole Church every where
must at once utterly fall off from that Church where that man of sin sits?
His fall depends on the fall of others, or rather their rising from under him:
If neither of these must be sudden, why is your have? But this must not be, yet
ought: as there must be heresies, yet there ought not: It is one thing what God
has secretly decreede, another what must be desired of us: If we could pull
that Harlot from her seat, and put her to Iezebels death, it were happy: Have
we not endeavored it? What speak you of the highest Towers, and strongest
pillars, or tottering remainders of Babylon: we show you all her roofes bare,
her walls raced, her vaults diged up, her monuments defaced, her altars
sacrificed to desolation: Shortly al her buildings demolished, not a stone upon
a stone save in rude heaps, to tell that here once was Babylon: Your strife
goes about to build again that her tower of confusion. God deuides your
languages: It will be well, if yet you build not more then we have reserved.

SECTION. XXVI.
The maine grounds of separation.
YOU will now be free both in your profession and gift, Bar. and Gr. ag. Giff.
Confer. and Eam. passim, Pe^^y in his exa.
You give us to have renounced many false Doctrins in Popery: and to have
embraced so many truths: We take it until more: Sep.
You profess where you stick, You have renounced many false Doctrines in
Popery, and in their plac^s embraced the truth.
what you mislike: In those four famous heads, which you have learned by
heart from all your predecessors: An hateful Prelacy, A devised Ministry, a
confused and profane communion, and lastly the intermixture of grievous errors.

What if this truth were taught under an hateful Prelacy? Exodus 1. 2. 3. etc.
Ier. 20. 1.
Suppose it were so? Must I not embrace the truth because I hate the Prelacy?
Ier. 5. vlt. But what if this truth be taught under the same hateful Prelacy,
in the same devised office of Ministry: and confused communion of the profane
multitude, and that mingled with many grievous errors.
What if Israel live under the hateful Egyptians? What if Jeremy live under
hateful Pashur? What if the Jews live under an hateful Priesthood? What if
the disciples live under hateful Scribes? What are others persons to my
profession. If I may be freely allowed to be a true professed Christian, what
care I under whose hands? But why is our Prelacy hateful? Actiuely to you, or
passiuely from you? In that it hates you? Would God you were not more your own
enemies: Or rather because you hate it? Your hatred is neither any news, nor
pain: Who or what of ours is not hateful to you? Our Churches, Belles,
Clothes, Sacraments, Preachings, Prayers, Singings, Catechismes, Courts,
Meetings, Burialles, Marriages: It is marvel that our air infects not: and
that our heaven and earth (as Optatus said of the Donatists) escape your
hatred: Not the forwardest of our Preachers (as you term the^) have found any
other entertainment; John's. Pres. to his 7. Reas.
no enemy could be more spightfull, I speak it to your shame. Rome it self in
diverse controuersary discourses has bewrayed less gall, then Amsterdam: The
better they are to others, John's. 7. Reas. p. 66.
you profess they are the worse: yea would to God that of Paul were not
verified of you: Tit. 3. 4.
hateful, and hating one another: But we have learned, that of wise Christians
not the measure of hatred should be respected, Psalm. 69. 4.
but the desert: David is hatred for no cause,: Michaiah for a good cause: Your
causes shall be examined in their places: onwards it were happy if you hated
your own sins more, and peace less: our prelacy would trouble you less,
and you the Church.

SECTION. XXVII.
The truth and warrant of the Ministry of England.
FOr our devised office of Ministry, you have given it a true title. Mat 28.
19.
It was devised indeed by our Savior when he said, Ephesians. 4. 11.
go teach all Nations and Baptize; and performed in continuance when he gave
some to be Pastors and Teachers; 2 Timothy 2. 2.
and not only the office of Ministry in general, 1, Tim. 3. 1.
but ours whom he has made both able to teach, Act. 13.
and desirous, separated us for this cause to the work, 1. Tim. 3. 9.
upon due trial admitted us, 1. Tim. 5. 22.
ordained us by imposition of hands of the Eldershippe, 2 Timothy 2. 15. (...).
and prayer, directed us in the right division of the word, committed a charge
to us; followed our Ministry with power, and blessed our labors with gracious
success, even in the hearts of those whose tongues are thus busy to deny the
truth of our vocation: Discourse of the Trouble and excem. at Amst. Certain
Arg. ag the Com. with the Minist. of England.
Behold here the devised Office of ^our Ministry: What can you devise against
this? Your Pastor, who (as his brother writes) hopes to work wonders by his
Logical skill, has killed us with seven Arguments, which he professes the
quintessence of his own, and Penryes extractions, whereto your Doctor referres
us as absolute. I would it were not tedious or worth a Readers labor to see
them scanned. Counterpoys.
I protest before, God and the world, I never read more gross stuff so boldly
and peremptorily faced out: so full of Tautologies and beggings of the Question
never to be yielded. Let me yet mention the maine heads of them, and for the
rest be sorry that I may not be endless.

To prove therefore that no communion may be had with the Ministry of the
Church of England, he uses these seven Demonstrations First, Because it is not
that Ministry which Christ gave, and set in his Church: Secondly, Because it
is the ministry of Antichrists Apostasy: Thirdly, Because none can
communicate with the ministry of England, but he worshippes the beasts Image,
and yields spiritual subjection to Antichrist: Fourthly, Because this
ministry deriueth not their power and functions from Christ: Fifthly, Because
they minister the holy things of God by virtue of a false spiritual calling:
Sixthly, Because i^ is a strange ministry, not appointed by God in his word:
Seventhly, Because it is not from heaven, but from men.

Now I beseech thee Christian Reader, judge whether that which this man was
wont so often to object to his brother (a cracked brain) appear not plainly in
this goodly equipage of reasons, for what is all this but one, and the same
thing tumbled seven times over? which yet with seven thousand times babbling
shall never be the more probable. That our ministry was not given and set in
the Church by Christ, but Antichristian, what is it else to be from men, to be
strange, to be a false spiritual calling, not to be derived from Christ, to
worship the Image of the beast? So this great Challenger that has abridged his
nine Arguments to seven, might as well have abridged his seven to one and a
half. Here would have been as much substance, but less glory: As for his
maine defense: First, we may not either have, or expect now in the Church that
ministry which Christ set: Where are our Apostles, prophets, Evangelists? If
we must always look for the very same administration of the Church which our
Savior left, why do we not challenge these extraordinary functions? Do we
not rather think, since it pleased him to begin with those Offices which
should not continue, that herein he purposely intended to teach us, that if we
have the same heavenly business done we should not be curious in the
circumstances of the persons: But for those ordinary callings of Pastors and
Doctors (intended to perpetuity) with what forehead can he deny them to be
in our Church? How many have we that conscionably teach and feed, or rather
feed by teaching? Call them what you please, Superintendents (that is)
Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Lecturers, Parsons, Vicars, etc. If they preach
Christ truly, upon true inward abilities, upon a sufficient (if not perfect)
outward vocation: such a one (let all Histories witness) for the substance, as
has bin ever in the Church since the Apostles times: they are Pastors and
Doctors allowed by Christ: Vbires convenit quis non verba contemnat,? August.
de Ordin. 2.
We stand not upon circumstances and appendances of the fashions of ordination,
manner of choice, attire, titles, maintenance: but if for substance these be
not true Pastors and Doctors Christ had never any in his Church, since the
Apostles left the earth. All the difficulty is in our outward calling: Let the
Reader grant our grave and learned Bishops to be but Christians, and this
will easily be euinced lawful, even by their rules: For, if with them every
plebeian artificer has power to elect and ordain by virtue of his Christian
profession (the act of the worthiest standing for all) how can they deny this
right to persons qualified (besides common graces) with wisdom, Brow. state
of Christians.
learning, experience, authority)? Either their Bishoppricke makes them no
Christians (a position which of all the world, besides this Sect, would be
hissed at) or else their hands imposed are thus far (by their rules of
Separatists) effectual. Now your best course is (like to an Hare that runs
back from whence she was started) to fly to your first hold: No Church,
therefore no Ministry: So now, not the Church has devised the Ministry, but
the Ministry has devised the Church: I follow you not in that idle Circle:
Thence you have been hunted already: But now, since I have given account of
ours: I pray you tell me seriously, Who devised your Office of Ministry? I
dare say, not Christ, not his Apostles, not their Successors: What Church ever
in the world can be produced (unless in case of extremity for one turn) whose
conspiring multitude made themselves ministers at pleasure? what rule of Christ
prescribes it? What Reformed Church ever did, or does practice it? What
example warrants it? where have the inferiors laid hands upon their Superiors?
What Congregation of Christendom in all records affoorded you the necessary
pattern of an vnteaching Pastor, or an vnfeeding Teacher?

It is an old policy of the faulty to complain first: Certainly there was
never Popish Legend a more errand devise of man then some parts of this
ministry of yours, so much gloried in for sincere correspondence to the first
institution.

SECTION. XXVIII.
Confused Communion of the profane.
YOUR scornful exception at the confused communion of the profane multitude
sauors strong of a Pharisee, who thought it sin to converse (cum terrae
filijs) the base vulgar, Perplexae sunt istae duae (initates in hoc seculo
inuicemque permixtae donec vltimo iudicto dirimantur.
and whose very Phylacteries did say, Touch me not, for I am cleaner then thou.
This multitude is profane (you say) and this communion confused: If some be
profane, yet not all, for then could be no confusion in the mixture: If some
be not profane, Aug. de Ciuit. d. l. 1. 33.
why do you not love them as much as you hate the other? If all maine truths
be taught amongst some godly, some profane: why will you more shunn those
profane, then cleave to those truths, and those godly? If you have duly
admonished him, and detested and bewailed his sin; what is another man's
profaneness to you? If profaneness be not punished, or confusion be
tolerated, it is their sin, Eze. 18. 20. Orig.
whom it concerns to redress them: Vnusquisque propter proprium peccatum
morietur, in proprid iusticia viuet, etc.
If the Officers sin, must we run from the Church? It is a famous and
pregnant protestation of God by Ezechiell: The righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. And
if the fathers sower Grapes cannot hurt the childrens teeth, Fr. John's. Artic.
ag. the Dutch and Fr.
how much less shall the neighbors? Answ. ag. Brough ton.
But whither will you run from this communion of the profane? The same fault
you find with the Dutch and French; Discover. of Brown.
yea in your own. How well you have avoided it in your separation, Troubles
and excom. at Amst. Charact. pres. Cypr. Ep. 2.
let Master White, George Johnson, Master Smith be sufficient witnesses, whose
plentiful reports of your known uncleannesses, Iidem in publico accusatores
in occulto rei, in semetipsos censores pariter and nocentes: Damnant foris,
quod intus operantur,
smothered mischiefs, malicious proceedings, corrupt packings, communicating
with known offenders, bolstering of sins, and willing conniuences, as they
are shameful to relate, so might well have stopped your mouth from excepting at
our confused Communion of the profane.

SECTION. XXIX.
Our Errors intermingled with Truth.
HOw many and grievous errors are mingled with our Truths shall appear
sufficiently in the sequel; If any want, ^arr. Conser. with M. Hutchins. etc.
and D. ^ndr.
let it be the fault of the accuser, it is enough for the Church of Amsterdam
to have no errors. But ours are grievous: Name them, that our shame may be
equal to your grief: Sep.
So many they are, Shall some general truth^s (yea though few of them in the
particulars may be foundly practiced) sweeten and sanctify the other errors?
does not one heresy make an heretic, and does not a little leaven, whether
in Doctrine or manners le^uen the whole lump? 1. Cor. 5. 6. Gal. 5 9. Hag. 2
13. If Antichrist held not many truths, wherewith should he countenance so
many forgeries, or how could his work be a mystery of iniquity? which in Rome
is more gross, and palpable, but in England spun with a finer thread, and so
more hardly discovered. But to wade no further in universalities; we will take
a little time to examine such particulars, as you your self have picked out
for your most advantage, to see whether you be so clear of Babels Towers in
your own evidence, as you bear the world in hand. Inquir. into M. white p.
35. Mat. 13. 33.
and so grievous that your Martyr, when he was urged to instance, could find
none but our opinion concerning Christ's descent into hell; and except he had
ouer-reached, not that. Call you our Doctrines some general truths? Look
into our Confessions, Apologies, Articles, and compare them with any, with all
other Churches, and if you find a more particular, found, Christian, absolute
profession of all fundame^tall truths in any Church since Christ ascended into
heaven, renounce us, as you do, and we will separate unto you: But these truths
are not soundly practiced: Let your Pastor teach you, that if errors of
practice should be stood upon, there could be no true Church upon earth: Pull
out your own beam first: we willingly yield this to be one of your truths,
that no truth can sanctify error: That one heresy makes an Heretic: but
learn withal, that every error does not pollute all truths: That there is
hay and stubble which may burn, yet both the foundation stand, and the builder
be saved: Such is ours at the worst, why do you condemn where God will save?
No Scripture is more worn with your tongus and pens, then that of the
leaven. 1. Cor. 5. 6. If you would compare Christ's leaven with Paul's, you
should satisfy your self. Christ says the kingdom of heaven is as leaven;
Paul says gross sin is leaven: Both leauens the whole lump: neither may be
taken precisely, but in resemblance: not of equality, (as he said well) but of
quality: For notwithstanding the leaven of the kingdom, M. Bredwell.
some part you grant is unsanctified; So notwithstanding the leaven of sin,
some (which have striuen against it to their utmost) are not sowred: The
leauening in both places must extend only to whom it is intended: the subjects
of regeneration in the one; the partners of sin in the other: So our Savior
says, Ye are the salt of the earth; Yet too much of the earth is unseasoned:
The truth of the effect must be regarded in these speeches not the quantity:
It was enough for Saint Paul to show them by this similitude, Hierom. In hoc
Ignoratis, quia malo exemplo possunt plurimi interire? Sed and per vnius
delictum in omne populum Indaeorum iram dei legimus adue nisse.
that gross sins where they are tolerated have a power to infect others:
whether it be (as Hierome interprets it) by ill example, or by procurement of
judgments: and thereupon the incestuous must be cast out: All this tends to
the exco^municating of the evil, not to the seperating of the good: Did ever
Paul say, if the incestuous be not cast out, separate from the Church. Show us
this, and we are yours: Else it is a shame for you that you are not ours: If
Antichrist hold many truths, and we but many, we must needs be proud of your
praises: We hold all his truths, and have showed you, how we hate all his
forgeries, no less then you hate us: Yet the mystery of iniquity is still spun
in the Church of England; but with a siner thread: So fine that the very eyes
of your malice cannot see it, yet none of our least motes have escaped you:
Thanks be to our good God, we have the great mystery of godliness so
fairly and happily spunne amongst us, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
as all, but you, bless God with us, and for us: As soon shall you find
charity and peace in your English Church, as heresy in our Church of England.

SECTION. XXX.
Whether our Prelacy be Antichristian.
TO the particular instances: Sep.
I ask where are the proud towers of their Universal Hierarchy: Where (say
you) are those proud towers of their Universal Hierarchy?
You answer roundly: One in Lambeth, another in Fulham, etc. What Universal?
Did ever any of our Prelates challenge all the world as his Diocese? Is this
simplicity, One in Lambeth, another in Fulham, and wheresoever a pontifical:
Prelate is, or his Chauncellor, Commissary, or other subordinate, there is a
Tower of Babel vnruinated. To this end I desire to know of you whether the
office of Arch-bishoppes, Bishops, and the rest of that rank, were not parts
of that accursed Hierarchy in queen Mary's days, and members of that man of
sin? If they were then as shoulders and arms under that head the Pope, and
over the inferior members; and have now the same Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
derived and continued upon them, whereof they were possessed in the time of
Popery (as it is plain they have by the first Parliament of queen Elizabeth)
Why are they not still members of that body, though the head the Pope be cut
off? 7. Arg. 1. Answ. Counterpoys.
or malice? If your Pastor tell us that as well a world as a Province, Let me
return it; If he may be Pastor over a Parlour full: Why not of a City: And if
of a City, why not of a Nation? But these you will prove vnruinated Towers of
that Babell: You ask therefore whether the office of Archbishops, Bishops, and
the rest of that rank, were not in Queen Mary's days, parts of that
accursed Hierarchy, and members of that man of sin. Doubtless they were: Who
can deny it? But now (say you) they have the same Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
continued: This is your miserable Sophistry: Those Popish Arch-bishoppes, and
Bishops and Clergy were members of Antichrist; not as Church-Gouernours, but
as Popish: While they swore subjection to him, while they defended him, whiles
they worshipped him above all that is called God, and extorted this homage from
others, how could they be other but limbs of that man of sin: shall others
therefore which defy him, resist, trample upon him, spend their lives and
labors in oppugnation of him be necessarily in the same case, because in the
same room? Let me help your Anabaptists with a sound Argument: The Princes,
Peers and Magistrates of the land in Queen Mary's days were shoulders and
arms of Antichrist; their calling is still the same; therefore now they are
such: Your Master Smith upon no other ground disclaimeth Infants Baptism,
crying out that this is the maine relic of Antichristianisme. Character of
the beast ag. R. Clifton.
But see how like a wise Master you confute your self: They are still members
of the body, though the head (the Pope) be cut off: The head is Antichrist,
therefore the body without the head is no part of Antichrist: He that is
without the head Christ, is no member of Christ; so contrarily: I hear you
say, the very Jurisdiction and office is here Antichristian, not the abuse:
What? in them, and not in all Bishops since, and in the Apostles times? Alas,
who are you that you should oppose al Churches and times? ignorance of
Church-story, and not distinguishing betwixt substances and appendances,
personal abuses, and callings, has led you to this error: Yet since you
have reckoned up so many Popes, let me help you with more: Was there not one
in Lambeth when Doctor Cranmer was there? One in Fulham when Ridly was there:
Archdeacon.
One in Worcester when Latimer was there? One at Winchester when Philpot was
there? We will go higher; Was not Hilarious at Arles, Beatissimus Papa passi^n
in Epist.
Paulinus at Nola. Primasius at Vtica, Eucherius at Lions, Cyrill at
Alexandria, Chrysostom at Constantinople, Ignat. ad Trallian. Eusebius. l. 3.
Augustine at Hippo, Ambrose at Milaine? What should I be infinite? Was not
Cyprian at Carthage? Euodius and after him Ignatius in S. John's time at
Antioch, Polycarpus at Smyrna, Philip at Cesarea, James and Simeon and Cleophas
at Jerusalem, Ex Eusebius. Hier. Catalog script. Epiph. ^nio, etc. Call. Instit l.
4. Hieron. Euagrio Heming. Potest. Eccles. clas. 3. c. 10.
and (by much consent of Antiquity) Titus in Creet, Timothy at Ephesus, Mark
at Alexandria: yea to be short, was there not every where in all ages, an
allowed superiority of Church-Gouernours under this title? Look into the
frequent Subscriptions of all Councels, and their Canons? Look into the
Registers of all times, Hinc Ecclesia purior secuta tempora Apostolorum, fecit
alios Patriarchas, quorum erat curare vt Episcupi cuiusque d^ocescos rite
eligerentur, vt suum munus Episcopi singuli probe administrarent etc. Arist.
Pol. 7. Potentia diuitiarum, and pauper tatis humilitas vel humiliorem vel
inferiorem Episcopum non facit.
and find your self answered: Let reverend Calvin be our Advocate: I would
desire no other words to confute you, but his: He shall tell you that even in
the Primitive Church, the Presbiters chose one out of their number in every
City, whom they titled their Bishop, least dissension should arise from
equality. Let Hemingius teach you that this was the practice of the purest
Church: Thus it was ever, and if Princes have pleased to annexe either large
maintenances, or styles of higher dignity, and respect unto these, do their
additions annihilate them? Has their double honor made void their callings?
Why more then extreme needinesse? If Aristotle would not allow a Priest to be a
tradesman, yet Paul could yield to homely Tent-making, if your Elders grow rich
or noble, Hieron. Euagr.
do they cease to be, or begin to be unlawful? But in how many volumes
has this point been fully discussed? I list not to gleane after their full
Carts.

SECTION. XXXI.
The judgment and practice of other Reformed Churches.
FRom your own Verdict you descend to the testimonies of all reformed
Churches: I blush to see so wilful a slander fall from the pen of a
Christian. Sep.
That all Reformed Churches renounce our Prelacy as Antichristian, And so do
all the Reformed Churches in the world (of whose testimony you boast so loud)
renounce the Prelacy of England, as part of that Pseudo-Clergie, and
Antichristian Hierarchy derived from Rome. Answ. Counterpoys. 3 Consid. Ps.
10. 7.
what one has done it? Yea, what one foreign Divine of note, has not given
to our Clergy the right hand of fellowshippe? so far is it from this, that I.
Alasco was the allowed Bishop of our first Reformed strangers in this land,
so far that when your Doctor found himself urged (by M. Spr.) with a cloud
of witnesses for our Church and ministry, as Bucer, Martyr, Fagius, Alasco,
Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Gualter, Simler, Zanchius, Iunius, Rollocus, and
others, he had nothing to say for himself, but Though you come against us with
Horsemen and Chariots, yet we will remember the name of the Lord our God, and
turns it off with the accusation of a Popish plea, and reference to the
practice of the Reformed: And if therefore they have so renounced it, because
their practice receives it not: Why like a true makebate do you not say,
that our Churches have so renounced their Government? These sisters have
learned to differ, and yet to love, and reverence each other: and in these
cases to enjoy their own forms, without prescription of necessity, or
censure. Let reverend Beza be the Trumpet of all the rest; who tells you that
the Reformed English Churches continue, Bez. de ministr. Euang. c. 18. Cited
also by D. Down p. 29. Heming. Iudicat caeteros ministros suis Episcopis obtem
perare debere. Potest. Eccles. c. 10.
vpheld by the authority of Bishops, and Archbishopps, that they have had men
of that rank, both famous martyrs, and worthy Pastors and Doctors: and lastly
congratulates this blessing to our Church: or let Hemingius tell you the
judgment of the Danish Church: Iudicat caeteros ministros etc. it judges
says he, that other ministers should obey their Bishops in all things, which
make to the edification of the Church, etc. But what do I oppose any to his
name-lesse, All? his own silence confutes him enough in my silence.

SECTION. XXXII.
Our Synodes determination of things indifferent.
THere was never a more idle and beggarly cavil then your next: your Christian
Reader must needs think you hard driven for quarrels, Article. 21
when you are feign to fetch the Popes infallibility out of our Synod, Sep.
whose flat decree it was of old: That even general Councels may err,
Infallibility of judgment. It seems the sacred (so called) Synod, assumeth
little less unto her self in her determinations: otherwise, how durst she
decree so absolutely as she does touching things reputed indifferent, viz. that
all men in all places must submit unto them without exception, or limitation.
Except she could infallibly determine, that these her ceremonies thus
absolutely imposed, should edify all men at all times, how durst she thus
impose them? To exact obedience in and unto them, whether they offend or offend
not, whether they edify or destroy, were intolerable presumption.
and have erred: But wherein does our facred Synod assume this infallibility, in
her determinations? Wherefore is a Synod, if not to determine? But, of
things reputed indifferent? What else are subject to the constitutions of
men? Good and evil are either directly, or by necessary sequel ordered by
God: these are above humane power. What have men to do, if not with things
indifferent? All necessary things are determined by God indifferent by men
from God, which are as so many particulars, extracts from the generals of God:
These things (says learned Calvin) are indifferent, and in the power of the
Church: Obligatio fine coercione nalla. Reg. Iur.
Either you must allow the Church this, or nothing. But these decrees are
absolute, what laws can be without a command? Non iura dicenda sunt, etc. de
Ciuitat. l. 19. Answ. to the Admon. p. 279. cited also by D. Sparks. p. 14.
The law that ties not, is no law: No more then that (says Austen) which ties
us to evil. But for all men, and all times? How for all? For none (I hope) but
our own, And why not for them? but without exception, and limitation: Do not
thus wrong our Church: Our late Archbishopp (if it were not piacular for you to
read ought of his) could have taught you in his public writings, these five
limitations of enjoined ceremonies: First, that they be not against the word of
God: Aug. Ep. 86.
Secondly, that justification or remission of sins be not attributed to them:
In his enim rebus, de quibus nih^^ certi statuit scriptura diuina, mos populi
Dei vel instituta maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt.
Thirdly, That the Church be not troubled with their multitude: Fourthly, that
they be not decreede as necessary, and not to be changed: And lastly, that men
be not so tied to them, but that by occasion they may be omitted so it be
without offense and contempt, you see our limits: Li^ius Decad. 4. l. 4.
but your fear is in this last, contrary to his. He stands upon offense in
omitting, you in using: As if it were a just offense to displease a beholder,
Nulla lex satis commoda omnibus est, id* modo quaeritur, si maiori parti and in
summa prodest.
no offense to displease and violate authority: What law could ever be made to
offend none? Wise Cato might have taught you this, in Liuie, that no law can
be commodious to all: Those lips which preserve knowledge, must impart so
much of it to their hearers, as to prevent their offense: Neither must
Lawgiuers, ever foresee what constructions will be of their laws, but what
ought to be: Those thin^^ which your consistory imposes, may you keep them if
you list? Is not the willing neglect of your own Parlor-decrees punished with
excommunication? And now what is all this to infallibility? The sacred Synod
determines these indifferent rites for decency and comeliness to be used of
those, whom it concerns, therefore it arrogates to it self infallibility: A
conclusion fit for a separatist.

You stumble at the title of sacred: every straw lies in your way; your
Calepine could have taught you that houses, Castles, religious businesses, old
age it self, Cum consedissent sancti and religiosi Episcopi. Bin. Tom. 1. p.
239. Sancta Synod. Carthagi. 4. sub Anastasio. 553. Sancta and Pacifica Synod
Antiocben. 1. p. 420.
have this style given them: And Virgill (vittasque resoluit, sacrati capitis)
no Epithete is more ordinary to Councelles and Synods: The reason whereof may
be fetched from that inscription of the Elibertine Synod; of those nineteen
Bishops is said: When the holy and religious Bishops were set: How few
Councels have not had this Title? To omit the late; The holy Synod of Carthage,
under Anastasius: Sancta dei and Apostolica Synodus 413.
The holy and peaceable Synod at Antioch: The holy Synod of God and
Apostolical, Peruenit ad sanctam synodum can. Nic. 18. 309.
at Rome under Julius. The holy and great Sinode at Nice: And not to be
endless: The holy Synod of Laodicea (though but provincial). What do these
Idle exceptions argue but want of greater? Sancta synod. La^dicena. 288.


SECTION. XXXIII.
Sins sold in our Courts.
SOme great men when they have done ill, outface their shame with enacting
Laws to make their sins lawful. Sep.
While you thus charge our practice, you bewray your own: Dispensations with
the laws of God and sins of men.
Who having separated from Gods Church, To let pass your Ecclesiastical
consistories wherein sins and absolutions from them, are as venall and saleable
as at Rome. Is it not a law of the Eternal God, that the Ministers of the
Gospel, the Bishops or Elders should be apt and able to teach? 1. Tim 3* 2.
Tit. 1. 9. and is it not their grievous sin to be unapt hereunto. Esa 56. 10
11. And. yet who know-not that the Patrons amongst you present, that the
Bishops institute, the Archdeacons induct, the Churces recei^e and the Laws
both Civil and Ecclesiastical allow and justify Ministers unapt and v^able to
teach. G. Ioh. Trou. and Exco. at Amste. Insufficiency and (...) reside^cy of
Ministers.
devise slanders to color your sin: We must be shameful, that you may
be innocent: You load our Ecclesiastical consistories with a shameless
reproach: Far be it from us to justify any man's personal sins; yet it is
safer sinning to the better part: Fie on these odious comparisons: sins as
saleable as at Rome? who knows not that, to be the Mart of all the world?
Periuries, murders, treasons are there bought and sold: when ever in ours? The
Popes Cofers can easily confute you alone: What tell you us of these, let me
tell you: Money is as fit an advocate in a consistory, as favor or malice:
These, some of yours have complained of, as bitterly, as you of ours. As if we
liked the abuses in Courts: as if corrupt executions of wholesome laws must be
imputed to the Church, whose wrongs they are. No less heinous, nor more true
is that which follows. True Elders (not yours) should be indeed (...): This
we call for, as vehemently (not so tumultuously) as your selves.

That they should feed their flocks with word and doctrine, we require more
then you: That Patrons present, Insufficiency and non residency of Ministers.
Bishops institute, Archdeacons induct some, which are unable, we grant and
bewail: But that our Church-lawes justify them, Sep.
we deny, and you slander? Is it not a law of the eternal God that the
Elders should feed the flock over which they are set, laboring amongst them
in the word and doctrine? Act. 20. 28. 1. Pet: 5. 1. 2. and is it not sin to
omit this duty?
For our law (if you know not) requires, that every one to be admitted to the
Ministry, should understand the Articles of Religion, not only as they are
compendiously set down in the Creed, but as they are at large in our book of
Articles; neither understand them only, but be able to prove them sufficiently
out of the scripture, and that not in English only, but in Latin also: This
competency would prove him (for knowledge) (...): If this be not performed,
blame the persons, clear the law. Profound Master Hooker tells you, that both
arguments from light of nature, Can. 34.
laws, and statutes of Scripture, M. Hooker 5. b.
the Canons that are taken out of ancient Synodes, Eccles. Pol.
the Decrees and constitutions of sincerest times, the sentences of all
Antiquity, and in a word, every man's full consent and conscience, is against
ignorance in them that have charge and cure of souls. And in the same book;
Did any thing more aggrauate the crime of Ieroboams Apostasy, Page 26. 3.
then that he chose to have his Clergy the scumme and refuse of his whole
land: Let no man spare to te^l it them, they are not faithful toward God;
that burden wilfully his Church, with such swarms of unworthy creatures:
Neither is it long, since a zealous and learned Sermon dedicated to our present
Lord Arch-bishoppe by his own Chaplain, D. Down. of the office and dignity of
the Mi^ist.
has no less taxed this abuse, whether of insufficiency, or negligence
(though with more discretion) then can be expected from your malicious pen:
Learn henceforth not to diffuse crimes to the innocent.

For the rest: Dispensations for pluralities.
your Baal in our dispensations for pluralities, would thus plead for
himself: First he would bid you learn of your Doctor to distinguish of
sins: Sep.
sins (says he) are either controuertible, or manifest: Plead not for Baall.
Your dispensations for Non-residency and pluralities of Benefices, as for two,
three, or more; yea tot quot, as many as a man will hau^e or can get are so
many dispensations with the laws of God, and sins of men. These things are
too impious to be defended, and too manifest to be denied. Counterpoys. p. 179.
if controuertible or doubtful, men ought to bear one with another different
judgment; if they do not, etc. they sin: such is this: if some be resolved,
others doubt: and in whole volumes plead, whether conuenience, or necessity:
how could your charity compare these with sins euicted? Secondly, he would
tell you that these dispensations are intended and directed, not against the
offense of God, but the danger of humane laws: not securing from sin, but
from loss: But, for both these points of Non-residence and insufficiency, if
you sought not rather strife then satisfaction: his Majesty's speech in the
Confer. at Hampton Court, might have stayed the course of your quarrelous pen:
No reasonable mind, but would rest in that gracious and Royal determination.
Lastly, Why look you not to your own Elders at home? Did. 34. Can. lector.
even your handful has not avoided this crime of Non-residency: What wonder
is it, Papa potest contra Apostolum dispensare. and Cause. 25. q. 1. Can. sunt
quidam. Dispensatin Euangelio etc. De concess. praebend. Tit. 8. Can. Proposuit
Secundum plenitu^ inem potestatis de iure possumus supra ius dispensare. and
Glossa paulo insr. Papa contra Apostolum dispensat. etc. Sum. confer. p. 52. M.
VVhites discou.
if our world of men have not escaped?

SECTION. XXXIIII.
Our loyalty to Princes cleared, theirs questioned.
YOU that confess our wisdom and honesty, must now plead for your own:
your hope is not more of us, then our fear of you. To depose Kings and dispose
Kingdoms is a proud work: Bar. ag. Gyff. Inconst. of Brow. p. 113
you want power, but what is your will? For excommunication it is clear
enough: While you fully hold that every private man has as much power in this
censure, as the Pastor; and that Princes must be equally subject with them to
these their censures: Let any man now devise, if the Brownists could have a
King, how that King could stand one day vnexcommunicated? Or if this censure
meddle only with his soul, not with his Scepter: How more then credible is
it, Ibid.
that some of your assemblies in Queen Elizabeth's days concluded, Inquir.
into Th.
that she was not (even in our sense) supreme head of the Church, White.
neither had authority to make laws Ecclesiastical in the Church: Sep.
It is well if you will disclaim it: Disposition of Kingdoms and Deposition of
Princes.
But you know your received position; That no one Church is superior to other:
You are wiser and I hope honester then thus to attempt, though that received
maxim amongst you No ceremony, no Bishop; no Bishop, no King; sauors too
strongly of that weed* but what though you be loyal to earthly Kings and their
crowns, and Kingdoms, yet if you be Traitors and rebels against the King of
his Church Jesus Christ, and the scepter of his Kingdom, not suffering him y
his laws and officers to reign over you, but in stead of them do stoop to
Antichrist in his offices and ordinances: shall your loyalty toward men
excuse your treasons against the Lord? though you now cry never so loud we
have no King, but Caesar, Ioh. 19. 15. yet is there an other King, one Jesus,
which shall return, and pass a heavy doom upon the rebellious, Luc. 19. 27.
These enemies which would not have me reign over them, bring them and slay
them before me.
No authority therefore can reuerse this Decree; your will may do it: yea what
better then rebellion appears in your next clause? While you accuse our
loyalty to an earthly King, as treasonable to the King of the Church, Christ
Jesus: If our loyalty be a sin, where is yours? If we be traitors in our
obedience: what do you make of him that commands it? Whether you would have
us each man to play the Rex, and erect a new government, or whether you accuse
us as rebels to Christ in obeying the old: P. 36.
God bless King James from such subjects. But whose is that so unsavory
weed; No Bishop, no King? Know you whom you accuse? let me show you your
adversary; it is King James himself in his Hampton Conference: is there not
now suspicion in the word? surely you had cause to fear that the King would
prove no good subject: Belike, not to Christ: What do you else in the next,
but proclaim his opposition to the King of KINGS? or ours in not opposing his?
As if we might say with the Israelites. Es. 36. 13.
O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have ruled us: If we would admit each
of your Elders to be so many Kings in the Church, we should stoop under
Christ's ordinances: Show us your Commission, and let it appear, whether we be
enemies, or you usurpers; Alas, you both refuse the rule of his true Deputy,
and set up false; Let this fearful doom of Christ light where it is most
due: Even so let thine enemies perish O Lord.

SECTION. XXXV.
Errors of Free Will, etc. fained upon the Church of England.
Go on to slander: Even that which you say you will not speak, Sep.
you do speak with much spite and no truth: Parting stakes with God in
con^ersion.
What has our Church to do with errors of universal grace or freewill:
Errors which her Articles do flatly oppose: Not to speak of the error of
universal grace, and consequently, of freewil that grows on apace amongst
you, what do you else but put in for a part with God in conversion though not
through freedom of will, yet in a devised Ministry, the means of conversion:
it being the Lords peculiar as well to appoint the outward Ministry of
conversion, as to give the inward grace.
what shamelessness is this? Is she guilty even of that which she condemns?
if some few private judgments shall conceive, or bring forth an error, shall
the whole Church do penance? would God that wicked and heretical Anabaptisme,
did not more grow upon you then those errors upon us: you had more need to
defend, then accuse: But see Christian Reader, how this man dragges in crimes
upon us, as Cacus did his Oxen: We do (forsooth) part stakes with God in our
conversion: wherein? in a devised Ministry: the means of conversion; well
fetched about: There may be a Ministry without a conversion; and (econuerso)
There may be a conversion without a Ministry: Where now are the stakes
parted? yet thus we partstakes (with the Apostle) that we are Gods
fellow laborers in this great work: He has separated us to it, and joined
us with him in it; it is he (as we have proved) that has devised our
Ministry: yea your self shall prove it: it is his peculiar to appoint the
outward Ministry, that gives the inward grace. But has not God given inward
grace, 1. Cor. 3. 9. (...).
by our outward Ministry? Your hearts shall be our witnesses: What will follow
therefore, but that our Ministry is his peculiar appointment?

SECTION. XXXVI.
Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
OUR Kneeling you derive (like a good Herald) from the error of
Transubstantiation: but to set down the descent of this pedigree; will trouble
you: we do utterly deny it, and challenge your proof: De Consecr. d. 2. Ego
Bereng. Apol.
How new a fiction Transubstantiation is, appears out of Berengaries
recantation to Pope Nicholas: Sep.
The error was then so young, it had not learned to speak; Where (say you)
are those rotten heaps of Transubstantiating of bread?
show us the same novelty in our kneeling: Till of late men held not the bread
to be God; of old they have held it sacred: This is the gesture of reverence in
our prayer at the receite, as Master Burgess well interpreted it, not of
Idolatrous adoration of the bread. And where, say I, learned you your devout
kneeling to or before the bread, but from that error of Transubstantiation? Yea
what less can it insinuate, then either that, or some other the like
Idolatrous conceit. If there were not something more in the bread and wine
then in the water at Baptism, or in the word read or preached, Why should such
solemn kneeling be so severely pressed at that time, rather then upon the
other occasions: And well and truly have your own men affirmed that it were
far less sin, and appeareance of an Idolatry that is nothing so gross, to
tie men in their prayers, to kneel before a Crucifixe then before the bread
and wine, and the reason follows, for that, papists commit an Idolatry far*
more gross and odious in worshipping the bread, then in worshipping any other
of their Images or Idols whatsoever. Apol of the Min. of Lincoln. Dioc. part.
1. page 66.
This was most-what in the elevation: the abolishing whereof cleares us of this
imputation: you know we hate this conceit, why do you thus force wrongs upon
the innocent? Neither are we alone in this use: The Church of Bohemie allows,
and practices it: and why is this error less palpable in the wafers of
Geneua? If the King should offer us his hand to kiss, we take it upon our
kneees: how much more when the King of heaven gives us his son in these
pledges? But if there were not something more then just reverence, why do we
solemnly kneel at the Communion not at Baptism? Can you find no difference?
In this (besides that there is both a more lively and feeling signification of
the thing represented) we are the parties, but in the other, witnesses: This
therefore I dare boldly say; that if your partner M. Smith should ever (which
God forbid) persuade you to rebaptise, your fittest gesture (or any others at
full age) would be to receive that Sacramental water, kneeling: How glad you
are to take all scraps, that fall from any of ours for your advantage? would to
God this observation of your malicious gatherings would make all our reverend
brethren w^ary of their censures: Surely, no idolatry can be worse then that
Popish (...). The Bread, and the Crucifixe, strive for the hier place; if we
should therefore be so tied to kneel before the bread, as they are tied to
kneel before the Crucifixe, their sentence were just: They adore the
Crucifixe, not we the bread; they pray to the Crucifixe, not we to the bread,
they direct their devotions (at the best) by the Crucifixe to their Savior,
we do not so by the bread, we kneel no more to the bread, then to the
Pulpit when we join our prayers with the Ministers: But our quarrel is not
with them; you that can approve their judgments in dislike, might learn to
follow them in approbation, and peaceable Communion with the Church: if there
be a galled place you will be sure to light upon that, Your charity is good:
whatsoever your wisdom be.

SECTION. XXXVII.
Whether our Ordinary and Seruice-Booke, be made Idolles by us.
YET more Idolatry? Sep.
And which is more, New, and strange; Adoring of Images.
such (I dare say) as will never be found in the two first Commandments, To let
pass your devout kneeling unto your Ordinary when you take the Oath of
Canonical obedience, or receive absolution at his hands, which (as the maine
actions are religious) must needs be religious adoration, what is the adoring
of your truly humane (though called Divine) seruice-booke in and by which you
worship God, as the Papists do by their Images? If the Lord Jesus in his
testament have not commanded any such book, it is accursed and abominable if
you think he have, show us the place where, that we may know it with you. or
manifest unto us that ever the Apostles used themselves or commended to the
Churches after them any such seruice-booke. Was not the Lord in the Apostles
time, and Apostolic Churches purely and perfectly worshipped, when the
Officers of the Church in their ministration manifested the spririt of prayer
which they had received according to the present necessities and occasions of
the Church, before the least parcel of this patchery came into the world. And
might not the Lord now be also purely and perfecty worshipped though this
printed Image, with the painted and carved Images, were sent back to Rome, yea
or cast to hell from whence both they and it came? Speak in your self, might
not the Lord be entirely worshipped with pure and holy worship, though none
other book but ye holy Scriptures were brought into the Church: If yea (as who
can deny it that knows what the worship of God means) what then does your
seruice-booke there. The word of God is perfect and admits of none addition.
Cursed be he that adds to the word of the Lord, and cursed be that which is
added, and so be your great Idol the Communion Book, though like
Nabuchadnezzars Image some part of the matter be gold and silver, which is
also so much the more detestable by how much it is the more highly advanced
amongst you.
Behold here two new Idols, Our Ordinary, and our Seruice-booke, a speaking
Idol, and a written Idol. Calecute has one strange Deity the devil, Siberia
many, whose people worship every day what they see first. Rome has many merry
Saints: but Saint Ordinary, and Saint Seruice-booke, were never heard of till
your Canonization. In earnest, do you think we make our Ordinary an Idol?
what else? You kneel devoutly to him when you receive either the Oath or
absolution. This must needs be religious adoration: is there no remedy? You
have twice kneeled to our Vice-Chauncellour, when you were admitted to your
degree; you have often kneeled to your parents, and Godfathers to receive a
blessing, did you make Idols of them? the party to be ordained kneeles under
the hand of the presbitery: does he religiously adore them? Of old they were
wont to kiss the hands of these Bishops, so they did to Baal: God and our
Superiors have had ever one and the same outward gesture: Paulus. in vitae
Ambros.
Though here, not the Agent is so much regarded; as the action: if your
Ordinary would have suffered you to have done this piece of Idolatry, you had
never separated.

But the true God-Bell and Dragon of England is the
humane-Diuine-Seruice-Booke: Let us see what ashes or lumpes of pitch this
Daniel brings: We worship God in and by it, as Papists do by their Images: In
deed we worship God in, and by the prayers contained in it: Why should we not?
Tell me why is it more idolatry for a man to worship God in, and by a prayer
read, or got by heart, then by a prayer conceived? I utter both, they are both
mine, if the heart speak them both, feelingly and devoutly, where lies the
Idol? In a conceived prayer, is it not possible for a man's thought to stray
from his tongue? in a prayer learned by heart, or read, is it not possible for
the heart to join with the tongue? If I pray therefore in spirit, and heartily
utter my desires to God, whether in mine own words, or borrowed (and so made
mine) what is the offense? But (say you) if the Lord Jesus in his Testament
have not commanded any such Book, it is accursed, and abominable: But say I:
if the Lord Jesus has not any where forbidden such a book, it is not accursed
nor abominable: Show us the place where, that we may know it with you: Nay,
but I must show you where the Apostles used any such seruice-booke: show you
me, where the Apostles baptized in a Basen: or where they received women to
the Lords table: Passag. twixt clifton an^ Smith.
(for your (...) 1. Cor. II. will not serve) show me that the Bible was
distinguished into Chapters and verses in the Apostles time: AEgypti^ vbi laute
epulati sunt, post caenam id faciunt.
show me that they ever celebrated the Sacrament of the Supper at any other
time then evening, Socr. l. 5. 21.
as your Anabaptists now do: show me that they used one prayer before their
Sermons always, another after, that they preached ever upon a Text: where they
preached over a Table: or lastly, show me where the Apostles used that prayer
which you made before your last prophecy; and a thousand such circumstances,
What an idle plea is this from the Apostolic times? And if I should tell you
that Saint Peter celebrated with the Lords prayer, you will not believe it:
Platia. initio.
yet you know the History. But let the Reader know that your quarrel is not
against the matter, but against the book, not as they are prayers, but as
stinted, or prescribed: Wherein, all the world besides your selves are
Idolaters: Behold all Churches that were, or are, are partners with us in this
crime. Oh Idolatrous Geneua, and all French, Scottish, Calvin. Ep. ad Protect.
Angl. Ep. 87.
Danish, Dutch Churches: All which both have their set prayers with us, and
approve them. Quod ad formulam, etc. as concerning a form of pra^ers and rites
Ecclesiastical (says reverend Calvin): I do greatly allow that it should be
set and certain, from which it should not be lawful for Pastors in their
function to depart. Judge now of the spirit of these bold controllers, that
dare thus condemn all Gods Churches, through the world as Idolatrous: but
since you call for Apostolic examples: did not the Apostle Paul use one set
form of apprecations, of benedictions? What were these but lesser prayers? The
quantity varies not the kind: Will you have yet auncienter precedents? The
Priest was appointed of old to use a set form under the law, Number. 6. 23. so
the people, Deuteronomy. 26. 3. 4, 5. etc. 15. Both of them a stinted Psalm for the
Sabbath, Ps. 92. What says your Doctor to these? Because the Lord (says he)
gave forms of prayers and Psalms, Answ. to the Minist. Counterp 237.
therefore the Prelates may: Can we think that Jeroboam had so slender a
reason for his Calves? Mark (good Reader) the shifts of these men: This
aunswerer calls for examples, and will abide no stinting of prayers, because
we show no patterns from Scripture: We do show patterns from Scripture, and
now their Doctor says, God appointed it to them of old, must we therefore do
it? So, whether we bring examples or none, we are condemned: But Mast. Doctor,
whom I beseech you should we follow, but God in his own services? If God have
not appointed it, you cry out upon inventions: if God have appointed it,
(...), we may not follow it: show then where (...) enjoined an ordinary service
to himself, that was not ceremonial (as this plainly is not): which should
not be a direction for us? But if stinting our prayers be a fault (for as yet
you meddle not with our blasphemous Counterp 236.
Collects) it is well that the Lords prayer it self bears us company, and is
no small part of our Idolatry: Omnibus aricubus gr^gis (id est) Apostolis suis
dedit morem orandi, dimitte nob^s etc. Aug. Ep. 89.
Which, though it were given principally as a rule to our prayers, yet since
the matter is so heavenly, and most wisely framed to the necessity of all
Christian hearts, to deny that it may be used entirely in our Saviors words,
is no better then a fanaticall curiousness: yield one and all; for if the
matter be more divine, yet the stint is no less faulty: This is not the lest
part of our patcherie: except you unrip this, the rest you cannot. But might
not God be purely and perfectly worshipped without it? Tell me, Might not God
be purely and perfectly worshipped without Churches, without houses, without
garments, yea without hands or feet? In a word, could not God be purely
worshipped, if you were not? Yet would you not seem a superfluous creature:
speak in your self: Might not God be entirely worshipped with pure and holy
worship, though there were no other books in the world, but the Scripture? If
yea, as who can deny it, that knows what the worship of God means? What
then do the Fathers and Doctors, and learned Interpreters? To the fire with
all those curious arts and volumes, as your Predecessors called them: Yea let
me put you in mind, that God was purely and perfectly worshipped by the
Apostolic Church before ever (...) Testament was written: See therefore the
idleness of your proofs; God may be served without a prescription of prayer,
but (if all Reformed Churches in Christendom err not) better with it: The
word of God is perfect, and admits no addition: Cursed were we, if we should
add ought to it: Cursed were that which should be added: But cursed be they
that take ought from it, and dare say, ye shall not pray thus, OUR FATHER, etc.
Do we offer to make our prayers Canonical, do we obtrude them as parts of
Gods word? Why cavil you thus? Why does the same prayer written add to the
word, which spoken adds not? Because conceived prayer is commanded, not the
other: But first, not your particular prayer: Secondly, without mention either
of conception, or memory, God commands us to pray in spirit, and with the
heart: These circumstances only as they are deduced from his Generals, so are
ours: But whence soever it please you to fetch our Book of public Prayer,
from Rome or Hell; or to what Image soever you please to resemble it: Let
moderate spirits hear what the precious Jewel of England says of it: We
have come as near as we could to the Church of the Apostles, Apolog. p. 170.
Accessimus etc.
etc. neither only have we framed our doctrine, but also our Sacraments, and
the form of public prayers according to their Rites and Institutions. H Bar.
ag. Gyff.
Let no Jew now object Swines-flesh to us: He is no judicious man (that I may
omit the mention of Cranmer, Buc^r Ridley, Tailor, etc. some of whose hands
were in it, all whose voices were for it) with whom one Jewel will not
ouer-weigh ten thousand Separatists.

SECTION. XXXVIII.
Marriage not made a Sacrament by the Church of England.
HOw did confirmation escape this number? how did Ordination? Sep.
it was your ouer-sight, Multitudes of Sacraments. The number of sacraments
seems greater amongst you by one at the least, then Christ has left in his
Testament, and that is Marriage; which howsoever you do not in express
terms call a sacrament, (no more did Christ and the Apostles call Baptism
and the supper sacraments,) yet do you in truth create it a sacrament, in the
administration and use of it. There are the parties to be married and their
marriage, representing Christ and his Church, and their spiritual Union: to
which mystery, says the Oracle of your seruice-Booke expressly, God has
consecrated them: there is the Ring hallowed by the said s^ruice-Booke,
(whereon it must be laid) for the Element; there are the words of
consecration; In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost; there is the place, the Church; the time usually, the Lords day; the
Minister, the Parish Priest. And being made as it is, a part of Gods worship,
and of the Ministers office, what is it if it be not a sacrament? It is no part
of prayer, or preaching, and with a sacrament it has the greatest
consimilitude, but an Idol I am sure it is in the celebration of it, being
made a Ministerial duty and part of Gods worship, without warrant, call it
by what name you will.
I fear, not your charity: some things seem, and are not: such is this your
number of our Sacraments: you will needs have us take in marriage into this
rank: why so? we do not (you confess) call it a Sacrament as the vulgar,
mis-interpreting Paul's Mysterium, Ep. 5. why should we not if we so esteemed
it? wherefore serve names, but to denotate the nature of things? If we were not
ashamed of the opinion, we could not be ashamed of the word: No more (say
you) did Christ and his Apostles call Baptism and the Supper, Sacraments; but
we do, and you with us: See now whether this clause do not confute your last:
where has Christ ever said, There are two Sacraments? Yet you dare say so:
what is this but in your sense an addition to the word: yea, we say flatly,
there are but two: yet we do (you say) in truth create it a Sacrament: how
often, and how resolutely has our Church maintained against Rome, that none but
Christ immediately can create Sacraments? If they had this advantage against us,
how could we stand? How wrongful is this force, to fasten an opinion upon our
Church which she has condemned? But wherein stands this our creation? It is
true, the parties to be married, and their marriage represent Christ, and his
Church, and their spiritual union: Beware least you strike God through our
sides: what has Gods spirit said, either less, or other then this? Ephe. 5.
25. 26. 27. and. 32. Does he not make Christ the husband, the Church his
spouse? Does he not from that sweet conjunction, and the effects of it: argue
the dear respects that should be in marriage? Or what does the Apostle allude
elesewhere unto, when he says (as Moses of Eve) we are flesh of Christ's flesh,
and bone of his bone? And how famous amongst the ancient is that resemblance of
Eve taken out of Adams side sleeping, to the Church taken out of Christ's side
sleeping on the Cross? Since marriage therefore so clearly represents this
mystery: and this use is holy and sacred: what error is it, to say that marriage
is consecrated to this mystery? But what is the Element: the Ring; These things
agree not; you had before made the two parties to be the matter of this
Sacrament? What is the matter of the Sacrament, but the Element? If they be the
matter, they are the Element; and so not the Ring; both cannot be; if you will
make the two parties to be but the receivers; how does all the mystery lie in
their representation? Or if the Ring be the Element, then all the mystery must
be in the Ring, not in the parties: Labor to be more perfect, ere you make
any more new Sacraments: but this Ring is laid upon the seruice-booke: why
not? For readiness, not for holiness: Nay, but it is hallowed (you say) by
the book: If it be a Sacramental Element, it rather hallowes the book, then
the book it: you are not mindful enough for this trade: But what exorcismes
are used in this hallowing? Or who ever held it any other then a civil pledge
of fidelity? Then follow the words of consecration: I pray you, what
difference is there betwixt hallowing, and consecration? The Ring was hallowed
before by the book; now it must be consecrated: How idly? by what words? In
the name of the Father, etc. These words you know are spoken after the Ring is
put on: was it ever heard of, that a Sacramental Element was consecrated after
it was applied? see how ill your slanders are digested by you: The place is
the Church, the time the Lords day, the minister is the actor, and is it not
thus in all other reformed Churches as well as ours. Behod, we are not alone: al
Churches in the world (if this will do it) are guilty of three Sacraments: Tell
me, would you not have marriage solemnized publicly? Br. state of Christians.
172.
You cannot mislike: though your founder seems to require nothing here but
notice given to witnesses, and then to bed: Well, if public; you account it
withal, a grave and weighty business: therefore such, as must be sanctified
by public prayer: What place is fitter for public prayer then the Church?
Who is fitter to offer up the public prayer, then the Minister? who should
rather join the parties in marriage, then the public deputy of that God,
who solemnly joined the first couple? who rather then he which in the name of
God may best bless them? The prayers which accompany this solemnity are parts
of Gods worship, not the contract it self: This is a mixed action, therefore
compounded of Ecclesiastical and civil: imposed on the Minister, not upon
necessity but expedience: neither essential to him, but accidentally, annexed,
for greater conuenience. These two frivolous grounds have made your cavil
either very simple, or very wilful.

SECTION. XXXIX.
Commutation of Penance in our Church.
SEe if this man be not hard driven for accusations when he is feign to
repeat over the very same crime, Sep.
which he largely urged before: Power of Iudulgences. Your Court of faculties
from whence your dispensations and tolerations for non-residencie, and
plurality of Benefices are had* together with your commuting of penances and
absoluing one man for another. Take away this power from the Prelates and you
main the beast in a lim.
All the world will know that you want variety, when you send in these
twise-sodde Coleworts: Somewhat yet we find new, Commutation of Penance; Our
Courts would tell you, that here is nothing dispensed with, but some ceremony
of shame in the confession: which in the greater sort is exchanged (for a
common benefit of the poor) into a pecuniary mulct; yet (say they) not so, as
to abridge the Church of her satisfaction, by the confession of the offender:
and if you grant the ceremony devised by them, why do you find fault that it
is altered, or commuted by them? As for absolution, you have a spite at it,
because you sought it, and were repulsed: If the censures be but their own (so
you hold) why blame you the menaging of them in what manne^ seems best to the
authors: This power is no more a limme of the Prelacy, then our Prelacy is that
beast in the Revelation: and our Prelacy holds it self no more Saint John's
beast, then it holds you Saint Paul's beast. Phil. 3. 2

SECTION. XL.
Oath ex officio.
I Ask of auricular Confession; you send me to our High Commission Court: Sep.
these two are much alike: Necessity of Confessions. In your high Commission
Court very absolute, where by the Oath Ex Officio men are constrained to accuse
themselves of such things as whereof no man will or can accuse the^; what
necessity is laid upon men in this case, let your prisons witness D. Cosens his
Apol.
But here is also very absolute necessity of confession: True; but as in a case
of justice. not of strife to clear a truth, not to obtain absolution: to a
bench of Judges, not to a Priests ear; Here are too many ghostly Fathers for
an auricular Confession: But you will mistake; it is enough against us, that men
are constrained in these Courts to confess against themselves: why name you
these Courts only? Even in others also oaths are urged, not only (ex officio
merclnario, but nobili): The honourablest Court of Star Chamber gives an oath
in a Criminal case to the Defendant; So does the Chancerie, and Court of
Requests: Shortly to omit foreign examples how many insta^ces have you of this
like proceeding in the common laws of this land? But withal you might learn
that no Enquiry Ex officio may be thus made but upon good grounds, as fame,
scandal, vehement presumption, etc. going before, and giving just cause of
suspicion: Secondly, D. Andr. determ. de Iure iurando (...).
that this proceeding is not allowed in any case of crime, whereby the life, or
limbs of the examined party, may be endangered: nor yet, where there is a
just suspicion of future perjury upon such inforcement: Number. 5. 12.
Thus is the suspected wife urged to clear her honesty by oath: Josh. 7. 19.
Thus the Master of the house must clear his truth, 1. Sam. 14 43.
Exodus 22. 8. Thus Achan and Jonathan are urged to be their own accusers, G.
John's. and M. Crud. Trouble at Amsterd p. 132.
though not by Oath: But if perhaps any sinister course be taken by any
corrupt Iusticer in their proceedings: must this be imputed to the Church? Look
you to your petty-Courts at home; Non potest quis in vna causa ^^dem momento
duas portare personas, vt in eodem iudicio and accusator sit and i^dex. Optat.
Mileuit. l. 7.
which some of your own have compared in these courses, not only to the
Commission-Court of England, but to the Inquisition of Spain: See there your
Pastor defending himself to be both an accuser and Judge in the same cause:
See their proceedings Ex Officio without Commission: and if your prisons cannot
witness it, your excommunications may.

SECTION. XLI.
Holy Days how observed in the Church of England.
WE have not lost, but cast away the Idolatrous shrines of Saints: Sep.
their days we retain; theirs, Prosite of Pilgr^mages. Though you have lost
the shrines of saints, yet you retain their days and those holy as the Lords
day, and that with good profit to your spiritual carnal Courts, from such as
profane them with the least and most lawful labor, notwithstanding the
liberty of the six days labor, which the Lord has given: and as much would
the Masters of these Courts be stirred at the casting of these saints days out
of the Calender, as were the masters of the possessed maid, when the spirit of
diuinatio^ was cast out of her, Act. 16. 19.
not for worship of them, which our Church condemns, but partly for
commemoration of their high deserts, and excellent examples: partly for
distinction: indeed therefore Gods days, not theirs: their praises redound to
him: show us where we implore them, where we consecrate days to their
service: The maine end of Holy Days is for the service of God, Socr. l. 5. c.
21.
and some, Est. 9. 17.
as Socrates sets down of old (quo se a laborum contentione relaxent) for
relaxation from labor: Nehem. 12. 27.
if such days may be appointed by the Church (as were the Holy Days of Purim,
1. Mac. 4 29.
of the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, Ioh. 10 23.
the dedication of the Temple) whose names should they rather bear (though but
for mere distinction) then the blessed Apostles of Christ: August. Ep. 44.
But this is a color only: Sc^as a Christianis Catholicis n^llum col^
mortuorum, nihil demque vt numen adorari quod sit factum and conditum a Deo
for you equally condemn those days of Christ's birth, Ascension,
Circumcision, Resurrection, Annunciation, which the Church has beyond all
memory celebrated: what then is our fault? We keep these holy as the Lords
day: in the same manner, though not in the same degree: Quae toto orb
terrarum, etc. sicuti quoque Do^^ini passio and resurrectio and in caelum
ascensus and aduentus spiritus sancti an niuersaria solemnitate celebrantur.
Aug. Ep. 118.
Indeed, we come to the Church, and worship the God of the Martyrs and
Saints: is this yet our offense? No: but we abstain from our most lawful
labor in them; True, yet not in conscience of the day, but in obedience to the
Church: If the Church shall indict a solemn fast: do not you hold it
contemptuous to spend that day in lawful labor; notwithstanding that liberty
of the six days which God has given? Why shall that be lawful in a case of
deiection, which may not in praise and exultation? If you had not loved to
cauil, you would rather have accepted the Apology, or excuse of our fister
Churches in this behalf, Churches of Fr. and Flanders in Harm. confess. Th.
VVhites Discover. p. 19.
then aggrauated these uncharitable pleas of your own: yet even in this your
own Synagogue at Amsterdame (if we may believe your own) is not altogether
guiltless: your hands are still and your shoppes shut upon festival days;
But we accuse you not: would God this were your worst: The Masters of our
Courts would tell you, that they would not care so much for this dispossession,
as that it should be done by such coniurers as your self.

SECTION. XLII.
Our approbation of an unlearned Ministry disproued.
YOur want of quarrels makes you still run over the same complaints: Sep.
which if you redouble a thousand times will not become just, Constrained and
approved ignorance.
may become tedious: God knows how far we are from approving an vnleared
Ministry: If an ignorant and unpreaching Ministry be approved amongst you,
and the people constrained by all kind of violence to submit unto it, and
therewith to rest (as what is more usual throughout the whole Kingdom) then
let no modest man once open his mouth to deny that ignorance is constrained and
approved amongst you. Confer. at Hampt.
The protestations of our gracious King, our Bishops, our greatest Patrons of
conformity in their public writings, might make you ashamed of this bold
assertion: we do not allow that it should be, we bewail that it will be: our
number of Parishes compared with our number of Divines, will soon show, that
either many Parishes must have none, or some Divines must have many
Congregations, or too many Congregations must have scarce Diuine-incumbents:
Our Dread Sovereign has promised a medicine for this disease: But withal
tells you that Jerusalem was not built all on a day. The violence you speak of
is commonly in case of wilful contempt, not of honest and peaceable desire of
further instruction, or in supposall of some tolerable ability in the ministry
forsaken: we do heartily pray for laborers into this harvest: we do wish
that all Israel could prophecy: we publish the Scriptures, we Preach,
Catechize, Write, and (Lord thou know) how many of us* would do more, if
we knew what more could be done, for the information of thy people, English
service.
and remedy of this ignorance which this adversary reproues us to approve. Sep.


We doubt not but the service said in our Parish-Churches, Unknown devotion.
is as good a service to God, If the service said or sung in the parish Church
may be called devotion, then sure there is good store of unknown devotion, the
greatest part in most parishes, neither knowing nor regarding what is said, nor
wherefore.
as the extemporarie devotions in your Parlors: But it is an unknown devotion,
you say: Through whose fault? The Readers, or the Hearers, or the matter?
Distinct reading you cannot deny to the most Parishes: the matter, is easy
Prayers, and English Scriptures: if the hearers be regardlesse, or in some
things dull of conceit, lay the fault from the service to the men: All yours
are free from ignorance, free from wandering conceits: we annoy you not, some
knowledge is no better then some ignorance, and carelessness is no worse then
mis-regard.

SECTION. XLIII.
Penan^es enjoined in the Church of England.
Coming now to the Vaults of Popery, I ask for their Penances and Purgatory;
those Popish penances, Sep.
which presumptuous Confessors enjoined as satisfactorie, What are your
sheete-penances for Adultery, and all your pursepenances for all other sins?
then which though some worse in popery, yet none more common. Sacco and cineri
incubare, corpus fordibus obscurare, presbyteris aduolui, and aris Dei
adganiculari. tert. de p^^it.
and meritorious upon their bold absolutions: You send me to Sheet-penances and
Purse-penances, the one, ceremonious corrections of shame, enjoined and
adjoined to public confessions of uncleanness, for the abasing of the
offender, and hate of the sin: such like, as the ancient Church thought good
to use for this purpose. Hence they were appointed (as Tertullian speaks) in
sackcloth and ashes, to crave the prayers of the Church, to besmeare their body
with filthynesse, to throw themselves down before Gods minister, and Altar;
not to mention other more hard, and perhaps, no less ancient Rites; and
hence, were those five stations of the Penitent, whereby he was at last
received into the body of his wonted Communion: Can on. Greg. Neocaesar. (...)
etc.
The other, a pecuniarie mulct imposed upon some (not all, you foulely slander
us) less heinous offenses; as a penalty, not as a penance; I hope you deny
not: Sodomy, Murder, Robbery, and (which you would not) theft it self, is
more deeply avenged: But did ever any of ours urge either sheet or purse as
the remedy of Purgatory, or inioyne them, to avoid those infernal pains?
unless we do so, our penances are not Popish, and our answerer is idle.

SECTION. XLIIII.
The practices of the Church of England, concerning the Funerals of the dead.
YOur next accusation is more ingeniously malicious; Sep.
our Doctrine you grant contrary to Purgatory: Touching Purgatory, though
you deny the Doctrine of it and teach the contrary, yet how well your practice
suits with it, let it be considered in these particulars. Your absoluing of men
dying excommunicate after they be dead, and before they may have Christian
burial.
but you will fetch it out of our practice, that we may build that which we
destroy: Let us therefore purge our selves from your Purgatory: We absolve
men dying Excommunicate; A rare practice, and which yet I have not lived to
see: but if Lawmakers contemn rare occurrents, surely accusers do not: Once
is too much of an evil: Mark then, Do we absolve his Soul after the
departure? No, what has the body to do with Purgatory? Yet for the body: do
we by any absolution seek to quit it from sin? Nothing less, reason it
self gives us that it is incapable either of sin or pardon; To lie unburied
or to be buried unseemly, is so much a punishment, that the Heathens objected
it (though upon the havoc and fury of War) to the Christians: Aug. de
Ciuitat. l. 1.
as an argument of Gods neglect. All that authority can do to the dead Rebel,
is to put his carcass to shame, and deny him the honor of seemly sepulture:
Athenienses decreuerunt ne siquis Se intersecisset sepeliretur in agro Attico.
etc.
Thus does the Church to those which will die in wilful contempt. Those
Grecian Virgins that feared not death, were yet restrained with the fear of
shame after death: it was a real not imaginary curse of Iezabel. The dogs
shall eat Iezabel. Now the absolution (as you call it, by an improper, but
malicious name) is nothing else, but a liberty given by the Church (upon
repentance signified of the fault of the late offender) of all those external
rites of decent Funeral: Death it self is capable of inequality, and
unseemliness: Suppose a just Excommunication: What reason is it, that he
which in his life and death would be as a Pagan, should be as a Christian in
his burial? Sep.
What is any, or all this to Purgatory.

The next intimation of our Purgatory, Your Christian Burial in holy ground
(if the party will be at the charges;) your ringing of hallowed bells for the
soul: your singing the Corpse to the grave from the Church style; your praying
over or for the dead especially in these words, That God would hasten his
kingdom, that we with this our brother (though his life were never so wretched
and death desperate) and all other departed in the true faith of thy holy name
may have our perfect consummation both in body and soul.
is our Christian burial, in the place, in the manner: The place Holy ground,
the Church, Churchyard, etc. The manner Ringing, Singing, Praying over the
Corpse. Thus therefore you argue, we bury the body in the Church, or
Churchyard, etc. therefore we hold a Purgatory of the Soul; a proof not
less strange then the opinion: We do neither scorn the carcasses of our
friends, as the old Troglodites: nor with the old Egyptians respect them more,
then when they were informed with a living soul: But we keep a mean course
betwixt both, using them as the remainders of dead men, yet as dead Christians:
and as those which we hope one day to see glorious: Sleeping-places Caemiteria.
We have learned to call no place holy in it self (since the Temple) but some
more holy in their use, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 12.
then others. (...)
The old ((...)) of the Christians, (...)
wherein their bodies slept in peace, were not less esteemed of them, (...)
Splendid ssimae sepulturae tradidit. Eus. l. 7. c. 15 Curatio funeris, conditio
sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt viuorum solatia quam subsidia
mortuorum.
then they are scorned of you. Galienus thought he did them a great favor (and
so they took it) when he gave them the liberty not only of their Churches, but
of their former burying-places. In the same book Eusebius commends Astyrius a
noble Senator for his care, and cost of Marinus his burial. Of all these
Rites of Funeral, and choice of place, we profess to hold with Augustine,
that they are only the comforts of the living, Aug. de Ciuit l. 1. c. 12.
not helps of the dead: yet as Origin also teaches us, we have learned to
honor a reasonable (much more a Christian) soul; Si enim paterna vestis and
annulus anto char. est posteris, nullo modo ipsa spernenda sunt corpora. Aug de
Ciuit. l. 1. c. 13.
and to commit the instrument or case of it honorably to the grave. All this
might have taught our answerer, that we make account of an heaven, of a
resurrection; not of a Purgatory: But we ring hallowed belles for the soul: Do
not those belles hang in hallowed Steeples too? Orig. contr. Cells. l. 8.
and do we not ring them with hallowed ropes? Rationolem animam honorare
didicimus, etc.
What fancy is this? If Papists were so fond of old: their folly and their
belles (for the most part) are both out of date; we call them soule-bels, for
that they signify the departure of the soul, not for that they help the
passage of the soul. This is mere boyes-play: But we pray over, or for the
dead; Do we not sing to him also? Pardon me, I must needs tell you, here is
much spite, and little wit. To pray for the consummation of the glory of all
Gods elect: What is it, but Thy Kingdom come? How vainly do you seek a knot
in a rush, while you cauil at so holy a petition? Go and learn how much
better it is, to call them our Brothers, which are not, in an harmless
ouerweening, and ouer-hoping of charity: then to call them no brothers, which
are in a proud and censorious uncharitableness: you cannot be content to tell
an untruth, but you must face it out: Let any Reader judge how far our
practice in this, has dissented from our doctrine; would to God in nothing
more: Yes (says this good friend) in the most other things; our words
profess, our deeds deny: at once you make us hypocrites, and your selves
Pharisees. Let all the world know, that the English Church at Amsterdam
professes nothing which it practices not: we may not be so holy, or so happy.

Generality is a notable shelter of untruth: Sep.
Many more, Your general doctrines and your particular practices agree in
this, as in the most other things, like Harp and Harrow. In word you profess
many truths, which in deed you deny. These and many mo popish devises (by
others at large discovered to the world) both for pomp and profit, are not
only not rased and buried in the dust, but are advanced amongst you, above all
that is called God.
you say, Popish devises, yet name none, No, you cannot. Advanced above all that
is called God? surely this is a paradoxe of slanders: you meant at once to
shame us with falshoode, and to appose us with Riddles: we say to the highest,
whom have we in heaven but thee? and for earth, your self have granted we
give too much to Princes, (which are earthen Gods) and may come under Paul's
((...)). Either name our Deity, or crave mercy for your wrong: certainly,
though you have not remorse, yet you shall have shame.

SECTION. XLV.
The Churches still retained in England.
THe Majesty of the Romish Petty-gods (I truly told you) was long agone with
Mythra and Serapis, Sep.
exposed to the laughter of the vulgar: You are far from doing to the Romish
Idols, as was done to the Egyptian Idols Mythra and Serapis, whole prie^^s
were expelled their Ministry and Monuments exposed to utter scorn and
desolation, their Temples demolished and raced to the very foundation.
you strain the comparison too far; yet we follow you: Their Priests were
expelled: for (as your Doctor yields) other Actors came upon the same Stage:
others in religion, else it had been no change: Their Ministry and Monuments
exposed to utter scorn: Their Masses, their oblations, their adorations, their
inuocations, their anoylings, their exorcizings, their shrift their
absolutions, their Images, roode loftes, and whatsoever else of this kind: But
the Temples of those old Heathens were demolished and raced: Here is the
quarrel: ours stand still in their proud Majesty: Can you see no difference
betwixt our Churches and their Temples? Socrat. Hist.
The very name it self (if at least you have understood it) Kirk or Church
(which is nothing but an abbreuiation of ((...)) the Lords house) might have
taught you, Eccles. l. 5. c. 16. 7.
that ours were dedicated to God, Bed. h^st. Eccl. l. 1. Cit. Gregor. Ep. Aug
suoc. 30. and Edilbe^toregi c. 32. Contra sibi etc. Sed and H^r^ticoru^ templa
vastata a Constantino. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 63.
and theirs to the Devil, in their false gods: Augustine answers you, as
directly, as if he were in my room: The Gentiles (says he) to their Gods
erected Temples, Aug. de ciuit. l. 8 c. 27.
we not Temples unto our Martyrs, Hocker 5. b. c. 13 Id Aug. contr. Max^min.
as unto Gods, but memorials as unto dead men, whose spirits with God are still
living: These then if they were abused by Popish Idolatry, Arian.
is there no way, Nonne sitemplum etc.
but down with them, down with them to the ground? Optat. Mileuit^n lib. 6.
I. auistis proculdubi^ pallas, Iudicate quid de codic^ bus secistis: Aut
vtr^mque lauate aut, etc. S^ quod tangit aspectus lauandum est, vt parietes.
etc. Videmus rectum, videmus and coelu^ etc. haec a vobis lauari non possunt.
Well fare the Donatists yet, your old friends; they but washed the walls
that were polluted by the Orthodoxe. By the same token that Optatus asks them,
why they did not wash the books, which ours touched, and the heavens which
they looked upon: What, are the very stones sinful? what can be done with
them? The very earth where they should lie on heaps would be unclean: But not
their pollution angers you more, then their proud Majesty: What house can be
too good for the maker of all Things? As God is not affected with state, so is
he not delighted in baseness. If the pomp of the Temple were ceremonial, yet
it leaves this morality behind it, that Gods house should be decent, and what
if goodly? If we did put holiness in the stones, as you do uncleanness, it
might be sin to be costly: Let me tell you, there may be as much pride in a
clay wall as in a carved: Proud Majesty is better then proud baseness: The
stone or clay will offend in neither, Athanas. Apol. Eusebius. de vita Constable.
we may in both: If you love Cottages, the ancient Christians with us, loved
to have Gods house stately, as appears by the example of that worthy Bishop
of Alexandria, and that gracious Constantine, in whose days these sacred piles
began to lift up their heads unto this enuyed height: Otho Fri^ing. l. ^. c. 3.
Take you your own choice, give us ours: let us neither repine, nor scorn at
each other.

SECTION. XLVI.
The Founders and Furnitures of our Churches.
ALl this while I feared you had been in Popish Idolatry, Sep.
now I find you in Heathenish: But your temples especially your Cathedral and
mother Churches stand still in their proud Majesty possessed by Arch Bishops,
and Lordbishops like the Flamins and Archssamins amongst the Gentiles, from
whom they were derived Lumb. lib. 4. d^st. 24. Isid. l. 7. E^imol. cap 12 and
furnished with all manner of pompous and superstitious monuments, as ^arued and
painted Images, massing Copes and surplices, chaunting and Organmusicke, and
many other glorious ornaments of the Romish Harlot, by which her Majesty is
commended to, and admired by the vulgar, so far are you in these respects for
being gone, or fl^d, yea or crept either, out of Babylon.

Theuphilus Ep^s^. cum ^aeteras s^^tuas deorum confi^ngeret, v^am integram
seruari i^^sst. eamque in loco publico e^exit vt Gentiles tempore progrediente
non inficiarentur se ^umsm^di D^us col^sse. (...) Grammat^ us hac dear valded
scruciatus Dixit grauem plagam religioni Gr^corum inct^^^m, quod illa vna
statcia no^ euerteretur. Socrat. l. 5. c. 16.


These our Churches are still possessed by their Flamins, and Arch-Flamins: I
had thought none of our Temples had been so ancient: Certainly I find but
one poor tuinous building, reported to have worn out this long tyranny of
time: For the most, you might have read their age, and their Founders in open
Records: But these were derived from those: surely, the Churches as much as the
men: It is true, the Flamins, and what ever other heathen Priests, were put
down, Christian Bishops were set up: Are these therefore derived from those?
Christianity came in the room of Iudaisme, was it therefore derived from it?
Before you told us, that our Prelacy came from that Antichrist of Rome, now
from the Flamins of the Heathen: Both no less, then either: If you cannot be
true, yet learn to be constant. But what mean you to charge our Churches with
carved and painted Images? It is well you write to those that know them; Why did
you not say we bow our knees to them, and offer incense? perhaps you have
espied, some old dustie statue in an obscure corner, covered over with
Cob-webs, with half a face, and that miserably blemished, or perhaps half a
Crucifixe inuerted in a Church-window, and these you surely noted for English
Idols: no less dangerous glass you might have seen at Geneua, a Church that
hates Idolatry, as much as you do us: What more? Massing copes and Surplices:
some copes (if you will) more Surplices, no Massing: Search your Books again;
you shall find Albes in the Mass, no Surplices: As for Organ-musicke, you
should not have fetched it from Rome, but from Jerusalem: In the Reformed
Church at Middleburgh, Sep.
you might have found this skirt of the Harlot: Now if you be thus* Babylonish
where you repute your selves most Syonlike, and thus confounded in your own
evidence, what defense could you make in the things whereof an adversary would
challenge you: If your light be darkness, how great is your darkness?
which yet you grant at least crept out of Babylon; Judge now (Christian
reader) of the weight of these grand exceptions: and see whether ten thousand
such were able to make us no Church, and argue us not only in Babylon, but to
be Babylon it self: Thus Babilonish we are to you, and thus Sion-like to God:
every true Church is Gods Sion: every Church that holds the foundation is
true, according to that golden rule, Ephesians. 2. 21. Every building that is
coupled together in this corner stone, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord:
No adversary either man or Devil can confound us, either in our evidences, or
their own Challenges: we may be faulty, but we are true: And if the darkness
you find in us be light, how great is our light?

SECTION. XLVII.
On what ground separation or Ceremonies was objected.
HE that leaves the whole Church in a gross and wilful error, Sep.
is an heretic; he that leaves a particular Church for appendances is a
schismaticke: But for that not the separation but the cause makes the
schismaticke; and least you should seem to speak evil of the thing you know
not, and to condemn a cause unheard, you lay down in the next place the
supposed cause of our separation, against which you deal as insufficiently.
And that you pretend to be, none other then your consorting with the Papist in
certain Ceremonies: touching which and our separation in regard of them thus
you write.

M. H. If you have taken but the least knowledge of the grounds of our
judgment and practice, how dare you thus abuse both us and the reader, as if
the only or chief ground of our separation were your popish ceremonies* but
if you go only by guess having never so much as read over one treatise
published in our defense, and yet stick not to pass this your censorious doom
both upon us and it; I leave it to the reader to judge whether you have been
more lavish of your censure or credit. Most unjust is the censure of a cause
unknown, though in it self never so blameworthy, which nevertheless may be
prais-worthy, for ought he knows that censures it.


such are you, both in the action, and cause: The act is yielded, the cause
has been in part scanned, shall be more: This I vainly pretended, to be our
consorting in ceremonies with the papists: Behold here the ground of your loud
challenge of my ignorance: Ignorance of your judgment and practice: Here is my
abuse of you, of my Reader: and, how durst I? Good words (M. R.) What I have
erred, I will confess: I have wronged you indeed: but in my charity: I knew
the cause of Brownisme, but I knew not you: For (to say ingenuously) I had
heard and hoped, that your case had been less desperate; My intelligence was,
that in dislike of these ceremonies obtruded, and an hopelesnes of future
liberty, you and your fellows had made a secession, rather then a separation
from our Church; to a place, where you might have scope to profess, and
opportunity to enjoy your own conceits: whence it was, that I termed you
Ringleaders of the late separation, not followers of the first, and made your
plea against our Church, imperfection, not falsehood: I hoped you, as not ours,
so not theirs: not ours in place, so not quite theirs in pieuish opinion: I
knew it to be no new thing for men inclining to these fancies, to begin new
Churches at Amsterdam, several from the rest: witness the letters of some
(sometimes yours) cited by your own pastor: Inq into M. White.
I knew the former separation, and hated it; I hoped better of the latter
separation and pittyed it: My knowledge both of Which upon the Lords prayer
has confuted some positions of that sect.
Master Smith whom you followed, and your self, would not let me think of
you, as you deserved: How durst I charge you with that, which perhaps you might
disauow? It was my charity therefore, that made my accusations easy: it is
your uncharitableness that accuses them of ignorance. I knew why a Brownist is a
true schismaticke; I knew not you were so true a Brownist. But why then did I
write? Taking your separation at best: I knew how justly I might take occasion
by it to dissuade from separation: to others good, though not to yours: Now I
know you better, or worse rather, I think you hear more: Forgive me my
charity, and make the worst of my ignorance. I knew that this separation (which
now I know yours) stands upon four grounds: as some beast upon four feet.
First, God worshipped after a false manner, Secondly, Profane multitude
received, Bar. and. Grecu^, passim. Pen^. Exam.
Thirdly, Antichristian Ministry imposed, Fourthly, subjection to
Antichristian Government: The ceremonies are but as some one paw in every
foot: yet if we extend the word to the largest use, dividing all Religion
into ceremony, and substance: I may yet, and do auerre, that your separation
is merely grounded upon Ceremonies.

SECTION. XLVIII.
Estimation of Ceremonies, and subjection to the Prelates.
AND touching ceremonies; you refused them formerly, but not long: and when you
did refuse them, you knew not wherefore; for immediately before your
suspension, Sep.
you acknowledged them to be things indifferent, And touching the ceremonies
here spoken of, howsoever we have formerly refused them, submitting (as all
others did and d^e) to the Prelates spiritual Jurisdiction, (herein through
ignorance strayning at Gnats and swallowing Camels) yet are we verily persuaded
of them, and so were before we separated, that they are but as leaves of that
tree, and as badges of that man of sin, whereof the Pope is head, and the
prelates shoulders. And so we for our parts see no reason why any of the
Bishops sworn servants (as all the Ministers in the Church of England are
Canonically) should make nice to wear their Lords liueryes. Which ceremonies
notwithstanding we know well enough, howsoever you for advantage extenuate, and
debase them unto us, to be advanced, and preferred in your Church, before the
preaching of the Gospel.
and for matter of scandal by them you had not informed your self (by your
own confession) of a whole quarter of a year after: Why refused you then, but
as the Poet made his plays, to please the people, or as Simon Magus was
baptized for company? But refusing them, you submitted to the Prelates
spiritual Jurisdiction: there was your crime; this was your Camel, the other
your Gnats: Did ever any Prelate challenge spiritual rule over your conscience?

This they all appropriate to the great Bishop of our souls: and if other;
grant them as your malice faineth: what sin is it to be the subject of a
Tyrant? now upon more grace, refusing the Prelacy, you have branded the
ceremonies: So you did before your separation: Tell us how long was it after
your suspension, and before your departure, that you could have been content
(upon condition) to have worn this linen badge of your man of sin? Was not
this your resolution, when you went from Norwich to Lincolnshire, after your
suspension? Deny it not; my witnesses are too strong. But let us take you as
you are: these ceremonies, though too vile for you, yet are good enough for our
Ministers of England: As if you said, Lord, I thank thee, I am not as this
Publican: Why, for our Ministers? Because, those are the Liueries, and these
the sworn servants of the Antichristian Bishops: We have indeed sworn
obedience to our Ordinary, in honest and lawful commandments, but service
to Christ: But does all obedience imply servitude? This obedience is, as to
spiritual Fathers, not to Masters: yet so are we the servants of Christ, 1.
Cor. 4. 1. Hierom. in Ps. 44.
that we are ready to give our service to the least of his Saints: Thus vile
will we be for God: Heming. Class. 3 Potest. Eccles. c. 10.
How much more to those whom God has made (as Hierom says) Principes
Ecclesiae: whiles they command for God: Vtcuique suus clerus and sua plebs in
his quae Domini sunt, pie obsequerentur. Ignat. Epi. ad Tarsens.
What do we herein, but that which Epiphanius urged of old against Aerius;
What but the same which Ignatius (that holy and old Martyr) requires (not once)
of all Presbyters, and offers the engagement of his own soul for us in this
act.

As for our ceremonies, Sep.
aggrauate them how you can for your advantage, It is much that they being not
so much as Reed nor any part of the building (as you pretend) should ouerturne
the best builders amongst you as they do.
they are but ceremonies to us: and such, as wherein we put no holiness, but
order, decency, conuenience: But they are preferred (you say) in our Church,
before the preaching of the Gospel: A most wrongful untruth; We hold
preaching an essential part of Gods service, ceremonies none at all: The
Gospel preached we hold the life and soul of the Church, Ceremonies either
the Garment, or the lace of the Garment: The Gospel preached we hold the
Foundation and Walls, Ceremonies hardly so much as Reed, or Tile: But how then
(say you) have they ouerturned our best builders? This is a word of rare favor:
I had thought you had held us all ruiners, not builders: Or if builders; of
Babel, not of Jerusalem: in which work, the best builders are the worst.
Those whose hand has been in this act would tell you, that not so much the
Ceremonies are stood upon, as obedience: If God please to try Adam but with an
Apple, it is enough: What do we quarrel at the value of the fruit, when we
have a prohibition? Shimei is slain: what merely for going out of the City?
the act was little, the bond was great: what is commanded matters not so much,
as by whom; insult not, we may thank your outrage for this loss.

For your retortion of my Zoar and Sodom: Sep.
I can give you leave to be witty, The proportion betwixt Zoar and them holds
well: Zoar was a neighbor unto Sodom both in place and sin, and obnoxious
to the same destruction with it: and it was ^ots error to desire to have it
spared, Genesis 19. 15, 18, 19, 20 and so he never found rest nor peace in it, but
forsook it for fear of the same just judgment, which had overtaken the rest
of the Cities, verse. 30. The application of this to your ceremonies I leave to
your self, and them to that destruction, to which they are devoted by the Lord.
you use it so seldom: but when you have played with the allusion what you
list, I must tell you that he which will needs urge a Comparison to go on
four feet, is not worthy to go upon two: Zoar was near to Sodom, not part
of it: Zoar was reserved when Sodom was destroyed: Fidem Domino habere
debuerat quise came seruaturum propter cumdixerat. Mercer. in Genes.
Zoars neerenesse to the place where Sodom stood, needed not have given Lot
cause of remoueall. Zoar might safely have been the harbor of Lot: his fear
was for want of faith: God promised him and the place security: the far-fetcht
application therefore of the wickedness of Zoar to our Ceremonies might well
have been forborne and kept to your self: much less needed you (like some
Anti- Lot) to call for fire and Brimstone from heaven upon your Zoar.

SECTION. XLIX.
The state of the Temple, and of our Church in resemblance.
HOw you would have behaved your self in the Temple to the mony-changers: Sep.
you will answer when we prove our Church to be Gods Temple, How we would have
behaved our selves in the Temple, where the mony-changers were, and they that
sold Doves, we shall answer you, when you prove your Church to be the Temple
of God, compiled and built of spiritually-hewen and lively stones 1. Kin. 5.
17. 18 and 6. 7. 1. pet: 2. 5. and of the Cedars, Firs, and Thine trees of
Lebanon. 2. Chr. 2. 8. framed and set together in that comely order which a
greater then Solomon has prescri^ed: unto which God has promised his
presence. But whilst we take it to be (as it is) a confused heap of dead and
defiled, and polluted stones, and of all rubbish, of Briars and brambles of the
wilderness, for the most part, fitter for burning then building, we take our
selves rather bound to show our obedience in departing from it, then our valor
in purging it, and to follow the prophets council in flying out of Babylon, as
the he goats before the flock, Ie^. 50. 8
built of that matter, and in that form which God has prescribed: and here you
send us to 1. K. 5. 17. and 2. Chr. 2. 8. Ignorantly; as if Salomons Temple had
stood till Christ's time: when neither the first, nor second (though called Beth
Gnolam) out lasted more then four hundred years: Or as if the Market had
been under the very roof of that Temple: whether Herod's were built of the
same matter with Salomons, and in full corespondence to it, I dispute not: it
was certainly dedicated to Gods service, and that (which you would hardly
digest) in a solemn anniuersary holy day; though not erected upon the word of
any Prophet. But to let pass Allegories: we must prove our selves the true
Church of God: Thus we do it: We are true Christians, for we were baptized
into the name of Christ; we truly profess our continuance in the same faith,
into which we were baptized: we join together in the public services of God:
we maintain every point of the most ancient Creeds: we overthrow not the
foundation by any consequence, therefore what ever is wanting to us, what ever
is superfluous, in spite of all the gates of Hell, we are the true Church of
God. Let me ask you: Were not the people of the Jews in the Prophets and in
Christ's time a confused heap of dead and defiled, and (for I will use your
Tautologies) polluted stones, and of all rubbish, of Briars and brambles of the
Wilderness, for the most part fitter for burning then building? Can we be
worse then they? If wickedness can defile a Church, they shall justify us: did
either those Prophets or our Savior, rather show their obedience to God in
departing from it, then their valor in purging it: you have well imitated
these heavenly patterns, But what? Can your charity find nothing but rubbish?
Not one square stone, not one living? You will be judging till God judge you:
if you take not heed of these courses, you will so runn with the He goats,
that you will stand with the Goats on the left hand: That God, whose place you
have usurped, give you more wisdom and love.

SECTION. L.
Whether Ministers should endure themselves silenced.
THe valor of our most zealous Reformers has truly showed it self in
yeeldance: As in Duels, so here, he is the most valiant that can so master
himself as not to fight: you according to the common opinion of Swaggerers,
Sep.
blame the peaceable of cowardice, And what I pray you is the valor which the
best hearted and most zealous Reformers amongst you, have manifested in driving
out the Mony-changers? does it not appear in this, that they suffer*
themselves to be driven out with the two stringed Whippe of. Ceremonies, and
subscription, by the Mony-changers, the Chancellers and Officials, which sell.
sins like Doves; and by the chief priests the Bishops which set them on
work? so far are the most zealous amongst you from driving out the
Mony-changers, as they themselves are driven out by them, because they will not
change with them to the utmost farthing. Bar. Refor, without Tar.
and accuse them of suffering. Behold a new crime: That they suffer themselves
to be driven out: What should they have done? Should they have taken arms,
and cry the sword of God, and Gedion? You that will not allow a Prince to
compel subjects, Will you allow subjects to compel Princes? God forbid:
This were high Treason against Gods anointed: what then? Should they approve
the Ceremonies by subscription, by practice? This you exclaim upon as high
Treason against the highest: What yet more? Should they have preached with
their mouths stopped? This is it, which you have learned of your founder, and
through not many hands received, and required with no less violence: Clamor
and tumult is that you desire; still let our sin be peaceable obedience,
yours fury and opposition Your headstrong conceit is, that it is a sin to be
silenced: Men must preach even when they may not: all times, before you, would
have wondered at this Paradoxe: For how ever the Apostles, which had not their
calling from men, would not be silenced by men, yet we find that all their
successors held that those hands which were laid upon their heads, might be
laid upon their mouths: look into all Histories: Those Constitutions (which
though not Apostolic (yet were ancient) in the seventh Canon punish a Bishop
or Presbiter, (...).
that upon pretense of Religion separates from his wife, with deposition: and
if any Presbiter shall shift his charge without license ((...)) and lastly
inflicts the same penalty upon fornication, We charge him not to serve any
more. So Can. 15. Can. 25. Cum compertu^ fuerit deponatur. Can. 10. De
Clericatus honor periclitabitur. Can. 2. E clero deponatur and sit alienus a
Canone. Can. 17. et Can. 18. A ministerio cessare debuerit Council. Sardic. c.
4. Council. Carth. 4. c. 48. and 56. 57. Leo. Ep. 1. Sect. 5. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 9.
S^cr. l. 2. c. 21.
adultery, perjury.

The great Nicene Councels take the same order with some misliked Bishops, and
Presbiters in diverse Canons: Gaudentius in the Council of Sardi, takes it for
granted, that a Bishop may by Bishops be deposed: so the second Council of
Carthage, Can. 13. so the fourth Council of Carthage more then once imposes
degradation: so Leo the first threats to put some offending persons from the
office of their Ministry: so (that I may not be endless) blessed Cyprian
aduises Rogatianus a good old Bishop, which was abused by a malapert Deacon,
by the authority of his Chair to right himself, and either to depose, or
suspend the offender. Leontius in Socrates, is deprived of his Priesthood: yea,
what Council or Father gives not both rules and instances, of this practice?
See how far the ancient Church was from these tumultuous fancies: No, no,
(M. R.) we well find, it is doing that undoes the Church, not suffering: If
your fellows could have suffered more, and done less, the Church had bin
happy: As for our Church officers, you may rail upon them with a lawless
safety: there is a great ditch betwixt you and them: else you might pay dear
for this sin of slandering them with their cheap peny-worths: How idly do
you insult over those, whom your Mony-changers have driven out of their
Pulpits: When you confess (after all your valor) that they have driven you
both out of Church and Country: who can pity a miserable insulter?

SECTION. LI.
Power of reforming abuses given to the Church: and the issue of the neglect of
it.
YOu that can grant there will be corruptions in all other Churches, will
endure none in ours: If England should have either unleavened Wafers, or
drunken Loue-feasts (though no other blemishes) she could not but be Babylon:
We envy not your favors: These, or whatsoever like enormities, Christ has
given power unto his Church to reform: but what if the Church neglect to use
it? What if those evils, which are brought in, by humane frailty, will not by
divine authority be purged out? Now the error (by your doctrine) is grown
fundamental; so Christ is lost, Bar* ag. Gyff p. 27. and 88.
and the foundation raced: if we shall then assume (against our friends, to
convince our enemies) The Church of Geneua has been seriously dealt with, Sep.
in this corruption, and dissuaded by vehement importunity, For the Wafers in
Geneua, and disorders in Corinth, they were corruptions which may and do (or
the like unto them) creep into the purest Churches in the world: for the
reformation whereof Christ has given his power unto his Church, that such evils
as are brought in by humane frailty, may by divine authority be purged out.
yet still persisteth: How can you free them, and charge us? see how we love to
be miserable, with company. This power to purge out all corruptions, Christ
has not given us: if he has given it you; you must first begin to purge out
your selves: you have done it; but still there remain some: would God we had
as much execution as power: Our Church should be as clean as yours is
schismatic: if you should measure faculties by their exercise: Natural rest
should be the greatest enemy to virtue: and the solitary Christian should be
miserable: This power of ours is not dead, but sleeps: When it awaketh unto
more frequent use, (which we earnestly pray for) look you for the first
handsell of it: None can be more worthy: as it is; we offend not more in defect
then you in excess: Of whom that your Lazarello of Amsterdam G. I. could say,
that you have excommunications as ready as a Prelate has a prison: Christ is
in many that feel him not; but we want not the power only, This power and
presence of Christ you want, holding all by homage (or rather by vilenage)
under the Prelates, unto whose sinful yoke you stoup in more then Babylonish
bondage, bearing and approving by personal communion, infinite abominations.
Troubl. and Excom. at Amsterd. An tu solus Ecclesia es? Et qui te offenderit a
Christo excluditur. Hieron. Eriphan. Cypr. Solus in caelum ascend. Pupianus? Et
ad Acesium Nouatianum Constant. Erigito tibi scalam Acesi, and ad caelum solus
ascendito. Socr. l. 1. C. 7.
but the presence of Christ: How so? He was with us while you were here: Did he
depart with you? will the separatists engrosse our Savior to themselves, and
(as Cyprian said of Pupianus) go to heaven alone? yea, confine the God of
heaven to Amsterdam? What insolence in this? we have him in his Word: we have
him in his Sacraments: we have him in our hearts: we have him in our
profession, yet this enemy dare say we want him: Wherein? I suppose in our
censures: We have Peter's keys (as his true successors both in office, and
doctrine): Bar. Gyff. ref. So some of their own have termed their
excommunication. Confess. by M. John's. Inqu. p. 65
our fault is; that we use them not, as you would: What Church does so? your
first Martyr does as zealously inueigh against the practice of Geneua, and all
other reformed Congregations in this point, as against us: both for the wooden
dagger (as he terms it) of suspension, and for their Consistoriall
excommunications: VVoe were to all the world, if Christ should limit his
presence only to your fashions: Here you found him, and here you left him:
Would to God we did no more grieve him with our sins, then you please him
in your presumptuous censures: in the rest you rail against our Prelates and
us: Can any man think that Christ has left peaceable spirits, to go dwell
with railers? Indeed, yours is freehold: so you would have it: free from
subjection, free from obedience: This is looseness, more then liberty: You
have broken the bonds, and cast the cords from you: but you miscall our
Tenure: We hate villenage no less then you hate peace; and hold (in capite)
of him, Col. 1. 18.
that is the head of his body, the Church: under whose easy yoke we do
willingly stoop in a sweet Christian freedom; Sep.
abhorring, And in these two last respects principally, your Babylonish
confusion of all sorts of people in the body of your Church, without
separation, and your Babylonish bondage under your spiritual Lords the
Prelates, we account you Babylon, and fly from you.
and reproving (and therefore notwithstanding our personal communion avoiding)
all abominations: In these two respects therefore of our confusion, and
bondage, we have well seen in this discourse, how justly your Sion accounts
us Babylon: since it is apparent for the one, that here is neither confusion,
nor Babylonish, nor without separation: For the other, no bondage, no
seruility: Our Prelates being our Fathers, not our Masters: and if Lords for
their external dignity, Amari Parens and Episcopus debet, non timeri. Hier. ad
Theophilum.
yet not Lords of our Faith: and if both these your respects were so, yet so
long as we do inviolably hold the foundation, both directly, and by necessary
sequel: any railer may term us, but no Seperatist shall prove us Babylon: you
may fly whether you list: would God yet further, unless you had more love.

SECTION. LII.
The view of the sins and disorders of others, whereupon objected: and how
far it should affect us.
I Need no better Analyser then your self, save that you do not only
resolve my parts, Sep.
but add more: M. H having formerly expostulated with us our supposed impiety
in forsaking a ceremonious Babylon in England, proceeds in the next place to
lay down our madness in choosing a substantial Babylon in Amsterdam: and if
it be so found by due trial, as he suggesteth, it is hard to say, whether our
impiety or madness be the greater.
whereas every motion has a double term: from whence, and whither: both these
could not but fall into our discourse; having therefore formerly expostulated
with you for your (since you will so term it) impiety, in forsaking a
ceremonious Babylon of your own making in England: I thought it not unfit to
compare your choice with your refusal: England with Amsterdam, which it
pleases you to entitle a substantial Babylon: impiety and madness are titles
of your own choice, let your guiltiness be your own accuser: The truth is,
my charity and your uncharitableness have caused us to mistake each other: my
charity thus: Hearing both at Middleburgh, and here, that certain companies
from the parts of Nottingham and Lincoln (whose Harbinger had been newly in
Zeland before me) meant to retire themselves to Amsterdam, for their full
liberty, not for the full approbation of your Church: not favoring your maine
opinions, but emulating your freedom in too much hate of our ceremonies, and
too much accordance to some grounds of your hatred: I hoped you had been one
of their guides; both because Lincolnshire was your Country, and Master Smith
your Oracle, and General: Not daring therefore to charge you with perfect
Brownisme, what could I think might be a greater motive to this your supposed
change, then the view of our (so often proclaimed) wickedness, and the hope of
less cause of offense in those foreign parts: this I urged, fearing to go
deeper then I might be sure to warrant: Now comes my charitable answerer, and
imputes this easines of my challenge, to my ignorance; and therefore will
needs persuade his Christian reader, that I knew nothing of the first
separation, because I objected so little to the second.

It were strange if I should think, Sep.
you gather Churches there by Town-rowes (as we in England) who know that some
one prison might hold all your refined flock: Belike M. H. thinks we gather
churches here by towne-rowes, as they do in England, and that all within the
parish procession are of the same Church. Wherefore else tells he us of Jews,
Arrians, and Anabaptists, with whom we have nothing common but the streets and
marketplace? It i^ the condition of the Church to live in the world, and to
have civil society with the men of this world, 1. Cor. 5. 10. Ioh. 17. 13.

But what is this to that spiritual communion of the saints, in the
fellowshippe of the Gospel, wherein they are separated, and sanctified from the
world unto the Lord? Ioh* 17. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 6. 17. 18.


you gathered here by Hedge-rowes; but there it is easier to tell how you
divide, then how you gather: let your Church be an entire body, inioying her
own spiritual communion, yet if it be not a corrasiue to your heart to
converse in the same streets, and to be ranged in the same Towne-rowes with
Jews, Arians, Anabaptists, etc. you are no whit of kin to him, that vexed
his righteous soul with the vncleanenesses of foul Sodom. That good man had
nothing but civil society with those impure neighbors: he differed from them
in Religion, in practice, yet could he not so carelessly turn off this
torment: His house was Gods Church; wherein they had the spiritual communion
of the Saints: yet whiles the City was so unclean, his heart was unquiet:
Separation from the world, how required.
We may (you grant) have civil society with ill men, spiritual communion
only with Saints: Those must be accounted the world, these only the Church:
your own allegations shall condemn you. Ioh. 17. 16.
They are not of the world (says Christ) as I am not of the world: Both
Christ, and they were parts of the Jewish Church: The Jewish Church was not so
sanctified, but the most were extremely* unclean: therefore we may be
parts of a visible unsanctified Church; and yet be separate from the world.
Saint Paul writes to his Corinthians, sanctified in Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 2. 1.
Cor. 3. 3.
Saints by calling: True, but not long after, he can say, ye are yet carnal.
In his second Epistle: Come out (says he) from among them: But, from whom?
From Infidels by profession, not corrupted Christians.

SECTION. LIII.
The nearenesse of the State and Church, and the great errors found by the
Separatists in the French and Dutch Churches.
THE Church and State, Sep.
if they be two, We indeed have much wickedness in the City where we live; you
in the Church. ^ut in earnest, do you imagine we account the Kingdom of
England Babylon, or the city of Amsterdam Syon* It is the Church of England,
or state Ecclesiastical, which we account Babylon, and from which we withdraw
in spiritual communion: ^ut for the commonwealth and Kingdom, as we honor it
above all the states in the world, so would we thankfully embrace the meanest
corner in it, at the extremest conditions of any people in the Kingdom*
yet they are twins, and that so, as eithers evil proves mutual: The sins
of the City not reformed, blemish the Church; where the Church has power and
in a sort comprehends the State, she cannot wash her hands of tolerated
disorders in the Commonwealth: hence is my comparison of the Church (if you
could have seen it, not the Kingdom) of England, with that of Amsterdam: I
doubt not, but you could be content to sing the old song of us, Bona terra,
mala gens: Our land you could like well, if you might be Lords alone, Thanks
be to God it likes not you, and justly thinks the meanest corner too good for
so mutinous a generation: when it is weary of peace it will recall you: you
that neither in prison, nor on the Seas, nor in the Coasts of Virginea, nor in
your way, nor in Netherland could live in peace, What shall we hope of your
ease at home? Where ye are, all you thankful Tenants cannot in a powerful
Christian state move God to distinguish betwixt the known sins of the City,
and the Church: How often has our gracious Sovereign, and how importunately
been solicited for a tolleration of Religions? It is pity that the Papists
hired not your aduocation: who in this point are those true Cassanders, which
reverend Calvin long since confuted: Their wishes herein are yours: Cassand. de
Offic boni viri. Bellar. de Laicis
To our shame and their excuse: his Christian heart held that tolleration
unchristian and intolerable, which you either neglect or magnify: Good
Constantine wink't at it in his beginning, Eusebius. in vita Constable.
but as David at the house of Zeruiah: Succeeding times found these Canaanites
to be pricks and thorns, and therefore both by mulctes and banishments sought
either their yeeldance or voydance. If your Magistrates having once given their
names to the Church, endeavor not to purge this Augean stable; how can you
prefer their Communion to ours?

But howsoever now, least we should think your Landlords have too just cause
to pack you away for wranglers, you turn over all the blame from the Church to
the City; yet your Pastor and Church have so found the City in the Church, and
branded it with so black marks, as that all your smooth extenuations cannot
make it a less Babylon then the Church of England: Behold now by your own
Confessions either Amsterdam shall be, or England shall not be Babylon: These
eleven crimes you have found and proclaimed in those Dutch and French Churches:
Fr. John's. Articles ag. the Fr^ and Dutch Churches.
First, That the assembles are so contrived that the whole Church comes not
together in one: So that the Ministers cannot together with the flock sanctify
the Lords day; The presence of the members of the Church cannot be known, and
finally no public action, whether excommunication, or any other can rightly
be performed. Could you say worse of us? Where neither Sabbath can be rightly
sanctified; nor presence or absence known, nor any holy action rightly
performed, what can there be but mere confusion?

Secondly, That they baptize the seed of them who are no members of any
visible Church; of whom moreover they have not care as of members, neither
admit their parents to the Lords Supper: Mere Babylonisme, and sin in
constitution, yea the same that makes us no Church: for what separation can
there be in such admittance? what other but a sinful commixture? How is the
Church of Amsterdam now gathered from the world?

Thirdly, That in the public worship of God they have devised, and used
another form of prayer, besides that which Christ our Lord has prescribed,
Mat. 6. reading out of a book certain prayers invented and imposed by man.
Behold here our fellow Idolaters: and (as follows) a daily Sacrifice of a set
Seruice-booke, which in stead of the sweet incense of spiritual prayers is
offered to God, very Swines-flesh, Bar. ag. Gyss.
a new Por^uise, and an equal participation with us of the curse of addition to
the word.

Fourthly, That rule and commandment of Christ, Matthew. 18. 15. they neither
observe, nor suffer rightly to be observed among them. How often have you said
that there can be no sound Church without this course, because no separation?
Behold the maine blemish of England in the face of Amsterdam!

Fifthly, That they worship God in the Idol Temples of Antichrist: so the Wine
is marred with the vessel, their service abomination with ours: neither do
these Antichristian stones want all glorious ornaments of the Romish harlot,
yet more.

Sixthly, That their Ministers have their set maintenance after another manner
then Christ has ordained, 1. Chr. 14. and that also such, as by which any
Ministry at all, whether Popish or other might be maintained: Either tithes,
or as ill: Behold one of the maine Arguments whereby our Ministry is condemned
as false and Antichristian, falling heavy upon our neighbors.

Seventhly, That their Elders change yearly, and do not continue in their
office, according to the doctrine of the Apostles and practice of the Primitive
Church: What can our Church have worse then false Governors? Both annual and
perpetual they cannot be: What is (if not this) a wrong in Constitution?

Eighthly, that they celebrate marriage in the Church, as if it were a part of
the Ecclesiastical administration: a foul shame and sin: and what better
then our third Sacrament?

Ninthly, That they use a new censure of suspension which Christ has not
appointed: no less then English presumption.

Tenthly, That they observe days and times, consecrating certain days in the
year to the Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ: Behold their
Calender as truly possessed: Two Commandments solemnly broken at once; and
we not Idolaters alone.

Eleventh, which is last and worst, that they receive unrepentant
excommunicates to be members of their Church, which by this means becomes one
one body with such as be delivered unto Satan; therefore none of Christ's
body: Counrtepoys.
England can be but a miscelline rabble of profane men; The Dutch and French
Churches are belike no better, who can be worse then an unrepentant
excommunicate? Go now and say, It is the Apostasy of Antichrist to have
communion with the world in the holy things of God, which are the peculiars of
the Church, and cannot without great Sacrilege be so prostituted and
profaned; Go say, that the plaguy-spirituall-leprosie of sin rising up in
the foreheads of many in that Church, unshut up, uncovered (yea wilfully let
loose) infects all both persons and things amongst them: Go now and fly out
of this Babylon also, as the Hee-goates before the flock, or return to ours:
But howeuer these errors be gross, perhaps they are tractable; Not the
sin undoes the Church, but obstinacy; here is no evasion: For behold, you do
no more accuse those Churches of corruption, then of wilfulness: for diverse
times have you dealt with them about these fearful enormities: yea you have
often de^ired, that knowledge thereof might be by themselves given to the whole
body of their Church, or that (at least) they would take order that it might be
done by you: They have refused both; What remains, but they be our
fellow-Heathens and Publicanes? And not they alone, but all reformed Churches
besides in Christendom, which do jointly partake in all these (except one or
two personal) abominations: will you never leave til you have wrangled your
selves out of the world?

But now I fear I have drawn you to say, that the hellish impieties both in
the City, Sep.
and Church of Amsterdam are but frogs, The hellish impieties in the city of
Amsterdam do no more prejudice our heavenly communion in the Church of Christ,
then the frogs, lyce, flies, moraine, and other plagues ouerspreading Egypt,
did the Israelites when Goshen the portion of their inheritance was free Exodus
8. 19. nor then the deluge, wherewith the whole world was covered did Noah,
when he and his family were safe in the Arc, Genesis 7. nor then satan's throne
did the Church of Pergamus being established in the same city with it, Re^. 2.
12, 13.
lyce, flies, moraine and other Egiptian plagues, not preiudicing your Goshen:
Say so if you dare; I fear they would soon make the Ocean your read Sea, and
Virginia your Wilderness.

The Church is Noah's Arc, which gave safety to her Guests, whereof ye are
part; but remember that it had unclean beasts also, and some savage: If the
waves drown you not, yet (me thinks) you should complain of noisome society:
Satan's throne could not prejudice the Church of Pergamus, but did not the
Balaamites (the Nicolaitanes?) Yet their heavenly communion stood, and the
Angel is sent away with but threats.

SECTION. LIIII.
Conversation with the world.
AS it were madness to deny that the Church should converse with the world in
the affairs thereof: Sep.
So to deny her Communion in Gods holy things, It is (...) will of God and of
Christ, that his Church should abide in the world, and converse with it in the
affairs thereof which are common to both: But it is the Apostasy of Antichrist
to have communion with the world in the holy things of God, which are the
peculiars of the Church, and cannot without great sacrilege be so prostituted
and profaned.
with any of those of the world, which profess Christianity (as yet
uncensured) is a point of Anabaptisticall Apostasy: such of the world are
still of the Church. As my censure cannot eiect them, so their sin (after my
private endeavor of redress) cannot defile me: I speak of private
Communicants: If an unbidden Guest come with a ragged garment, and unwashed
hands, shall I forbear Gods heavenly dainties? The Master of the feast can
say, Friend, how came thou in hither: not, Friends why came you hither with
such a Guest? God biddes me come: he has imposed this necessity, never allowed
this excuse: My teeth shall not be set on edge with the sower grapes of
others: Duobus mod^ non te ma^ulat malus, vid^licet si non consentis and si
redarg^is d. 23. q. 4. a malis.
If the Church cast not out the known unworthy, the sin is hers: If a man
will come unworthy, the sin is his: But if I come not because he comes, the
sin is mine: I shall not answer for that others sin: I shall answer for
mine own neglect: An other man's fault cannot dispense with my duty.

SECTION. LV.
The impure mixtures of the Church of England.
AS there is no element which is not through many mixtures departed from the
first simplicity: Sep.
So no Church ever breathed in so pure an Air, The air of the Gospel which
you draw in is nothing so free and clear as you make show: it is only because
you are used to it, that makes you so judge.
as that it might not justly complain of some thick and unwholesome
euaporations of error and sin. If you challenge an immunity, you are herein
the true brood of the ancient Puritanes: But if too many sins in practice
have thickened the Air of our Church, yet not one heresy: that smoke of the
bottomless pit has never corrupted it: and therefore justly may I auerre,
that here you might draw in the clear Air of the Gospel: No whereupon earth
more freely: And if this be but the opinion of custom, you whom absence has
helped with a more nice and dainty sent, speak your worst: Show us our
heresies, and shame us: you have done it, and behold four maine infections of
our English air: The first, 1. Canons.
the smoke of our Canons: Wittily: I fear the great Ordinances of the Church,
Sep.
have troubled you more with the blow, The thick smoke of your Canons,
especially of such as are planted against the Kingdom of Christ the visible
Church, and the administration of it, do both obscure and poison the air,
which you all draw in, and wherein you breath.
then the smoke: For you tell us of their Plantation against the Kingdom of
Christ: What Kingdom? The Visible Church: Which is that? Not the Reformedst
piece of ours, whole best are but Goats and Swine: Not the close Nicodemians of
your own Sect amongst us, which would be loath to be visible: Not forrainers,
to them they extend not: None therefore in all the world, but the English
Parlour-full at Amsterdam: Can there be any truer Donatisme? Cry you still out
of their poisoning the Air: We hold it the best cleansed by the batteries of
your idle fancies, by ridding you from our Air, and by making this your Church
invisible to us; smart you thus, till we complain.

The second is the plague or Leprosy of sin unshut up and uncovered: 2.
Sin uncensured.
We know that sin is as ill, Sep.
as the Diuill can make it, The plaguy-spirituall-leprosie of sin rising up
in the foreheads of so many thousands in the Church, unshut up, uncovered,
infects all both persons and things amongst you. Leu. 13. 45. 46. 47. 2. cor.
6, 17.
a most loathsome thing in the eyes of God, and his Angels, and Saints: and we
grant to our grief that among so many millions of men, there may be found some
thousands of Lepers: Good laws and censures meet with some, others escape: It
is not so much our fault, as our grief: But that this Leprosy infects all
persons, and things, is shamefully ouer-reach't: Plague and Leprosy have their
limits, beyond which, is no contagion; Certe nullius crimen maculat nescientem.
If a man come not near them, if he take the wind in an open air, they
infect not: such is sin: It can infect none but the guilty: Those which act
or assent to, Aug. Ep. 48.
or bear with it, or detest it not, are in this pollution: But those which can
mourn for it, and cannot redress it, are free from infection: How many foul
Lepers spiritually did our Savior see in the public Air of the Jewish
Church? wherewith yet he joined, and his, not fearing infection so much, as
gracing the remnants of their ruinous Church: Were those seven thousand
Israelites whose knees bowed not to Baal, 1. Reg. 19. 18.
infected with the Idolatry of their neighbors? yet continued they still
parts of the same Church.

But this yet exceedes: Not only all persons, but all things? What? Our
Gospel? Our heaven, earth, Sea? Our Books; Coin, Commodities? Behold, you
see the same heaven with us, you have no Bibles but ours: our Air in his
circular motion comes to be yours: the water that washes our Island, perhaps
washes your hands: Our unclean Silver (I fear) maintains you: Our
Commodities (in part) enrich your Landlords: and yet all things amongst us
infected? you are content to take some evil from your neighbors.

The third is our blasting Hierarchy, which suffers no good thing, 3.
Heirarchy.
(that is no Brownist, Sep.
no singular fancy) (for what good things have we but yours?) The blasting
Hierarchy suffers no good thing to grow, or prosper, but withers all both
budde and branch.
to grow, or prosper amongst us, but withers all both budde and branch, would
to God the root also: The last, is the daily sacrifice of a seruice-booke: an
incense, how ever unsavory to you, 4. Seruice-booke.
yet such as all Churches in Christendom hold sweet, Sep.
and offer up as fit for the nostrils of the Almighty; The daily sacrifice
of the seruice-booke which in stead of spiritual prayer sweet as incense, you
offer up morning and evening, smells so strong of the Popes Portuise, as it
makes many hundreds amongst your selves stop their noses at it; and yet you
boast of the free and clear air of the Gospel wherein you breath.
we are not alone thus tainted; al Christian Churches that are, or have bin,
present the same Censers unto God: But ours smells strong of the Popes Portuise:
See whether this be any better then triuiall cauilling: If either an ill man,
or a Diuill shall speak that which is good; may not a good man use it? If a
good Angel, or man shall speak that which is evil, is it ever the better for
the Deliverer? If Satan himself shall say of Christ; Thou art the son of
the living God, shall I fear to repeat it? Not the Author but the matter, in
these things is worthy of regard: As Jerome speaks of the poisoned works of
Origin, and other dangerous Treatisours, Good things may be received from ill
hands; If the matter of any prayer be Popish, fault it for what it contains,
not for whence it came: what say you against us in this, more then Master Smith
(your stout Anabaptist) says of our baptizing of Infants: Patres nostri non
solum ante Cyprianum vel Agrippinum, sed postea, saluberrimam consuetudinem
tenuerunt, vt quicquid diuinum atque legitimum in aliqua haeresi vel schismate
integrum reperirent approbarent potius quam negarent. August.
Both of them equally condemned for Antichristian: Still therefore we boast of
the free, and clear air of the Gospel, if it be annoyed with some practical
evils, we may be foul, the Gospel is it self, and our profession holy,
neither can we complain of all evils, while we want you.

SECTION. LVI.
The judgment of our own, and our neighbors of our Church.
THat which follows is but words, a short answer is too much: That all
Christendom magnifies the worthiness of our Church, Sep.
in so clear evidences of their own voices you cannot deny; That all
Christendom should so magnify your happiness (as you say) is much, and yet
your selves, and the best amongst you, complain so much both in word, and
writing, of your miserable condition, under the imperious and superstitious
impositions of the Prelates, yea and suffer so much also under them, as at this
day you do for seeking the same Church-gouernment and Ministry, which is in
use in all other Churches save your own. Socrat. l. 1. c. 4. Constant. Alex.
and Ario. Ac tamet si vos inter vos vic^ssim de re qu^piam minimi momenti
dissent^tis (siquidem neque omnes de omnibus rebus idem sentimus nihilom^nus
tan^ fi^ri p^terit, vt eximia concordia sincere inter vos, integr^que s^ru^tur,
and vna inter omnes communio and consociatio custodiatur.
and now when you see such testimonies abroad (lest you should say nothing) you
fetch cauils from home: Those men which (you say) complain so much of their
miserable condition under the Prelates impositions, have notwithstanding with
the same pens and tongues not only justified our Church but extold it: you
have found no sharper adversaries in this very accusation, for which you
maliciously cite them: How freely, how sully have they euinced the truth? yea
the happiness of the Church of England against your false challenges: and yet
your forehead dare challenge them for Authors: So has their moderation opposed
some appendances, that they have both acknowledged and defended the substance
with equal vehemence to your opposition: neither do they suffer (as you
traduce them) for seeking another Church-gouernement: look into the
Millenaries petition (the common voice of that part) I am deceived, if ought of
their complaints sound that way, much less of their sufferings: deformity in
practice is objected to them, not endeavor of innovation; That quarrel has
been long silent, your motion cannot revive it: would God you could as much
follow those men in moderate and charitable carriage, as you have outrun them
in complaint.

It pleases you to devise us, Sep.
like pictures upon course Canuasse, The truth is, you are best liked where you
are worst known. Your next neighbors of Scotland know your Bishops Government
so well, as they rather choose to undergo all the misery, of bonds and
banishment, then to partake with you in your happiness this way, so highly do
they magnify and applaud the same Which choice I doubt not other Churches also
would make, if the same necessity were laid upon them.
which show fairest at farthest; attributing foreign approbation (which you
cannot deny) to distance, more then to desert. How is it then, that (besides
strange witnesses) we which look upon this face without prejudice, commend it
(God knows) without flattery: we can at once acknowledge her infirmities, and
bless God for her graces: Our neighbors, (yea our selves) of Scotland, know
our Church so well, that they do with one consent praise her for one of Gods
best daughters; neither do the most rigorous amongst them, more dislike our
Episcopal Government, then embrace our Church: what fraud is this, to fly
from the Church in common, to one circumstance? we can honor that noble
Church in Scotland, may we not dislike their alienations of Church-liuings? If
one thing offend, do all displease? Yet even this Government, which you would
have them resist to bonds and banishment (who knows not?) begins to find both
favor and place: what choice other Churches would make, as you doubt not, so
you care not: If you regarded their sentence: How durst your revile her as a
false harlot, whom they honor as a dear sister? If you were more theirs then
we, you might vpbraide us: Now you tell us what perhaps they would do, we tell
you what they do, and will do: Even with one voice, bless God for England,
as the most famous and flourishing Church in Christendom: Sep.
your handful only makes faces, And for your graces, we despise them not nor
any good thing amongst you, no more then you do such graces and good things as
are to be found in the Church of Rome, from which you separate notwithstanding.
We have by Gods mercy the pure and right use of the good gifts and graces of
God in Christ's Ordinance which you want. Neither the Lords people, nor the holy
vessels could make Babylon Syon, though both the one and the other were
captiued for a time. Lastly, it is thus written, and we thus advised. M.
Smiths. retort upon M. Cliston. p. 50,.
and enuies this true glory; Who yet (you say) despise not our graces, no more
then we those of Rome: See how you despise us while you say, you are free from
despite: How malicious is this Comparison, as if we were to you, as Rome to
us: and yet you despise us more: We grant Rome a true Baptism, true
Visibilitie of a Church, though monstrously corrupted: you give not us so much:
Thanks be to God, we care less for your censure, then you do for our
Church: We have by Gods mercy the true and right use of the word, and
Sacraments, and all other essential gifts and graces of God; if there might
be some further helps in execution, to make these more effectual, we resist
not: But those your other imaginary ordinances, as we have not, so we want
not: Neither the Chaldeans, nor any Idolatrous enemies could make Sion Babylon,
nor the holy vessels profane; so as they should cease to be fit for Gods
use: but they were brought back at the return of the captivity to Jerusalem:
Such were our worship, ministry, Sacraments, and those manifold subjects of
your cauils, which whiles you disgrace for their former abuse, you call our
good evil, and willingly despise our graces.

SECTION. LVII.
The issue of Separation.
ALL the sequel of my answerer is merely sententious: Sep.
it is fitter for us to learn, Where the truth is a gayner, the Lord (which is
truth) cannot be a looser. Neither is the thanks of ancient favors lost
amongst them, which still press on toward new mercies. Unthankful are they
unto the blessed majesty of God, and unfaithful also, which Inter licet
vestrum and non licet nostrum, nutant ac remigant animae Christianorum. Optat
contr. Parm.
then reply: Where the truth gains (say you) God loses not* I tell you
again, where God loses, the truth gains not, and where the Church loses,
God (which endowed her) cannot but loose: Alas what can the truth either get or
save by such unkind quarrels? Surely suspicion on some hands, on others
reiection: for (as Optatus of his Donatists) Betwixt our Licet, and your Non
licet many poor souls waver and doubt: neither will settle, because we agree
not: Thanks are not lost, where new favors are called for, but where old are
denied, while your Posie is: Such as the mother such is the daughter; where are
our old, our any mercies? They are unthankful, which know what God has done,
and confess it not: They are unfaithful to God and his Deputy, which knowing
themselves made to obey, presume to overrule, and upon their private
authority, obtrude to the Church those ordinances to be observed, which never
had being but in their own idle speculation.

Your Sequestration and our confusion, Sep.
are both of them beneficial, knowing the will of their Master do it not, but
go on p^esumptuously in disobedience to many the holy ordinances of the Lord,
and of his Christ, which they know, and in word also acknowledge, he has given
to his Church to be observed, and not for idle speculation, and disputation
without obedience.

It is not by our sequestration, but by your confusion, that Rome and Hell
gains.


where they should not: and as you pretend our confusion for the cause of your
Separation; So is your Separation the true cause of too much trouble, and
confusion in the Church: Your odious tale of commixture has cloyed and
surfeited your reader already, and received answer to satietie: This one dish
so often brought forth, argues your poverty: Sep.
The visible Church is Gods drag-net, Your odious commixture of all sorts of
people in the body of your Church, in whose lap the vilest miscreants are
dandled, sucking her breasts, as her natural children, and are be-blest by her
(as having right thereunto) with all her holy things as prayer, sacraments, and
other ceremonies, is that which aduantageth hell, in the final obduration and
perdition of the wicked, whom by these means you flatter and deceive. Non enim
propter malos boni des^rendi, sed propter bonos mali tolerandi sunt, etc. Sicut
tolerau^runt Prophetae etc. Aug. Ep. 48. Bar. ag. Gyff.

Sep. The Romish Prelacie and Priesthood amongst you, with the appurtenances
for their maintenance and ministrations are Romes advantage. Which therefore
she challenges as her own, and by which she also still holds possession
amongst you, under the hope of regayning her full inheritance at one time or
other.


and field, and floor, and Arc, here will be ever at her best, sedge, tares,
chafe, unclean Creatures: yet is this no pretense for her neglect: The
notoriously evil she casts from her breast, and knee, denying them the use of
her prayers, and (which your leaders mislike) of her Sacrament; If diverse
through corruption of unfaithful officers, escape censure; yet let not the
transgressions of some, redound to the condemnation of the whole Church: In
Gods judgment it shall not, we care little, if in yours. We tell wicked men,
they may go to hell-with the water of Baptism in their faces, with the Church
in their mouths, we denounce Gods judgments impartially against their sins,
and them: Thus we flatter, thus we deceive, if yet they will needs run to
perdition: Perditio tua ex te Israel.

Our Clergy is so Romish as our Baptism: If therefore Romish, because they
came thence, we have disproued it: If therefore Romish because they have been
used there, we grant and justify it, That ancient confession of their faith
which was famous thorough the world we receive with them: If they hold one God,
one Baptism, one heaven, one Christ shall we renounce it? Why should we not
cast off our Christendom and humanity, because the Romans had both? How much
Rome can either challenge, or hope to gain in our Clergy and Ministration is
well witnessed by the blood of those Martyrs, eminent in the Prelacie, which in
the fresh memories of many was shed for God, against that Harlot: and by the
excellent labors of others, both Bishops and Doctors: whose learned pens have
pulled down more of the walls of Rome, then all the corner-creeping Brownists
in the world shall ever be able to do, while Amsterdam stands. It is you
that furnish these adversaries with advantages, Sep.
through your wilful divisions: And if the Papists take aduantange at our
condemnation of you, and separation from you: it concerns you, well to see
where the blame is, and there to lay it, least through light, and inconsiderate
judgment, you justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous.
Take Scilurus his arrows, single out of the sheafe, the least finger breaks
them, while the whole bundle fears no stresse: we know well where the blame
is, our deseruings can be no protection to you: you went from us, not we from
you. Plead not our constraint, you should not have been compelled to forsake
us, while Christ is with us: But who compels you not to call us brethren? to
deny us Christians? your zeal is so far from justifying the wicked, that it
condemns the righteous.

SECTION. LVIII.
The Brownists scornful opinion of our people.
How scornefully do you turn over our poor rude multitude, Sep.
as if they were beasts not men; And for the suspicion of the rude multitude,
you need not much fear it. They will suspect nothing that comes under the
Kings broad seal: they are ignorant of this fault. Though it were the mass
that came with authority of the magistrate, they (for the most part) would be
without suspicion of it: so ignorant and profane are they in the most places.
or if men, not rude, but savage: This contempt needed not: These sons of the
earth may go before you to heaven: Indeed as it was of old said, that all
Egyptians were Physicians: so may it now of you: All Brownists are divines, no
Separatist cannot prophecy: No sooner can they look at the skirts of this
hill, but they are rapt from the ordinary pitch of men: Either this change is
perhaps by some strange illumination, or else your learned paucitie got their
skill amongst our rude and profane multitude: we have still many in our rude
multitude, whom we dare compare with your teachers: neither is there any so
lewd and profane that cannot pretend a scandal from your separation: Even
these souls must be regarded (though not by you.) Such were some of you, but
ye are washed, etc.

The wise hearted amongst us do more then suspect, find out our weaknesses,
and bewail them; yet do they not more discover our imperfections then
acknowledge our truth: 1 Samuel 10. 10.
If they be truly wise, It is the wise hearted amongst you that suspect your
dealings, who will also suspect you yet more, as your unfound dealing shall be
further discovered.
we cannot suspect them, they cannot forsake us: Their charity will cover,
more then their wisdoms can discover.

SECTION. LIX.
The conclusion from the fearful answer of Separation.
MY last threat, of the easier aunsweres of whoredoms, and adulteries then
Separation, you think to skoffe out of countenance. I fear your conscience
will not always allow this mirth; Our Consistories have spared you enough:
Troub. and excom at Amster. G. John's. professes he found better dealing in the
Bishops Consistories; and might have found better in the Inquisition.
let those which have tried, say, whether your corrupt Eldership be more safe
judges: If ours imprison justly, yours excommunicate unjustly; To be in
Custody is less grievous, then out of the Church: at least, if your censures
were worth any thing, but contempt: As Hierom said of the like: It is well that
malice has not so great power as will: Hieron. Cypr. de simplic. praelat. Ad
pacis praemium ven^re non polerunt, qui pacem domini discordiae furore ruperunt.
you shall one day (I fear) find the Consistory of heaven more rigorous, if
you wash not this wrong with your tears; That tribunal shall find your
confidence, presumption; your zeal, fury: you are bold, surely more then
wise: To proclaim, we have no need of such criers: doubtless your head has
made Proclamations long, Ibid.
now your hand begins: Inexpiabilis and g^auis culpa discordiae nec passione
purgatur.
What proclaim ye? Separation from the Communion, Government, Ministry and
worship of the Church of England: Sep
what needed it? Your act might have saved your voice: Lastly the terr^ble
threat you utter against us, that even whoredoms and murders shall abide an
easier answer then separation, would certainly fall heavy upon us, if this
answer were to be made in your Consistory Courts; or before any of your
Ecclesiastical judges; but because we know, that not Antichrist, but Christ
shall be our judge, we are hold upon the warrant of his word and testament,
(which being sealed with his blood may not be altered) to proclaim to all the
world separation from whatsoever rises up rebelliously, against the scepter of
his kingdom, as we are undoubtedly persuaded, the Communion, government,
ministry, and worship of the Church of England do.
what should our eyes and ears be troubled with one bad object?

But why separate you from these? John Robinson.
Because they rise up rebelliously against the Scepter of Christ: The Scepter
of Christ is his word: he holds it out, we touch and kiss it: What one
sentence of it, do we wilfully oppose? away with these foolish impieties, you
thrust a Reed into your Sauiors hand, and say, Hail King of the Jews, and
will needs persuade us none but this is his rod of Iron: Lastly, upon what
warrant? Of his will and Testament: you may wrong us; But how dare you fasten
your lies upon your Redeemer and Judge? What clause of his has bid you
separate? We have the true Copies. As we hope or desire to be saved, we can
find no sentence that sounds toward the favor of this your act: Must God be
accused of your wilfulness? Before that God and his blessed Angels, and
Saints, we fear not to protest that we are undoubtedly persuaded, that
whosoever wilfully forsakes the Communion, Government, Ministry, or
worship of the Church of England are enemies to the Scepter of Christ, and
rebels against his Church and anointed: neither doubt we to say, that the
Mastershippe of the Hospital at Norwich, or a lease from that City (sued for,
with repulse) might have procured that this separation from the Communion,
Government, and worship of the Church of England, should not have been made
by

John Robinson.

FINIS.
A Table of all the Sections contained in this Book.
THE entrance into the work. fol. 1. The answerers Preamble. fol. 3. The
parties written to, and their crime. fol. 6. The kinds of separation and which
is just. fol. 8. The antiquity and examples of separation. fol. 12. What
separation is to be made by Churches in their planting, or restoration. fol.
16. What separation the Church of England has made. fo. 19 Constitution of a
Church. fol. 21 Order 2. Part of Constitution, how far requisite, and whether
hindered by Constraint. fol. 23. Constraint requisite. fol. 24 Constitution of
the Church of England. fol. 26. The Answerers title. fol. 31. The Apostasy of
the Church of England. fol. 33. The Separatists acknowledgements of the graces
of the Church of England. fol. 39. The unnaturalness of some principal
separatists fol. 42. What the Separatists think themselves beholden to the
Church of England for. fol. 44. The Motherhood of the Church of England, how
far it obliges us. fol. 45. The want of pretended Ordinances of God, whether
sinful to us: and whether they are to be set up without Princes. fol. 48. The
bonds of Gods word unjustly pleaded by the Separatists. fol. 51. The necessity
of their pretended Ordinances. fol. 52. The enormities of the Church in common.
fol. 55. The Church of England is the Spouse of Christ. fol. 56. How the Church
of England has separated from Babylon. fol. 57. The Separation made by our
holy Martyrs. fol. 62. What separation England has made. fol. 63. The maine
grounds of Separation. fol. 65. The truth and warrant of the Ministry of
England. fol. 66. Confused Communion of the profane. fol. 70. Our Errors
intermingled with Truth. fol. 71. Whether our Prelacie be Antichristian. fol.
74. The judgment and practice of other Reformed Churches. fol. 77. Our Synodes
determination of things indifferent. fol. 78. Sins sold in our Courts. fol.
81. Our loyalty to Princes cleared, theirs questioned. fol. 84. Errors of
Free will, etc. fained upon the Church of England. fol. 86. Kneeling at the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. fol. 87. Whether our Ordinary and
Seruice-Booke, be made Idols by us. fol. 89. Marriage not made a Sacrament by
the Church of England. fol. 95. Commutation of Penance in our Church. fol. 98.
Oath ex Officio. fol. 99. Holy Days how observed in the Church of England.
100. Our approbation of an unlearned Ministry disproued. fol. 102. Penances
enjoined in the Church of England. fol. 103. The practices of the Church of
England, concerning the Funerals of the dead. fol. 104. The Churches still
retained in England. fol. 108. The Founders and Furnitures of our Churches.
fol. 110. On what ground Separation or Ceremonies was objected. fol. 112.
Estimation of Ceremonies, and subjection to the Prelates. fol. 114. The state
of the Temple, and of our Church in resemblance. fol. 117. Whether Ministers
should endure themselves silenced. fol. 119. Power of reforming abuses given to
the Church: and the issue of the neglect of it. fol. 121. The view of the
sins and disorders of others, whereupon objected: and how far it should
affect us. fol. 124. The nearenesse of the State and Church, and the great
errors found by the Separatists in the French and Dutch Churches. fol. 127.
Conversation with the world. fol. 132. The impure mixtures of the Church of
England. fo. 133. The judgment of our own, and our neighbors of our Church.
fol. 137. The issue of Separation. fol. 140 The Brownists scornful opinion of
our people. fol. 143. The Conclusion from the fearful answer of Separation.
fol. 144.
Errata.
Read welbeloueds for welbelouedst. Epist pa. vlt. Con^iction for conjunction.
page 32. line 19. Uncharitableness for vnchariblenesse. page 47. line 18.
Optat. lib. 3. for Opt. lib. 30. marg. page 49. Rules of Christ, for rules
Christ. page 50. line 1. Places; onwards. for places onwards. page 66. line.
18. Our Ministry for your Ministry. page 67. line 8. That houses for what
houses page 80. line 16. waryof, for weary of, page 88. line 16. shrifte for
strife. pa. 99. l. 12 Envy for annoy, page 103. line 13. Ingenuously, for
ingeniously, page 104. line. 19 which are; in, for which are in, page 107. line
13.

Besides, many quotations in the margent, are misplaced; the matter will lead
the Reader to the right place:

The words of the adversary are only those, which have this Note of Sep. set
before them.


