MEDITATIONS and Vows, Divine and Moral.

Serving For direction in Christian and Civil practice.

Divided into two Books.

By Jos. Hall.

AT LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for John Porter.

1605.

Votum Authoris.
QVas ego non vano deprompsi e pectore leges,
Quaeque ego vota tuli pacis honesta meae.
Alme Deus (nec enim sine te vouisse i^^abit,
Te sine nil facio, nil fugio sine te)
Da placide seruem, and praesta seruando quietem,
Sic mihi certa salus, sic mihi sancta quies.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Drury, Knight, my singular good Patron.
All increase of true Ho^or and Virtue.
SIr, that I have made these my homely Aphoris^es public, needs n^ other
reason; but that, though the world is furnished with other Writings, eu^n to
satietie and surfeit: yet, of these, which reduce Christianity to practice,
there is (at least) s^arcitie enough: wherein (yet) I must needs confess, I had
some eye to my self; for (having after a sort vowed this au^tere course of
judgment and practice to my self) I thought it best to acquaint the world
with it, that it might either witness my answerable proceeding, or check me
in my straying there-fro^: by which means, so many men as I live amongst, so
many monitors I shall have, which shall point me to my own rules, and upbraid
me with my aberrations. Why I have dedi^ated the^ to your name, cannot be
strange to any, that knows you, my Patron; and me, your Pastor: the regard of
which bond, easily drew me on to consider, that whereas my body, which was
ever weak, began of ^ate to languish more; it would be not in-expedient (at
the worst) to leave behind me this little ^onument of that great respect, which
I (deservedly) bear you: And i^ it shall please GOD to reprieue me, until a
longer day; yet^ ^t shall not repent me, to have sent this unworthy scrowle,
to wait upon you, in your necessary absences; neither shall it be (I hope)
bootlesse for you, to adioyne these my mean speculations, unto those grounds
of virtue, you have so happily laid: to which, if they shall add but one
scruple, it shall be to me sufficient joy, contentment, recompense.

From your Halsted. Dec. 4. Your Worships humbly devoted IOS. HALL.

The first Book, containing a full Centurie of Meditations and Vows, both
Divine and Moral.
1.
IN Meditation, those, which begin heavenly thoughts, and prosecute them not,
are like those, which kindle a fire under green wood, and leave it, so soon
as it but begins to flame: leesing the hope of a good beginning, for want of
^econding it with a suitable proceeding: when I set my self to meditate, I will
not give over, till I come to an issue. It has been said by some, that the
beginning is as much as the midst; yea, more the^ all: but I say, the ending is
more the^ ye beginning.

2 There is nothing (but Man) that respects greatness: Not God, not Nature,
not Disease, not Death, not Judgment: Not God, he is no accepter of persons:
Not nature, we see the sons of Princes borne as naked, as the poorest; and
the poor child as fair, wel-fauored strong, witty, as the heir of nobles:
Not disease, death, judgment, they sicken a-like, die a-like, fare a-like after
death: There is nothing (besides natural men) of who^ goodness is not
respected: I will honor greatness in others, but for my self, I will esteem a
dra^ of goodness, worth a whole world of greatness.

3 As there is a foolish wisdom: so there Pro. ^9^ 22 1, Cor. 120^
is a wise ign^rance, in not prying into God's Ark: not inquiring i^to things
not revealed. I would feign know all that I need, and all that I may: I leave
Gods secrets to himself. It is happy for me, that God makes me of his Court,
though not of his Counsel.

4.
As there is no vacuity in nature, no more is there spiritually: Every vessel
is full, if not of liquor, yet of air; so is the heart of man: though (by
nature) it is empty of Math. 23. 28.
grace, yet it is full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Now, as it fills with
grace, so it is emptied of his evil qualities. As in a vessel, so much water
as goes in, so much air goes out: but man's heart is a narrow-mouthed vessel,
and receives grace but by drops; and therefore asks a long time to empty and
fill. Now, as there be differences in degrees, and one heart is nearer to fulness
then an other: so, the best vessel is not quite full, while it is in the
body, because there are still remainders of corruption: I will neither be
content with that measure of grace I have, nor impatient of Gods delay: But
every day I will endeavor to have one drop added to the rest, so my last day shall
fill up my vessel to the brim.

5
Satan would seem to be mannerly and reasonable, making, as i^ he would be
content with one half of the heart, whereas God challenges all or none: as
(indeed) he has most reason to claim all, that made all: But this is nothing,
but a crafty fetch of Satan, for he knows, that if he have any part, God will
have none; so, the whole falls to his share alone. My heart (when it is both
whole, and at the best) is but a strait and unworthy lodging for God; if it
were bigger and better^ I would rescrue it all for him. Satan may look in at
my doors by a temptation, but he shall not have so much as one chamber-room
setapart, for him to soiourne in.

6
I see, that in natural motions, the nearer any thing comes to his end, the
swifter it moves. I have seen great rivers, which at their first rising out
of some hills side, might be covered with a bushel, which, after many miles,
fill a very broad channel; and drawing near to the Sea, do even make a little
Sea in their own banks: So, the wind at the first rising, as a little vapor
from the cranies of the earth, and passing forward about the earth, the further
it goes, the more blustering and violent it waxes; a Christians motion (after
he is regenerate) is made natural to Godward; and therefore, the nearer he
comes to Heaven, the more zealous he is. A good man must be like the Sun;
not like Ezechias Sun, that went backward, nor like Iosuahs Sun, that stood
still, but David's Sun, that (like a Bridegroom) comes out of his chamber;
and as a Champion rejoices to runn^ his race: only, herein is the difference,
that when he comes to his high noon, he declineth not. How ever therefore, the
mind (in her natural faculties) follows the temperature of the body, yet in
these supernatural things she quite crosses it, for with the coldest
complexion of age, is joined in those that are truly religious, the feruentest
zeal and affection to good things: which is therefore the more reverenced, and
better acknowledged, because it cannot be ascribed to the hot spirits of youth.
The devil himself devised that old slander of ^arly holiness; A young Saint,
an old Devil: sometimes young Devils have proved old Saints; never the
contrary; but true Saints in youth, do always prove Angels in their age. I
will strive to be ever good, but if I should not find my self best at last,
I should fear I was never good at all.

7
Consent hartneth sin, which a little dislike would have daunted at first; As
we say, there would be no thieves, if no receivers: so would there not be so
many open mouths to detract and slander, if there were not as many open ears
to entertain them. If I cannot stop other men's mouths from speaking ill^ I
will either open my mouth to reprove it, or else I will stop mine ears from
hearing it; and let him see in my face, that he has no room in my heart.

8
I have often wondered how fishes can retain their fresh taste, and yet live in
salt waters; since I see that every other thing participates of the nature of
the place, wherein it abides: so, the waters passing through the cha^nels of
the earth, vary their savor with the ve^nes of soil, through which they
slide: So, brute creatures transported from one Region to another, alter their
former quality, and degenerate by little and little. The like danger have I
seen in the manners of men, conuersing with evil companions, in corrupt
places: For, besides that, it blemisheth our reputation, and makes us thought
ill, though we be good; it breeds in us an insensible declination to ill; and
works in us, if not an approbation, yet a less dislike of those sins, to
which, our ears and eyes are so continually inured. I may have a bad
acquaintance, I will never have a wicked companion.

9
Expectation in a weak mind, makes an evil, greater; and a good, less: but
in a resolved mind, it digests an evil, before it come, and makes a future
good, long before, present. I will expect the woorst, because it may come the
best, because I know it will come.

10
Some promise what they cannot do, as Satan to Christ; some, what they could,
but mean not to do, as the Sons of Jacob to the Shechemites: some, what
they meant for the time, and after retrayt, as Laban to Jacob; some, what they
do also give, but unwillingly, as H^rod; some, what they willingly give, and
after repent them, as Ioshu^ to the Gibeonites. So great distrust is there in
man, whether from his impotence or faithlesnes^ as in other things, so in this,
I see God is not like man: but what ever he promises, he approoues himself
most faithful, both in his ability and performances: I will therefore ever
trust God on his bare word, even with hope, besides hope, above hope, against
hope: and onwards, I will rely on him for small matters of this life: for how
shall I hope to trust him in impossibilities, if I may not in likelihoods? how
shall I depend on him, for raising my body from dust, and saving my soul; if I
mistrust him for a crust of bread, toward my preservation.

11
If the world would make me his Minion^ he could give me but what he has: and
what has he to give? but a smoke of honor, a shadow of riches, a sound of
pleasures, a blast of fame; which, when I have had in the best measure; I may
be worse; I cannot be better: I can live no whit longer, no whit merrier, no
whit happier. If he profess to hate me, what can he do but disgrace me in my
name, impouerish me in my state, afflict me in my body? in all which, it is
easy, not to be ever the more miserable: I have been too long beguiled with
the vain semblances of it: Now henceforth accounting my self borne to a
better world, I will in an holy loftines, bear my self as one too good to be
enamoured of the best pleasures, to be dau^ted with the greatest miseries of
this life.

12
I see there is no man so happy, as to have all things, and no man so
miserable, as not to have some; Why should I look for a better condition, then
all others? If I have somewhat, and that of the best things, I will in
thankfulness enjoy them, and want the rest with contentment.

13
Co^straint makes an easy thing toilesom, whereas again, love makes the
greatest toil, pleasant: How many miles do we ride and run, to see one silly
beast follow another, with pleasure: which, if we were commanded to measure
upon the charge of a superior, we should complain of wearines. I see the
folly of the most men, that make their lives miserable, and their actions
tedious, for want of love to that, they must do: I will first labor to ^ettle
in my heart a good affection to heavenly things; so, Lord, thy yoke shall be
easy, and thy burden light.

14
I am a stranger even at home, therefore if the dogs of the world bark at me,
I neither care, no^ wonder.

15
It is the greatest madness in the world, to be an hypocrite in religious
profession: Men hate thee, because thou art a Christian, so much as in
appearance: God hates thee double, because thou art but in appearace: so, while
thou have the hatred of both, thou have no comfort in thy self: Yet if thou will not be good, as thou seem; I hold it better to seem ill as thou art:
An open wicked man does much hurt with notorioussinnes, but an hypocrite does
at last more shame goodness, by seeming good; I had rather be an open wicked
man, then an hypocrite, but I had rather be no man, then either of them.

16
When I cast down mine eyes upon my wants, upon my sins, upon my miseries;
me thinks no man should be worse, no man so ill as I; my means so many, so
force-able, and almost violent; my progress so small, and insensible; my
corruptions so strong, my infirmities so frequent, and remediless; my body so
vnaunswerab^e to my mind. But when I look up to the blesinges that GOD has
enricht me with all, me thinks I should soon be^ induced to think none
more happy then my self: God is my friend, and my Father: the world not my
Master, but my slave: I have friends, not many, but so tried, that I dare trust
them. An estate not superfluous, not needy: yet nearer to defect, then
abundance: A calling, if despised of men, yet honorable with God: A body not
so strong, as to admit security, but often checking me in occasion of
pleasure: nor yet so weak, as to afflict me continually: A mind not so
furnished with knowledge, that I may boast of it; nor yet so naked, that I
should despair of obtaining it: My miseries afford me joy, mine enemies
advantage; my account is cast up for another world: And if thou think, I have
said too much good of my self, either I am thus, or I would be.

17
The worldlings life is (of all other) most disco^fortable, for that which is
his God, does not always favor him, that which should be, never.

18
There are three messengers of death: Casualty, Sickness, Age: The two first are
doubtful, since many have recovered them both; the last is certain: The two
first are sudden, the last leasurely and deliberate: As for all men upon so
many summons, so, especially for an old man, it is a shame to be unprepared
for death: For, where other see they may die, he sees he must die. I was long
a-gone old enough to dye, but if I live till age, I will think my self too
old to live longer.

19
I will not care what I have, whether much or litt^e (...) If little, my
account shall be the less; If more, I shall do the more good, and receive
the more glory.

20
I care not for any companion, but such as may teach me somewhat, or learn
somewhat of me. Both these shall much pleasure me; one as an agent, the other
as an subject to work upon, neither know I whether more; for though it be an
excellent thing to learn, yet I learn but to teach others.

21
If earth (that is provided for mortality, and is possessed by the Makers
enemies) have so much pleasure in it; that Wor^dlinges think it worth the
account of their heaven: such a Sun to enlighten it, such an heaven to wall it
about, such sweet fruits and flowers to adorn it, such variety of creatures,
for the commodious use of it: What must heaven needs be, that is provided for
God himself, and his friends: How can it be less in worth, then God is above
his creatures, and Gods friends better, then his enemies. I will not only be
content, but desirous to be disso^ued.

22
It is commonly s^ene, that boldness puts men forth before their time, before
their ability. Wherein, we have seen many yt (like Lapwings, and Partridges)
have run away with some part of their shel on their heads: Whence it
follows, that as they began boldly, so they proceed unprofitably, and
conclude not without shame: I would rather be haled by force of others to
great duties, the^ rush upon them unbidden: It were better a man should want
work, then that great worke^ should want a man aunswerable to their weight.

23
I will use my friends, as Moses did his rodd; While it was a rodd, he held it
familiarly in his hand; when once a Serpent, he ran away from it.

24
I have seldom seen much o^tentation; and much learning met together: The
Sun rising and declining, makes long shadows, at midday when he is at
highest, none at all: Besides, that skill when it is too much shown, looses
the grace, as fresh-coloured wares, if they be often opened, leese their
brightness, and are soyled with much handling: I had rather, applaude my self
for having much, that I show not: then that others should app^a^d me, for
showing more, then I have.

25
An ambitious man is the greatest enemy to himself, of any in the world
besides. For he still torments himself with hopes, and desires^ and cares,
which he might avoid, if he would remit of the height of his thoughts; and
live ^^ietly. My only ambition shall be to be in Gods favor on earth, and
to be a Saint in heaven.

26
There was never good thing easily comne by: The heathen man could say, God
sels knowledge for sweat, and so, he does honor for ieopardie: Never any man
has got either wealth, or learning with ease^ Therefore, the greatest good must
needs be most difficult. How shall I hope to get Christ, if I take no pains
for him; and if in all other things the difficulty of obtaining, whets the
mind so much the more to seek, why should it in this alone daunt me, I will
not care what I do, what I suffer, s^ I may win Christ; If men can endure
such cutting, such lancing, searing of their bodies, to protract a miserable
life, yet a while longer; what pain should I refuse for eternity?

27
I^ I die; the world shall miss me but a little, I shall miss it less; Not
it me, because it has such store of better men; Not I it, because it has so
much ill, and I shall have so much happiness.

28
Two things make a man set by, Dignity and Desert, amongst fools the first
without the second is sufficient: Amongst wise men, the second without the
first; Let me deserve well, though I be not advanced. The Conscience of my
worth, shall cheer me more in others contempt, then the approbation of others
can comfort me^ against the secret check of my own unworthiness.

29
The best qualities do so cleave to their subjects, that they cannot be
communicated to others: For, where patrimony, and vulgar acc^unt of honor,
follow the blood in many generations, virtue is not traduced in propagation,
nor learning bequeathed by our will to our heirs: least the giuers should wax
proud, and the receivers negligent: I will account nothing my own, but what I
have gotten; nor that my own, because it is more of gift then desert.

30
Then only is the Church most happy, when Truth and Peace kiss each other;
and the^ miserable, when either of them balke the way, or when they meet and
kiss not: For truth without peace is turbulent; and peace without truth is
secure injustice; though I love peace well, yet I love main truths better; and
though I love all truths well, yet I had rather conceal a small truth, then
disturb a common Peace.

31
An in-discreete good action, is little better the^ a discreet mischief, for
in this, the doer wrongs only the patient: but in that other, the wrong is
done to ye good action; for both it makes a good thing odious (as many good
tales are marred in telling) and besides, it preiudice^ a future opportunity: I
will rather let pass a good gale of wind; and stay still on ye shore, then
launch forth, when I know the wind will be contrary.

32
The world teaches me, that it is madness to leave behind me those goods, that
I may carry with me: Christianity teaches me that, what I charitably give
alive, I carry with me dead; and experience teaches me, that what I leave
behind I leese; I will carry that treasure with me by giving it, which the
worldling loses by keeping it; so, while his corpse shall carry nothing but a
winding-cloath to his grave, I shall be richer under the earth, the^ I was above
it.

33
Every worldling is an hypocrite, for while his face naturally looks upward to
heaven, his heart grouels beneath on the earth; yet if I would admit of any
discord in the inward and outward parts; I would have an heart, Coloss^ 3^ 2^
that should look up to heaven, in an holy contemp^ation of the things above,
and a countenance cast down to the earth in humiliation; this only
dissimilitude is pleasing to God.

34
The heart of man is a short word, a small substance, yet great in capacity,
yea, so infinite in desire, that the round Globe of the world cannot fill the
three corners of it; when it desires more, and cries, Give, Give. I will set it
over to that infinite good; where the more it has, it may desire more, and see
more to be desired; when it desires but what it needs, my hands shall soon
satisfy it; either of which, if it may co^taine it, when it is without the
body, much more may both of them fill it, while it is within.

35
With men it is a good rule to try first, and then to trust, with God it is
contrary: I will first trust him as most wise, omnipotent, merciful, and try
him afterward: I know it is as impossible for him to deceive me^, as not to be.

36
As Christ was both a Lamb and a Lion, so is every Christian: A Lamb for
patience in suffering, and innocence of life. A Lion for boldness in his
innocence: I would so order my courage and mildness, that I may be neither
Lyon-like in my conversation, nor sleepish in the defense of a good cause.

37
The godly sow in tears, reap in joy: The seede^time is commonly waterish,
and louring: I will be content with a wet spring; so I may be sure of a
clear and joyful harvest.

38
Every man has an Heaven and an Hell: Earth is the wicked man's Heaven, his
Hell is to come; On the contrary, the godly have their hell upon earth, where
they are vexed with tentations, and afflictions by Satan and his accomplices;
their heaven is above in endless happiness; If it be ill with me on earth, it
is well my torment is so short, and so easy: I will not be so covetous, to
hope for two heavens.

39
Man on his Deathbed has a double prospect, which in his lifetime the
interposition of pleasure and miseries debard him from: The good man looks
upward, and sees heaven open with Steven, and the glorious Angels ready to
carry up his soul. The wicked manne looks downe-ward, and sees three terrible
spectacles, Death, Judgment, Hell, one beyond another; and all to be passed
through by his soul: I marvel not, that the godly have been so cheerful in
Death, that those torments, whose very sight has ouercomne the beholders, have
seemed easy to them I marvel not that a wicked man is so loath to hear of
death, so dejected, when he feels sickness, and so desperate, when he feels
the pangues of death; nor that every Balaam would fain die the death of the
righteous. Henceforth, I will envy none, but a good man; I will pity nothing
so much, as the prosperity of the wicked.

40
Not to be afflicted, is a sign of weakness: For therefore God imposes no
more on me, because he sees I can bear no more: God will not make choice of
a weak Champion^ when I am stronger, I will look for more; And when I
sustain more, it shall more comfort me, that God finds me strong, then it
shall grieve me, to be pressed with an heavy affliction.

41
That the wicked have peace in themselves, is no wonder, they are as sure as
Tentation can make them: No Prince makes War with his own Subjects: The
godly are still enemies: Therefore, they must look to be assaulted both by
Stratagems and violence: Nothing shall more joy me, then my inward unquietness.
A just war is a thousand times more happy then an ill-co^ditioned Peace.

42
Goodness is so powerful, that it can make things simply evil (namely our
sins) good to us; not good in nature, but good in the event; good, when they
are done, not good to be done: Sin is so powerful, that it can turn the
holiest Ordinances of God in it self: But herein our sins goes be^ond our
goodness; that sin defiles a man or action otherwise good; but all the goodness
of the world cannot justify one sin: As the holy ^le^h in the skirt makes
not the bread holy that touches it; but the unclean touching an holy thing,
defiles it. I will loath every evil for it own sake, I will do good but not
trust to it.

43
Fools measure good actions by the event after they are done: Wise men
beforehand by judgment, upon the rules of reason and faith: Let me do
well, let God take charge of the success, if it be we^l accepted, it is well.
If not, my thank is with God.

44
He was never good man, that amends not. For if he were good, he must needs
desire to be better. Grace is so sweet, that who ever tastes of it, must
needs long after more: and if he desire it, he will endeavor it, and if h^e
do but endeavor; GOD will crown it with success. Gods family admittes of no
Dwarffes; which are vnthriuing, and stand at a stay; but men of meas^res. What
ever become of my body, or my estate; I will ever labor to find somewhat
added to the stature of my soul.

45
Pride is the most dangerous of all sins, for both it is most insinuatiue,
having crept into HEAVEN, and Paradise; and most dangerous where it is: For
where all other Tentations are about evil, this alone is conversant only about
good things^ and one dram of it poisons many measures of grace. I will not be
more afraid of doing good things amiss, then of being proud, when I have
performed them.

46
Not only Commission makes a sin: A man is guilty of all those sins he
hates not. If I cannot avoid all, yet I will hate all.

47
Prejudice is so great an enemy to truth, that it makes the mind incapable of
it. In matters of faith, I will first lay a sure ground, and then believe,
though I cannot argue: holding the conclusion in spite of the premises: but in
other less matters, I will not so fore-stall my mind with resolution, as that
I will not be willing to be better informed. Neither will I say in my selfe^ I
will hold it, therefore it shall be truth; but, This is truth, therefore I will
hold it: I will not strive for victory, but for truth.

48
Drunkenness and Covetousness do much resemble one another, for the more a man
drinks, the more he thirsts; and the more he has, still the more he
coueteth: and for their effects, besides other, both of them have the power of
transforming a man into a beast, and of all other beasts, into a Swine. The
former is evident to sense; the other, though more obscure, is no more
q^uestionable: the covetous man in two things plainly resembles a Swine:
That he cuer roots in the earth, not so much as looking toward Heaven: That
he never does good, till his death: In desiring, my rule shall be necessity
of nature, or estate; in having, I will account that my good, which does me
good.

49
I acknowledge no Master of Requests in Heaven but one, Christ my Mediator: I
know I cannot be so happy, as not to need him, nor so miserable, that he
should contemn me: I will always ask; and that of none, but where I am sure
to speed, but where there is so much store, that when I have had the most, I
shall leave no less behind; Though numberless drops be in the Sea, yet if one
be taken out of it, has so much the less, though insensibly; but God, because
he is infinite, can admit of no diminution: Therefore are men niggardly,
because the more they give, the less they have: but thou, Lord, may give
what thou will, without abatement of thy store: Good prayers never came weeping
home; I am sure I shall receive either what I ask, or what I should ask.

50
I see that a fit Booty many times makes a thiese, and many would be proud, if
they had but the common causes of their neighbors: I account this none of the
least favors of GOD, That the world goes no better forward with me; for I
fear, if my estate were better to ye world, it might be worse to God. As it
is an happy necessity that inforces to good, so is that next happy, that
hinders from evil.

51
It is the basest love of all others that is for a benefit; for herein we
love not another, so much as our selves: Though there were no Heaven, O Lord, I
would love thee: Now there is one, I will esteem it, I will desire it, yet
still will love thee for thy goodness sake; Thy self is reward enough, though
thou broughtest no more.

52
I see men point the field, and desperately ieopard their lives, as prodigal
of their blood, in the revenge of a disgracefu^l word against themselves, while
they can be content to hear GOD pulled out of Heaven with blasphemy, and not
feel so much as a rising of their blood: Which argues our cold love to God,
and our ouer-seruent affection to our selves: In my own wrongs, I will hold
patience laudable, but in Gods injuries, impious.

53
It is an hard thing to speak well, but it is harder to be well silent, so as
it may be free from suspicion of affectation, or ^ullennes, or ignorance: Else
loquasitie, and not silence, would be a note of wisdom. Herein I will not
care how little, but how well; He said well for this. Not that which is much,
is we^l, but that which is well, is much.

54
There is nothing more odious, then fruitless old age. Now, for that no Tree
bears fruit in Autumn, unless it blossom in the spring; to the end that my
age may be profitable, and laden with ripe fruit I will endeavor, that my youth
may be studious, and floured with the blossoms of learning and observation.

55
Revenge commonly hurts both the offerer, and sufferer: as we see in the
foolish Be (though in a ^ other things commendable) yet herein the pattern
of fond spightfulnesse; which in her anger inuenometh the flesh, and loses
hersting, and so lives a Drone ever after. I account it the only valor to
remit a wrong, and will applaude it to my self, as right noble and Christian,
that I might hurt, and will not.

56
He that lives well, cannot choose but die well; for if he die suddenly, yet
he dies not vnpreparedly; if by leisure, the conscience of his well-led life,
makes his death more comfortable: But it is seldom seen, that he which lives
i^, dy^th well, for the conscience of his former evils, his present pain, and
the expectation and fear of greater, so take up his heart, that he cannot seek
God; and now it is just with God, not to be sought, or not to be found,
because he sought to him in his life time, and was repulsed: Whereas therefore,
there are usually two maine cares of good men, to live well, and die well, I
will have but this one, To live well.

57
With God there is no freeman, but his Servant, though in the Galleys, no
slave, but the sinner, though in a Palace, none noble, but the virtuous, if
never so basely descended, none rich, but he that possesses God, even in
rags, none wise, but he that is a fool to himself, and the world; none
happy, bu^ him whom the world pities: Let me be free, noble, rich, wise,
happy to God; I pass not what I am to the world.

58
When the mouth prays, man hears; when the heart, God hears; every good
prayer knockes at Heaven for a blessing; but an importunate prayer pierces it
(though as hard as brass) and makes way for it self, into the ears of the
Almighty: and as it ascends lightly up, carried with the wings of Faith, so it
comes ever laden down again upon our heads: In my prayers, my thoughts shall
not be guided by my words; but my words shall follow my thoughts.

59
If that servant were condemned for evil, that gave God no more then his
own, which he had received, what shall become of them that rob God of his
own; If God gain a little glory by me, I shall gain more by him: I will
labor so to husband the stock that God has left in my hands, that I may
return my soul better then I received it; and that he may make it better
then I return it.

60
Heaven is compared to an hill, and therefore is figured by Olympus among the
Heathen, by mount Sion in GODS Book: Hell contrariwise to a Pit^ The ascent to
the one is hard therefore, and the descent of the other easy and headlong: and
so, as if we once begin to fall, the recovery is most difficult: and not
one of many stays, till he comes to the bottom, I will be content, to pant,
and blow, and sweat, in climbing up to Heaven; as contrarily, I will be wary
of setting the first step downward toward the Pit: For as there is a I^cobs
Ladder into heaven, so there are blind stayres that go winding down into
death, whereof each makes way for other; From the object, is raised an ill
suggestion, suggestion draws on delight, delight consent, consent endeavor,
endeavor practice, practice custom, custom excuse, excuse defense, defense
obstinacy, obstinacy boasting of sin, boasting a reprobate sense: I will
watch over my ways, and do thou, Lord, watch over me, that I may avoid the
first degrees of sin, and if those ouer-take my frailty, yet keep me that
presumptuous sins prevail not over me. Beginnings are with more ease and
safety declined, when we are free; then proceedings when we have begun.

61
It is fitter for youth to learn then teach, and for age to teach then learn;
and yet fitter for an old man to learn then be ignorant; I know I shall
never know so much, that I cannot learn more; and I hope I shall never live so
long, as till I be too old to learn.

62
I never loved those Salamanders, that ar^ never well, but when they are in the
fire of contention; I will rather suffer a thousand wrongs, then offer one; I
will suffer an hundredth, rather then return one; I will suffer many, ere I
will complain of one^ and endeavor to right it by contending; I have ever
found, that to strive with my superior is furious, with ^y equal doubtful,
with my inferior, sordid and base, with any, full of unquietness.

63
The praise of a good speech stands in words and matter: Matter which is as a
fair and well featured body; Elegance of words, which is as a neat and well
fashioned garment; Good matter slubbred up in rude and careless words, is
made loathsome to the hearer, as a good body misshapen with unhandsome clothes:
Elegance without soundnes, is no better then a nice vanity: Although therefore
the most hearers are like Bees, that go all to the flowers; never regarding
the good herbs that are of as wholesome use, as the other of fair show; yet
let my speech strive to be profitable; plausible as it happens^ Better the
coat be misshapen, then the body.

64
I see, that as black and white colors to ye eyes, so is the Vice and Virtue
of others to the judgment of men: Vice gathers the beams of the sight in one,
that the eye may see it, and be intent upon it. Virtue scatters them abroad,
and therefore hardly admits of a perfect apprehension: whence it comes to
pass, that as judgment is according to sense, we do so soon epsy, and so
earnestly censure a man for one vice, letting pass many laudable qualities
undiscerned, or at least vnacknowledged; yea, whereas every man is once a fool,
and does that perhaps in one fit of his folly, which he shall at leisure
repent of; as Noah in one hours dru^kennes, uncovered those secrets which were
hid six hundred years before; The world, is hereupon ready to call in
question all his former integrity, and to exclude him from the hope of any
future amendment. Since God has given me two eyes; the one shall be busied
about the present fault that I see, with a detesting commiseration, the other
about the commendable qualities of the offender, not without an impartial
approbation of them: So shall I do GOD no wrong, in robbing him of the glory
of his gifts, mixed with infirmities, nor yet in the mean time encourage Vice,
while I do distinctly reserve for it a due portion of hatred.

65
God is above man, the brute creatures under him, he set in the midst: least he
should be proud that he has infinite creatures under him; that one is infinite
degrees above him; I do therefore owe awe unto God, mercy to the inferior
creatures; knowing that they are my fellows, in respect of creation; whereas
there is no proportion betwixt me and my Maker.

66
One said, it is good to mure the mouth to speak well, for good speech is
many times drawn into the affection; But I would fear, that speaking well
without feeling, were the next way to procure an habitual hypocri^i^: Let my
good works follow good affections, not go before them, I will therefore speak
as I think; but withal, I will labor to think well, and then I know I
cannot but speak well.

67
When I consider my soul; I could be proud to think of how divine a nature
and quality it is; but when I cast down mine eyes to my body, as the Swanne
to her black legs; and see what loathsome matter issues from the mouth,
nosthrils, ears, pores, and other passages, and how most carrion-like of all
other creatures it is after death; I am justly ashamed, to think that so
excellent a guest dwells but in a more cleanelie dunghill.

68
Every worldling is a madd manne: for, besides, that he preferres profit and
pleasure to Virtue, the world to GOD, earth to Heaven, ti^e to eternity; he
pampers the body, and starues the soul: He feeds one foul an hundredth
times, that it may feed him but once, and ^eekes all Lands and Seas for
dainties; not caring whether any, or what repast, he prouides for his soul:
He clothes the body with all rich ornaments, that it may be as fair
without, as it is filthy within; whiles his soul goes bare and naked; having
not a ragg of knowledge to cover it: Yea, he cares not to destroy ^is soul to
please the b^dy, when for the salvation of the soul, he will not so much as
hold the body short of the least pleasure. What is, if this be not a
reasonable kind of madness? Let me enjoy my soul no longer, then I prefer it
to my body; Let me have a deformed, lean, crooked, unhealthful, neglected
body; so that I may find my soul; sound, strong, well furnished, well
disposed both for earth and heaven.

69
Asa was sick but of his feet, far from the heart, yet because he sought to
the Physicians, not to God; he escaped not: Ezekiah was sick to die, yet
because he trusted to God, not to Physicians, he was restored Means without
GOD cannot help; GOD without means can and often does: I will use good
means, not to rest in them.

70
A man's best monument is his virtuous actions, foolish is the hope
ofimmortality, and future praise by the cost of a senceles^e stone; when the
passenger shall only say, here lies a fair stone and a filthy carcass:
That only can report thee rich, but for other praises, thy self must build
thy own monument alive; and write thy own Epitaph in honest and honorable
actions: which are so much more noble, then the other, as living men are better
then dead stones: Nay, I know not if the other be not the way to work a
perpetual succession of infamy: Whiles the censorious Reader, upon occasion
thereof, shall comment upon thy bad life; Whereas in this every man's heart is a
Toombe, and every man's tongue writes an Epitaph upon the well behaved:
Either I will procure me such a Monument to be remembered by, or else it is
better to be inglorious, then infamous.

71
The basest things are ever most plentiful; history and experience tell us,
that some kind of Mouse breeds 120. young ones in one nest, whereas the
Lion, or Elephant bears but one at once. I have ever found, the least wit
yields the most words: It is both the surest and wisest way, to speak
little, and think more.

7^
An evil man is clay to God, wax to the Devil: God may stamp him into
powder, or temper him a new, but none of his means can melt him. Contrariwise,
a good man is Gods wax, and Satan clay, he relents at every look of God, but
is not stirred at any temptation. I had rather bow, then break to God; but for
Satan, or the world, I had rather be broken in pieces with their violence,
then suffer my self to be bowed unto their obedience.

73
It is an easy matter for a man to be careless of himself, and yet much
easier to be enamoured of himself: For if he be a Christian, whiles he
contemnes the world perfectly, it is hard for him to reserve a competent
measure of love to himself: If a worldling, it is not possible but he must
ouer-loue himself. I will strive for the mean of both; and so hate ye world,
that I may care for my self, and so care for my self, that I be not in love
with the world.

74
I will hate popularitie and ostentation, as ever dangerous, but most of all
in Gods business: which who so affect, do as ill spokesmen, who when they are
sent to woo for GOD, speak for themselves; I know how dangerous it is to
have GOD my rival.

75
Earth affords no sound contentment: for what is there under Heaven not
troublesome, besides that which is called pleasure: and that in the end I find
most irksome of all other.

76
God is ever with me, ever before me; I know he cannot but ouer-see me
always, though my eyes be held that I see him not; yea, he is still within
me, though I feel him not: Neither is there any moment, that I can live
without God; Why do I not therefore always live with him? Why do I not
account all ho^res lost, wherein I enjoy him not?

77
There is no man so happy as the Christian; When he looks up into Heaven, he
thinks, That is my home, the God that made it, and owes it, is my Father; The
Angels more glorious in nature then my self are my attendants; mine enemies
are my vassals: Yea, those things, which are the terriblest of all to the
wicked, are most pleasant to him: When he hears God thunder above his head,
he thinks this is the voice of my Father; when he remembers the Tribunal of
the last judgment, he thinks it is my Savior that sits in it; when death, he
esteems it but as the Angel set before Paradise; which with one blow admits
him to eternal joy; and which is most of all, nothing in earth or Hell can make
him miserable: There is nothing in the world worth envying but a Christian.

78
As manne is a little world; so every Christian is a little Church within
himself. As the Church therefore is sometimes in the wane through persecution,
other times in her full glory and brightness: So let me expect my self
sometimes drouping under Tentations, and sadly hanging down the head, for the
want of the feeling of GODS presence; at other times carried with the full
sail of a resolute assurance to Heaven: Knowing that as it is a Church at the
weakest stay, so shall I in my greatest deiection hold the child of God.

79
Tentations on the right hand, are more perilous then those on the left; and
destroy a thousand to the others ten; As the Sun more usually causes the
Trauailer to cast his cloak, then the wind: For those on the left hand miscarie
men but two ways, to distrust, and denial of God; more rare sins: but the
other, to all the rest, wherewith men's lives are so commonly defiled: The
spirit of Christians is like the English Iet, whereof we read, that is fired
with water, quenched with oy^e. And these two, prosperity and adversity, are
like heat and cold; the one gathers the powers of the soul together, and
makes them abler to resist by uniting them, the other diffuses them, and by
such separation makes them easier to conquer: I hold it therefore as praise
worthy with God, for a man to contemn a proffered honor, or pleasure for
conscience sake, as on the rack not to deny his profession: When these are
offered, I will not nibble at the bayte, that I be not taken with the hook.

80
GOD is Lord of my body also, and therefore challenges as well reverent
gesture, as inward devotion: I will ever in my prayers, either stand as a
Servant before my Master, or kneel as a Subi^ct to my Prince.

81
I have not been in others breasts; but for my own part, I never tasted of
ought, that might deserve the name of pleasure; And if I could, yet a thousand
pleasures cannot counteruaile one torment, because the one may be exquisite,
the other not without composition; and if not one torment, much less a
thousand; and if not for a moment, much less for eternity; and if not the
torment of a part, much less of the whole; for if the pain but of a tooth be
so into lerable, what shall the racking of the whole body be; and if of the
body, what shall that be, which is primarilie of the soul. If there be
pleasures that I hear not of, I will be wary o^ buying them so ouer-deere.

82
As hypocrisy is a common counterfeit of all virtues, so there is no special
virtue, which is not to the very life of it seemingly resembled by some
special vice: So, devotion is counterfaited by superstition, good thrist by
niggardliness, charity with vainglorious pride: For as charity is bounteous
to the poor, so is vainglory to the wealthy; as charity sustaines al for
truth, so pride for a vain praise; both of them make a man courteous and
affable: So the substance of every virtue is in the heart; which since it has
not a window made into it by the Creator of it; but is re^erued under lock and
key for his own view: I will judge only by appearance: I had rather wrong my
self by credulity, then others by unjust censures and suspicions.

83
Every man has a kingdom within himself: Reason as the Princess dwells in
the highest and inwardest room: The senses are the Guard and attendants on the
Court; without whose aid nothing is admitted into the Presence: The supreme
faculties as will, memory etc. ar^ the Peers: The outward parts and inward
affections are the Commons: Violent Passions are as Rebels to disturb the
common Peace. I would not be a Stoic to have no Passions; for that were to
overthrow this inward government, God has erected in me; but a Christian, to
order those I have: and for that I see that as in commotions, one mutinous
person draws on more, so in passions, that one m^kes way for the extremitic of
another (as excess of love causes excess of grie^e, upon the loss of what we
loved): I will do as wise Princes use, to those they misdoubt for faction, so
hold them down, and keep them bare, that their very impotencie and
remissness shall affoorde me security.

84
I look upon the things of this life, as an owner, as a stranger: As an owner
in their right, as a stranger in their use. I see that owning is but a conceit
besides using: I can use (as I lawful^y may) other men's commodities as my own;
walk in their woods, look on their fair houses, with as much pleasure as my
own. Yet again, I will use my own, as if it were another, knowing that
though I hold them by right, yet it is only by Tenure at will.

85
There is none like to Luthers three Maist^rs. Prayer, Tentation, Medita^ion:
Tentation stirs up holy meditation, meditation prepares to prayer, and prayer
makes profit of ^entation; and fetches all divine knowledge from Heaven: O^
others, I may learn the Theorie of Divinity, of ^hese only, the practice.
Other Masters teach me by rote, to speak Parotlike of heavenly things, these
alone with feeling and understanding.

86
Expectation is the greatest enemy both of doing well, and good acceptance of
what is done I hold it the part of a wise man, to endeavor rather that Fame may
follow him then go before him.

87
I see a number which with Shimei, whiles they seek their servant, which is
riches; loose their souls: No worldly thing shall draw me without the gates,
within which, God has confined me.

88
It is an hard thing for a man to find weariness in pleasure, while it
^a^teth, or contentmen^ in pain while he is under it: after both (indeed) it
is easy: yet both of these must be found in both; or else we shall be drunken
with pleasures, and overwhelmed with sorrow: As those therefore which should
eat some dish over deliciously sweet, allay it with tart sauce, that they may
not be cloyed; and those that are to receive bitter pills, yt they may not be
anoyed with their unpleasing ^ast, role them in Sugar; so in all pleasures it
is best to labor, not how to make them most delightful, but how to moderate
them from excess; and in a^l sorrows so to sett^e our hearts in true grounds
of comfort, that we may not care so much for being bemoned of others, as how
to be most contented in ourselves.

8^
In ways, we see Trauailers choose not the fairest and greenest, if it be
either cross or contrary, but the nearest, though mirie and uneven: so in
opinions, let me follow not ye plausiblest, but the truest, though more
perplexed.

90
Christian society is like a bundle of sticks laid together, whereof one
kind^es another: Solitary men have fewest prouocations to evil, but again
fewest incitations to good: so much as doing good is better then not doing
evil, will I account christian good fellowship better then an Eremitish and
mel^ncholike solitarines.

91
I had rather confess my ignorance, the^ falsely profess knowledge: It is no
shame not to know all things; but it is a just shame to ouer-reach in any
thing.

62
Sudden extremity is anotable trial of faith, or any other disposition of
the soul: for as in a sudden fear, the blood gathers to the heart, for
garding of that part which is principal; so the powers of the soul co^bine
themselves in an hard exigent, that they may be easily judged of: The faithful
(more suddenly then any casualty) can lift up his heart to his stay in Heaven:
Whereas the worldling stands amazed, and distraught with the evil, because he
has no refuge to fly unto, for not being acquainted with God in his peace,
how should he but have him to seek in his extremity. When therefore some
sudden stitch girds me in the side, like to be the messenger of death, or when
the sword of my enemy in an unexpected assault threate^s my body, I will
seriously note how I am affected^ so the suddainest evil, as it shall not come
unlooked for, shall not go away unthought of: If I find my self courageous,
and heavenly minded, I will rejoice in the truth of Gods graces in me, knowing
that one dram of tried faith, is worth a whole pound of speculatiue: and that
which once stood by me, will never fail me: If dejected, and hartlesse,
herein I will acknowledge cause of humiliation, and with all care and
earnestness seek to store my self against the dangers following.

93
The rules of civil policy, may well be applied to the mind: as therefore for
a Prince, that he may have good success against either rebels or foreign
enemies, it is a sure axiom, Divide and rule: but when he is once seated in
the throne over loyal Subjects, Unite and rule: So in the regiment of the
soul, there must be variance' set in the judgment, and the conscience, and
affections, that that what is amiss may be subdued; but when all parts
brought to order, it is the only course to maintain their peace; that all
seeking to establish and help each other, the whole may prosper. Always to be
at war, is desperate; always at peace, secure, and over Epicure-like. I do
account a secure peace, a just occasion of this civil dissension, in my self,
and a true Christian peace, the end of all my secret wars; which when I have
achieved, I shall reign with comfort, and never will be quiet, till I have
achieved it.

94
I brought sin enough with me into the world, to repent of all my life,
though I should never actually sin; and sin enough actuallie every day to
sorrow for, though I had brought none with me into the world: but laying both
together, my time is rather too short for my repentance: It were madness in me
to spend my short life in iollity and pleasures, whereof I have so small
occasion, and neglect the opportunity of my so just sorrow: especially since
before I came into the world, I sinned; after I am gone out of the world, the
contagion of my sin past, shall add to the guilt of it; yet in both these
states I am incapable of repentance; I will do that while I may, which when I
have neglected, is unrecoverable.

95
Ambition is torment enough for an enemy, for it affordes as much
coffeehouse in inioying, ^as in want, making men like poisoned Rats, which
when they have tasted of their bane, cannot rest till they drink, and then can
much less rest, till their death: It is better for me to live in the
wise-mens stocks in a contented want, then in a fools Paradise to vex my
self with wil^full unquietness.

96
It is not possible but a conceited man must be a fool: for that ouerweening
opinion, he has of himself, excludes all opportunity of purchasing knowledge.
Let a vessel be once full of never so base liquor, it will not give room to
the costliest; but spilles beside what so ever is infused: the proud man,
though he be empty of good substance, yet he is full of conceit: Many men had
proved wise, if they had not so thought themselves. I am empty enough to
receive knowledge enough: Let me think my self but so bare as I am, and more
I need not. O Lord, do thou teach me how little, how nothing I have: and
give me no more the^ I know I want.

97
Every man has his turn of sorrow; whereby, some more, some less, all men
are in their times miserable, I never yet could meet with the man that
complained not of somewhat. Before sorrow come, I will prepare for it, when it
is come, I will welcome it; when it goes, I will take but half a farewell of
it, as still expecting his return.

98
There be three things that follow an injury, so far as it concerns our
selves (for as the offense touches GOD, it is above our reach:) revenge,
censure, satisfaction; Which must be remitted of the merciful man; Yet not all
at all times: But revenge always, leaving it to him that can, and will do it;
censure often times; satisfaction sometimes; He that deceiues me often, though I
must forgive him, yet charity binds me not, not to censure him for untrusty:
and he that has endammaged me much, cannot plead breach of charity in my
seeking his restitution: I will so remit wrongs, as I may not encourage others
to offer them: and so retain them, as I may not induce God to retain mine to
him.

99
Garments that have once one rent in them, are subject to be torn on every
nail, and every brere; and glasses that are once cracked, are soon broken: such
is a man's good name^ once tainted with just reproach: Next to the approbation of
God, and the testimony of my own conscience, I will seek for a good
reputation with men^ not by close carriage concealing faults, that they may
not be known to my shame, but avoiding all vices, that I may not deserve it:
the efficacy of the agent is in the patient wel^ disposed; It is hard for me
ever to do good, unless I be reputed good.

100
Many vegetable, and many brute creatures exceed man in length of age; which
has opened the mouths of heathen Philosophers to accuse nature, as a
stepmother to man: who has given him ye least time to live, that only could
make use of his time in getting knowledge: But herein religion does most
magnify God in his wisdom and justice, teaching us, that other creatures live
long, and perish to nothing; only man recompe^ces the shortness of his life,
with eternity after it; that the sooner he dies well, the sooner he coms to ye
Perfection of knowledge: which he might in vain seek below; the sooner he
dies ill, the less hurt he does with his knowledge: There is great reason
then, why man should live long; greater, why he should die early: I will neu^r
blame God for making me too soon happy, for changing my ignorance for
knowledge, my corruption for immortality, my infirmities for perfection^ Come
Lord lesus, come quickly.

The second book OF MEDITATIONS and Vows,

Divine and Morrall.

AT LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for John Porter.

1605.

TO THE RIGHT virtuous and Worshipful Lady, the Lady Drury, all increase of
Grace.
MAdame, I know your Christian ingenu^ti^ such, that you will not grudge
others the communication of this your priu^t right: which ye^ I durst not have
presumed to adventure, if I feared that either the benefit of it would be
less, or the acceptance. Now it shall be no less yours, only it shall be
more known to be yours. Vouchsase therefore to take part with your worthy
husband, of these my simple Meditations. And if your long and gracious
experience, have written you a larger volume of wholesome laws, and better
informed you by precepts fetched from your own ^eeling, then I can hope for, by
my b^re speculation, yet where these my not unlikely rules shall accord with
yours, let your redoubled assent allow the^, and they confirm it. I made them
not for the eye, ^ut for the heart; neither do I commend the^ to your reading,
but your practice: wherein also it shall not be enough, that you are a mere
and ordinary agent, but that you be a pattern propounded unto others
imitation: so shall your virtuous and holy progress, besides your own peace
and happiness, be my crown, and rejoicing in the day of our common
appearance. Halsted. Dec. 4.

Your L. humbly devoted, Ios. Hall.

(...) 2
I find that all worldly things require a long labor in getting, and af^ord a
short pleasure in enjoying them. I will not care much for what I have, nothing
for what I have not.

3
I see natural bodies for^ake their own place and condition, for the
pre^eruation of ye whole, but of all other creatures, man, and of all other
men, Christians, have the least interest in themselves; I will live as given to
others, lent only to my self.

4
That which is said of the Elephant, that being guilty to his deformity, he
cannot abide to look on his own face in the water, but seeks ^or troubled and
muddy channels, we see well moralized in men of evil conscience, who know
their souls are so filthy, that they dare not so much as view them; but shift
off all checkes of their former iniquity, wit^ vain excuses of good
^ellowship: Whence it is, that every ^inal reprehension so galls them, because
it calls the eyes of the soul home to it self, and makes them see a glance
of what they would not: So have I seen a foolish and timorous patient, which
knowing his wound very deep, would not endure the Chirurgian ^o search it;
Whereon what can ensue, but a festering of the part, and a danger of the whole
body^ so I have seen many prodigal wasters run so far in books, that
they cannot abide to hear of a reckoning. It has been an old and true
Proverb, Often and even reckoninges make long friends. I will often sum up my
estate with GOD, that I may know what I have to expect, and answer for:
Neither shall my score run on so long with GOD, that I shall not know my
debts, or fear an Audit, or despair of payment.

5
I account this body nothing but a close prison to my soul, and the earth a
larger prison to my body. I may not break prison, till I be loosed by death,
but I will leave it not unwillingly when I am loosed.

6
The common fears of the world are causeless, and ill placed; no man fears
to do ill, every man to suffer ill: wherein if we consider it well, we shall
find that we fear our best friends; for my part, I have learned more of God
and of my self in one weeks extremity, then all my whole lives prosperity had
taught me before: And in reason and common experience, prosperity usually
makes us forget our death; adversity on the other side makes us neglect our
life: Now if we measure both of these by their effects, forgetfulness of death
makes us secure, neglect of this life makes us careful of a better; so much
therefore as neglect of life is better then forgetfulness of death; and
watchfulnes better then security, so much more beneficial will I esteem
adversity then prosperity.

7
Even griese it self is pleasant to the remembrance, when it is once past, as
joy is, whiles it is present. I will not therefore in my conceit make any so
great difference betwixt joy and griese; since griese past is joyful, and long
expectation of joy is grievous.

8
Every sickness is a little death, I will be content to die often, that I may die
once Well.

9
Often times those things which have been sweet in opinion, have proved bitter
in experience; I will therefore ever suspende my resolute judgment, vnti^l the
trial and event, in the mean while I will fear the worst, and hope the best.

10
In all divine and morrall good things, I would feign keep that I have, and
get that I want; I do not more loath all other covetousness, then I affect
this: in all these things alone I profess never to have enough: If I may
increase them, therefore either by laboring, or begging, or usury, I shall
leave no means unattempted.

11
Some children are of that nature, that they are never well, but while the rod
is over them: such am I to God: let him beat me, so he amend me; let him take
all away from me, so he give me himself.

12
There must not be one uniform proceeding with all men in reprehension: but
that must vary according to the disposition of the reproved: I have seen
some men as thorns, which easily touched, hurt not; but if hard and unwarily,
fetch blood of the hand^ others, as nettles, which if they be nicely handled,
sting and prick, but if hard and roughly pressed, are pulled up without harm:
Before I take any man in hand, I will know whether he be a thorn or a nettle.

13
I will account no sin little, since there is not the least, but works out the
death of the soul; It is all one, whether I be drowned in the ebbe^ shore, or
in the midst of the deep Sea.

14
It is a base thing to get goods to keep them: I see that GOD which only is
infinitely rich, holds nothing in his own hands, but gives all to his
creatures. But if we will needs lay up; were should we rather repose it, then
in Christ's treasury: The poor man's hand is the treasury of Christ: All my
super^luitie shall be there hoorded up, where I know it shall be safely kept,
and surely returned me.

15
The School of God and Nature require two contrary manners of proceeding: In
the School of Nature, we must conceive, and then beleeue^ In the School of
God, we must first believe, and then we shall conceive: He that believes no
more then he conceiues, can never be a Christian; nor he a Philosopher that
assents without reason. In Natures School we are taught to bolt out the truth
by Logical discourse: God cannot endure a Logitian in his School; he is the
best Scholar that reasons least, and assents most: In divine things, what I
may, I will conceive, the rest I will believe and admire. Not a curious head, but
a credulous and plain heart is accepted with God.

16
No worldly pleasure has any absolute delight in it, but as a Be, having
honey in the mouth, has a sting in the tail; Why am I so foolish to rest my
heart upon any of them; and not rather labor to aspire to that one abso^lute
good, in whom is nothing ^auouring of grief, nothing wanting to perfect
happiness.

17
A sharp reproof I account better then a smooth deceit; therefore when my
friend checks me, I will respect it with thankfulness; when others flatter
me, I will suspect it, and rest in my own censure of my self, who should be
more privy, and less partial to my own deseruings.

18
Extremity distinguishes friends: worldly pl^a^ures like Physicians, gives
us over when once we lie a dying, and yet the deathbed had most need of
comforts: Christ Jesus stands by his in the pangues of death; and after death,
at the bar of judgment, not leaving them either in their bed, or grave: I
will use them therefore to my best advantage, not trust them. But for thee (O
my Lord) which in mercy and truth can not fail me, whom I have found ever
faithful and present in all extremities; Kill me, yet will I trust in thee.

19
We have heard of so many thousand generations passed, and we have seen so
many hundreths die within our knowledge, that I wonder any man can make account
to live one day. I will die daily, it is not done before the ^ime, which may
be done at all times.

20
Desire oft-times makes us unthankful; for who hopes for that, he has not,
usually forgets that which he has. I will not suffer my heart to roue after
high or impossible hopes, least I should in the mean time contemn present
benefits.

21
In hoping well, in being ill, and fearing worse, the life of man is wholly
consumed. When I am ill, I will live in hope of better, when well, in fear of
worse, neither will I at any time hope without fear, least I should deceive my
self with too much confidence, wherein evil shall be so much more unwelcome
and intolerable, because I looked for good; nor again, fear without hope,
least I should be overmuch dejected; nor do either of them without true
contentation.

22
What is man to the whole earth? what is earth to the Heaven? What is Heaven to
his Maker? I will admire nothing in it self, but all things in God, and God in
all things.

23
There be three usual causes of ingratitude, upon a benefit received, Envy,
Pride, Covetousness: Envy looking more at others benefits then our own:
Pride looking more at our selves, then the benefit; Covetousness looking more
at what we would have, then what we have. In good turns I will neither
respect the giver, nor my self, nor the gift, nor others; but only the intent
and good will from whence it proceeded; so shall requite others great pleasures
with equal goodwill, and accept of small favors with great thankfulness.

24
Whereas the custom of the world, is to hate things present, to desire
future, and magnifi^ what is past^ I will contrarily esteem that which is
present, best: for both, what is past, was once present, and what is future,
will be present; future things next, because they are present in hope; what
is past, least of all, because it cannot be present, yet somewhat, because it
was.

25
We pity the folly of the Lark, which while in plays with the feather, and
stoopeth to the glass, is caught in the Fowlers net; and yet cannot see our
selves a-like made fools by Satan, who deluding us by the vain feathers, and
glasses of the world, suddenly enwrappeth us in his snares; we see not the
nets indeed, it is too much that we shall feel them, and that they are not so
easily escaped after, as before avoided; O Lord keep thou mine eyes from
beholding vanity, and though mine eyes see it, let not my heart stoop to it;
but loath it a far off; And if I stoop at any time, and be taken, Set thou
my soul at liberty, that I may say, My soul is escaped even as a bird out of
the snare of the Fowler; the snare is broken, and I am de^iuered.

26
In suffering eui^l, to look to secondarie causes, without respect to the
highest, makes impatience; for so we bite at the stone, and neglect him that
threw it. If we take a blow at our equal, we return it with usury, if of a
Prince, we repine not: What matter is it, if God kill me, whether he do it
by an Ague, or by the hand of a Tyrant^ Again, in expectation of good, to
look to the first cause, without care of the second, argues idleness, and
causes want: As we cannot help our selves without God; so God will not
ordinarily help us without our selves; In both, I will look up to God, without
repining at the means in one, or trusting them in the other.

27
If my money were another man's, I could but keep it; only the expending
shows it my own: It is greater glory, comfort, and gain, to lay it out well,
then to keep it safely: God has made me not his Treasurer, but his Steward.

28
Augustines friend Nebridius, not unjustly hated a short answer to a weighty
and difficult question: because the disquisition of great truths requires
time, and the determining is perilous: I will as much hate a tedious and
farre-fetched answer to a short and easy question: For as that other wrongs
the truth, so this the hearer.

29
Performance is a binder; I will request no more favor of any man, then I must
needs: I will rather choose to make an honest shift, the^ overmuch enthrall my
self by being beholden.

30
The world is a stage; Every man an actor; and plays his part here either in
a Comedy or Tragedy; The good man is a Comedian, which how ever he begins,
ends merrily: but the wicked man acts a Tragedy, and therefore ever ends in
horror. Thou see a wicked man vant himself on this stage, stay till the last
act, and look to his end, as Da^id did, and see whether that be peace: Thou
would make strange Tragedies, if thou would have but one act: who sees an
Ox grazing in a fat and rank pasture, and thinks not that he is near to the
slaughter? whereas the lean beast that toils under the yoke, is far enough
from the Shambles. The best wicked man cannot be so envied in his first shows,
as he is pitiable in ye conclusion.

32
Of all objects of Beneficence, I would choose either an old man, or a child;
because these are most out of hope to requite: The one forgets a good turn,
the other lives not to repay it.

32
That which Pythagoras said of Philosophers, is more true of Christians: for
Christianity is nothing but a divine and better Philosophy: Three sorts of men
come to the Market, buyers, sellers, lookers on: The two first are both busy,
and carefully distracted about their Market; only the third live happily,
using the world as if they used it not.

33
There be three things which of all other I will never strive for: the wall,
the way, the best seate^ If I deserve well, a low place cannot disparage me so
much, as I shall grace it; if not, the height of my place shall add to my
s^ame: whiles every man shall condemn me of pride matched with unworthiness.

34
I see there is not so much difference betwixt a man and a beast, as betwixt a
Christian and a natural man: For whereas man lives but one life of reason,
above the beast: A Christian lives four lives above a natural man: The life of
inchoate regeneration by grace: The perfect life of imputed righteousness: the
life of glory begun in the separation of the soul; the life of perfect glory
in the society of the body, with the soul in full happiness: The woo^st
whereof is better by many degrees, then the best life of a natural man: For
whereas the dignity of the life is measured by the cause of it; in which
regard the life of the plant is basest, because it is but from the juice
arising from the root, administered by the earth: the life of the bruit
creature better then it, because it is sensitive; of man better then it,
because reasonable; and the cause of this life, is the spirit of GOD; so far
as the spirit of GOD is above reason, so far does a Christian exceed a mere
naturalist. I thank God much that he has made me a man; but more that he
has made me a Christian; without which, I know not whether it had been
better for me, to have been a beast, or not to have been.

35
Great men's favors, friends promises, and dead men's s^ooes I will esteem,
but not trus^ to.

36
It is a fearful thing to sin, more fearful to delight in sin, yet
worse to defend it, but worse the^ worst, to boast of it: If therefore I cannot
avoid sin, because I am a man; yet I will avoid the delight, defense, and
boasting of sin, because I am a Christian.

37
Those things which are most eagerly desired, are most hardly both gotten, and
kept: God commonly crossing our desires, in what we are over fervent. I will
therefore account all things as too good to have, so nothing too dear to
loose.

38
It is best to be courteous to all, entire with few^ so may we (perhaps) have
less cause of joy, I am sure, less occasion of sorrow.

39
Secrecies as they are a burden to the mind ere they be uttered, so are they
no less charge to the receiver, when they are vttred: I will not long after
more inward secrets, least I should procure doubt to my self, and jealous
fear to the discloser: But as my mouth shall be shut with fidelity, not to
blab them, so my ear shall not be too open to receive them.

40
As good Physicians by one receipt make way for another, so is it the safest
course in practice: I will reveal a great secret to none, but whom I have
found faithful in less.

41
I will enjoy all things in GOD, and GOD in all things, nothing in it self: So
shall my joys neither change nor perish; for how ever the things themselves
may alter, or fade, yet he in whom they are mine, is ever like himself,
constant, and everlasting.

42
If I would provoke my self to contentation, I will cast down my eyes to my
inferiors, and there see better men in worse condition: If to humility, I will
cast them up to my betters, and so much more de^ect my self to them, by how
much more I see them, thought worthy to be respected of others, and deserve
better in themselves.

43
True virtue rests in the conscience of it self, either for reward, or censur^.
If therefore I know my self upright, false rumors shall not daunt me; If not
answerable to the good report of my favorers, I will my self find the first
fault, that I may prevent the shame of others.

44
I will account virtue the best riches, knowledge the next, riches the worst;
and therefore will labor to be virtuous and learned without condition; as for
riches, if they fall in my way, I refuse them not; but if not, I desire them
not.

45
An honest word I account better then a careless oath, I will say nothing but
what I dare swear, and will perform, it is a shame for a Christian to abide
his tongue a false Servant, or his mind a loose Mistress.

46
There is a just and easy difference to be put betwixt a friend, and an
enemy; betwixt a familiar and a friend; and much good use to be made of all;
But of all with discretion. I will disclose my self no whi^ to my enemy,
somewhat to my friend, wholly to no man, least I should be more others then my
own: Friendship is brittle stuff, how know I whether he that now loves me,
may not hate me hereafter?

47
No man but is an easy Judge of his own matters; and lookers on oftentimes
see the more. I will therefore submit my self to others, in what I am
reproved, but in what I am praised, only to my self.

48
I will not be so merry as to forget God, nor so sorrowful to forget my self.

49
As nothing makes so strong and mortal hostility, as discord in religions, so
nothing in the world unites men's hearts so firmly, as the bond of faith: For
whereas there are three grounds of friendship, virtue, pleasure, profit, and by
all confessions, that is the surest which is upon virtue, it must needs follow,
that what is grounded on the best, and most heavenly virtue, must be the
fastest^ which as it unites man to God so inseparably, that no tentations, no
torments, not all the gates of H^ll can sever him; so it unites one Christian
soul to another so firmly, that no outward occurrences, ^o imperfections in
the party loved, can dissolve them; If I love not the child of GOD for his
own sake, for his Fathers sake, more then my friend for my commodity, or my
kinsman for blood, I never received any spark of true heavenly love.

50
The good duty that is differed upon a conceit of present unfitness, at last
grows irksome, and there-vpon altogether neglected. I will not suffer my heart
to entertain the least thought of loathnesse toward the task of devotion,
wherewith I have stinted my self: but violently break through any motion of
unwillingness, not without a deep check to my self for my backwardnes.

51 Hearing is a sense of great apprehension, yet far more subject to deceit
then seeing; not in the manner of apprehending, but in ye uncertainty of the
object: words are vocal interpreters of the mind, actions real; and therefore
how ever both should speak according to the truth of what is in the heart; yet
words do more belie the heart, then actions: I care not what words I hear,
when I see deeds; I am sure what a man does, he thinks, not so always what
he speaks: Though I will not be so severe a censor, that for some few evil
acts I should condemn a man of false-hartednes; yet in common course of life,
I need not be so mopish, as not to believe rather the language of ye hand, then
of the tongue. He that says we^l, and does well, is without exception
commendable; but if one of these must be severed from the other, I like him
well that does well, and ^aith nothing.

52
That which they say of the Pelican, that when the Shepherds in desire to
catch her, lay fire not far from her nest, which ^he finding, and fearing the
danger of her young, seeks to blow out with her wings, so long till ^he burn
her self, and makes her self a pray in an vnwi^e pity to her young^ I see
morally verified in experience, of those which indiscreetly med^ling with the
flame of discension kindled in the Church, rather increase then quench it;
rather fire their own wings then help others. I had rather b^waile the fire a
far off, then stir in the coals of it. I would not grudge my ashes to it,
if those might abate the burning, but since I see it is daily increased with
partaking; I will behold it with sorrow; and meddle no otherwise then by
prayers to God, and entreaties to men; seeking my own safety, and the peace of
the Church in the freedom of my thought, and silence of my tongue.

53
That which is said of Lucillaes faction, that anger bred it, pride fostered
it, and covetousness confirmed it, is true of all Schisms, though with some
inuersion: For the most are bred through pride; whiles men upon an high conceit
of themselves, scorn to go in the common road, and affect singularity in
opinion; are confirmed through anger, whiles they stomach and grudge any
contradiction; and are nourished through coue^ousnes, whiles they seek ability
to bea^e out their part. In some other again Covetousness obtaines the first
place, Anger the second, Pride the ^ast: Herein therefore I have be^ne always
wont to commend and admire the humi^ity of those great and profound wi^s, whom
depth of knowledge has not led to bypaths in judgment, but wal^ing in the
beaten path of the church, have bent all their forces to the estab^ishment of
received truths: accounting it greater glory to confirm an ancient verity,
then to devise a new opinion (though never so probable) unknown to their
predecessors: I will not reject a truth for m^ere novelty; old truths may
come newly to light: neither is God tied to times for the gift of his
illumination, but I will suspect a novel opinion of untruth; and not
entertain it, unless it may be deduced from ancient grounds.

54
The ear and the ey^ are the minds rece^uers; but the tongue is only busied
in expending the treasure received, if therefore the revenues of the mind be
vttred as fast or faster then they are recei^ed, it cannot be but that the
mind must needs be held bare, and can never lay up for purchase. But if the
receivers take in still with no utterance, the mind may soon grow a burden to
it self, and unprofitable to others. I will not lay up too much, and utter
nothing, least I be covetous, nor spend much, and store up little, least I be
prodigal and poor.

55
I will speak no ill of others, no good of my self.

56
That which is the misery of Trauailers, to find many hosts, and few
friends, is the estate of Christians in their pilgrimage to a better life: Good
friends may not therefore be easily forgone; neither must they be used as
suits of apparel, which when we have worn threadbare, we cast off, and call
for new; Nothing but death or villainy shall divorce me from an old friend:
But still I will follow him so far, as is either possible or honest: And then
I will leave him with sorrow.

57
True Friendship necessarily requires Patience, for there is no man in whom I
shall not mislike somewhat; and who shall not as justly mislike somewhat in
me. My friends faults therefore, if little, I will swallowe and digest; if
great, I will smot^er them; how ever, I will wink at them to others, but
lovingly notify them to himself.

58
Injuries hurt (...) more in the receiving, then in the remembrance: A small
injury shall go as it comes, a great injury may dine or suppe with me; but
none at all shall lodge with me; why should I vex my self, because another
has vexed me.

59
It is good dealing with that, over which we have the most power: if my estate
will not be framed to my mind, I will labor to frame my mind to my estate.

60
In greatest company I will be alone to my self; in greatest priuacie, in
company with God.

61
Grief for things past that cannot be remedied, and care for things to come
that cannot be prevented, may easily hurt, can never benefit me; I will
therefore commit my self to God in both, and enjoy the present.

62
Let my estate be never so mean, I will ever keep my self rather beneath;
then either leuel, or above it: A man may rise when he will with honor, but
cannot fall without shame.

63
Nothing does so befoole a man as extreme passion; this does both make the^
fools, which otherwise are not; and show them to be fools that are so:
Violent passions, if I cannot tame the^, that they may yield to my ease; I will
at least smother the^ by concealment, that they may not appear to my shame.

64
The mind of man, though infinite in desire, yet is finite in capacity: Since
I cannot hope to know all things, I will labor first to know what I needs
must for their use; next, what I best may for their conuenience.

65
Though time be precious to me (as all irreuocable good things deserve to be)
and of all other things I would not be lavish of it; yet I will account no
time lost, that is either lent to, or bestowed upon my friend.

66
I will honor good examples, but I will live by good precepts.

67
As charity requires forgetfulness of evil deeds, so Patience requires
forgetfulness of evil accidents^ I will remember evils past to humble me, not
to vex me.

68
It is both a misery and a shame, for a man to be a Banckrupt in love; which he
may easily pay, and be never the more impouirished. I will be in no man's debt
for good will; but will at least return every man his own measure; if not with
usury: It is much better to be a Creditor, then a Debtor in any thing; but
especially of this: yet of this, I will so be content to be a debtor, that I
will always be paying it where I owe it; and yet never will have so paid it,
that I shall not owe it more.

69
The Spanish proverb is too true; Dead men and absent find no friends: All
mouths are boldly opened with a conceit of impunity: My ^are shall be no
grave to bury my friends good name: But as I will be my present friends
self, So I will be my absent friends Deputy; to say for him what he would,
and cannot speak for himself.

70
The loss of my friend as it shall moderately grieve me, so it shall another
way much benefit me in recompense of his want: for it shall make me think more
often, and seriously of earth, and of heaven: Of earth, for his body which is
reposed in it: of Heaven for his soul, which possesses it before me: of
earth to put me in mind of my like frailty and mortality: of Heaven, to make
me desire, and after a sort emulate his happiness and glory.

71
Variety of objects is wont to cause distraction; when again a little one
lay^ close to the eye, if but of a penny breadth, wholly takes up the sight,
which could else see the whole half Heaven at once: I will have the eyes of my
mind ever forestalled, and filled with these two objects, the shortness of my
life, eternity after death.

72
I see that he is more happy, that has nothing to leese, then he that
loses that which he has. I will therefore neither hope for riches, nor fear
poverty.

73
I care not so much in anything for multitude, as for choice; Books and
friends I will not have many: I had rather ^eriouslv converse with a few, then
wander amongst many.

74
The wicked man is a very coward, and is afraid of every thing of God, because
he is his enemy, of Satan, because he is his tormenter; of Gods creatures,
because they joining with their Maker, fight against him; of himself, because
he bears about him his own accuser, and executioner: The godly man
contrarily, is afraid of nothng^ not of GOD, because he knows him his best
friend, and therefore will not hurt him; not of Satan, because he cannot hurt
him, not of afflictions, because he knows they proceed from a loving God, and
end his own good; not of the creatures, since the very stones of the field are
in league with him; not of himself, since his conscience is at peace; A wicked
man may be secure, because he knows not what he has to fear, or desperate,
through extremity of fear; but truly courageous he cannot be. Faithlesnes
cannot choose but be false hearted: I will ever by my courage take trial of my
faith: By how much more I fear, by so much less I believe.

75
The godly man lives hardly, and like the Ant toils here, during the Summer
of his peace, holding himself short of his pleasures, as looking to provide
for an Winter^ which when it comes, he is able to wear it out comfortably;
whereas the wicked man does prodigally lash out all his joys in the time of
his prosperity: and like the Grasshopper, singing merrily all Summer, is starued
in Winter. I will so enjoy the present, that I will lay up more for hereafter.

76
I have wondered often, and blushed for shame, to read in mere Philosophers
(which had no other Mistress but Nature) such strange resolution in the
contempt of both fortunes (as they call them); such notable precepts for a
constant setlednes and tranquillity of mind; and to compare it with my own
disposition, and practice; whom I have found too much drouping and dejected
under small crosses, and easily again carried away with little prosperity. To
see such courage and strength to ^o^temne death in those, which thought they
wholly perished in death, and to find such fainthartednes in my self at the
first conceit of death, who yet am thoroughly persuaded of the future happiness
of my soul: I have that benefit of nature as well as they, besides infinite
more help that they wanted^ Oh the dulnes and blindness of us unworthy
Christians, that suffer Heathens by the dim Candlelight of Nature, to go
further then we by the clear Sun of the Gospell^ that an indiffer^nt man
could not tell by our practice, whether were the Pagan. Let me never for shame
account my self a Christian, unless my Art of Christianity have imitated and
gone beyond nature so far, that I can find the best heathen as far below
me in true resolution, as the vulgar sort were below them. Else, I may shame
Religion, it can neither honest nor help me.

77
If I wou^d be irreligious and unconscionable, I would make no doubt to be
rich, for if a man will defraud, dissemble, forswear, bribe, oppress, serve
the time, make use of all men for his own turn, make no scruple of any wicked
action for his advantage: I cannot see how he can escape wealth and preferment.
But for an upright man to rise is difficult; whiles his conscience straightly
curbes him in from every unjust action; and will not allow him to advance him
self by indirect means: So riches come seldom easily to a good man; seldom
hardly to the consciencelesse. Happy is that man that can be rich with truth,
or poor with co^tentment, I will not envy the gravel in the unjust man's
throat. Of riches let me never have more, then an honest man can bear away.

78
God is the God of order not of confusion: As therefore in natural things he
uses to proceed from one extreme to another by degrees, through the mean; so
does he in spiritual. The Sun rises not an once to his highest from the
darkness of midnight, but first sends forth some feeble glimmering of light in
the dawning; the^ looks out with weak and waterish beams, and so by degrees
ascends to the midst of heaven: So in the seasons of the year, we are not one
day scorched with a So^mer heat, and on the next, frozen with a sudden
extremity of cold: But Winter comes on softly, first by cold dewes, then
hoare frostes, until at last it descend to the hardest weather of all: such
are GODS spiritual pro^eedings^ He never bringes ani^ man from the estate of
sin, to the estate of glory, but through the state of grace. And in grace
seldom when, any man from gross wickedness, to any eminency of perfection: I
will be charitably jealous of those men, which from notorious lewdness leap
at once into a sudden forwardnes of profession. Holiness does not like ^onas
gourd grow up in a night. I like it better to go on soft and sure, then for an
hasty fit to run my self out of wind, and after stand still and breath me.

79
It has been said of old, To do well and hear ill, is princely; which as
it is most true, by reason of the Envy which follows upon justice; so is the
contrary no less justified by many experiments: To do ill, and to hear
well, is the fashion of many great men: To do ill, because they are borne out
with the assurance of impunitie. To hear well, because of abundance of
Parasites, which as Ravens to a carkasse^ ^ather about great men. Neither is
there any so great misery in greatness as this, that it conceales men from
themselves; and when they will needs have a sight of their own actions, it
shows them a ^alfe glass to look in. Meandness of state (that I can find)
has none so great inconvenience. I am no whit sorry that I am rather subject
to contempt, then flattery.

80
There is no earthly blessi^^ so precious, as health of body, without which all
other worldly good things are but troublesome: Neither is there any thing
more difficult, then to have a good soul in a strong and vigorous body; for it
is commonly seen, that the worse part draws away the better: But to have an
healthful and sound soul, in a weak sickly body, is no novelty; whiles the
weakness of the body is an help to the soul: playing the part of a
perpetual monitor, to incite it to good, and check it for evil: I will not
be over glad of health, nor over fearful of sickness. I will more fear the
spiritual hurt that may follow upon health, then the bodily pain that
accompanies sickness.

81
There is nothing more troublesome to a good mind then to do nothing; for
besides the furtherance of our estate, the mind does both delight, and better
it self with exercise. There is but this difference then betwixt labor and
idleness; that labor is a profi^able and pleasant trouble, idleness a trouble
both unprofitable and comfortl^sse. I will be ever doing something, that
either God when he comes, or Satan when he tempts, may find me busied.
And yet since as the old proverb is, Better it is be idle then effect
nothing, I will not more hate doing nothing, then doing something to no
purpose. I shall do good but a while; let me strive to do it while I may.

82
A faithful man has three eyes: The first of sense, common to him with brute
creatures; the second of reason, common to all men; the third, of faith proper
to his profession: Whereof each looks beyond other, and none of them medleth
with others obiect^: For neither does the eye of sense reach to intelligible
things, and matters of discourse: nor the eye of reason to those things which
are supernatura^l and spiritual; neither does faith look down to things
that may be sensibly seen. If thou discourse to a brute beast of the depthes
of Philosophy never so plainly, he understands not, because they are beyond
the view of his eye, which is only of sense: If to a mere carnal man of
di^ine things: He perceives not the things of God, neither indeed can do,
because they are spiritually discerned; and therefore no wonder if those things
seem unlikely, incredible, impossible to him, which the faithful manne
having a proportionable means of apprehension, does as plainly see, as his
eye does any sensible thing. Tell a plain country^man that the Sun, or some
higher or lesser star, is much bigger then his Cartwheele; or at least so
many scores bigger the^ the whole earth; he laughes thee to scorn, as
affecting admiration, with a learned vntruth^ Yet the Scholar by the eye of
reason, does as plainly see and acknowledge this truth, as that his hand is
bigger then his pen: What a thick mist; yea, what a palpable and more then
Egyptian darkness does the natural man live? What a world is there, that he
does not see at all, and how little does he see in this, which is his proper
element; There is no bodily thing but the brute creatures see as well as he,
and some of the^ better. As for his eye of reason; how dim is it in those
things which are best fitted to it: What one thing is there in nature, which he
does perfectly know? what herb, or flower, or worm that he treads on, is
there, whose true essence he knows? No not so much, as what is in his own
bosom; What it is, where it is, or whence it is that gives ^eing to himself:
But for those things which concern the best world, he does not so much as
co^fusedly see the^, neither knows whether they be: He sees no whit into the
great and awful majesty of God; he discernes him not in all his creatures,
filling the world with his infinite and glorious presence; he sees not his wise
providence ouer^ruling all things, disposing all casual events, ordering all
sinful actions of men to his own glory; he comprehends nothing of the beauty,
majesty, power, and mercy of ye Savior of the world, sitting in his humanity
at his fathers right hand: He sees not ye unspeakable happiness of the
glorified souls of the Saints; he sees not the whole heavenly commonwealth
of Angels, ascending and descending to the behoof of Gods children; waiting
upon him at all times inuisibly; not excluded with ye closenes of prisons nor
desolatnes of wildernesses; and the multitude of evil spirits passing and
standing by him to tempt him unto evil; but like unto the foolish bird, when he
has hid his head that he sees no body, he thinks himself altogether unseen:
and then counts himself solitary, when his eye can meet with no companion. It
was not without cause that we call a mere fool, a Natural; for how ever
worldlings have still thought christians Gods fools, we know them the fools
of the world. The deepest Philosopher yt ever was (saving the reverence of the
schools) is but an ignorant sot to the simplest Christian: For the weakest
Christian may by plain information see somewhat into the greatest mysteries of
Nature, because he has the e^e of reason common with the best but the best
Philosopher by all the demo^stration in the world, can conceive nothing of the
mysteries of godliness; because he utterly ^ants the eye of faith. Though my
in-sight into matters of the world be so shallow, that my simplicity moves
pity, or makes sport unto others; it shall be contentment and happiness, that I
see further into better matters: That which I see not is worthless, and
deserves little better then contempt; that which I see is unspeakable,
inestimable, for comfort, for glory.

83 It is not possible for an inferior to live at peace, unless he have
learned to be contemned. For the pride of his Superiors, and the malice of his
equals and inferiors, shall offer him continual^ and inevitable occasions of
unquietness. As contentatio^ is the mother of inward peace with our selves; so
is humility the mother of peace with others: for if thou be vile in thine own
eyes first, it shall the less trouble thee to be accounted vile of others. So
that a man of an high heart in a low place, cannot want coffeehouse; whereas a
man of a lowly^stomak, can swallow and digest contempt without any diste^per.
For wherein can he be the worse for being contemned, who out of his own
knowledge of his deserts did most of all contemn himself I should be very
improuident, if in this cal^ing I did not look for daily contempt: wherein, we
are made a spectacle to the world, to Angels, and men: when it comes, I will
either embrace it, or contemn it. Embrace it when it is within my measure,
when above, contemn it: so embrace it, that I may more humble my selfvnder it;
and so contemn it, that I may not give heart to him that offers it; nor
disgrace him, for whose cause I am contemned.

14 Christ raised three dead men to life: One newly departed; another on the
Beer, a third smelling in the grave; to show us that no degree of death is so
desperate, that it is past help. My sins are many, and great, yet if they
were more, they are far below the mercy of him that has remitted them and
the value of his ransom that has paid for them: A man hurts himself most by
presumption, ^ut we cannot do God a greater wrong, then to despair of
forg^uenes. It is a do^ble injury to God, first that we offend his justice by
sinning, then that we wrong his mercy with despairing. etc.

85 For a man to be weary of the world through miseries that he meets with,
and for that cause to covet death, is neither difficult, nor commendable; but
rather argues a base weakness of mind. So it may be a cowardly part to
contemn the utmost of all terrible things, in a fear of lingering misery: But
for a man either living happily here on earth, or resolving to live miserably,
yet to desire his remoouall to Heaven, does well become a true Christian
courage; and argues a notable mixture of patience and faith: ^f patience, for
that he can and dare abide to live sorrowfully; of faith, for that he is
assured of his better Being otherwhere; and therefore prefers the absent joys
he looks for, to those he feels in present: No sorrow shall make me wish my
self dead, that I may not be at all: No contentment shall hinder me from
wishing my self with Christ, that I may be happier.

89 It was not for nothing, that the wise Creator of all things has placed
gold and ^iluer, and all precious minerals under our feet to be trod upon;
and has hid them low in the bowels of the earth, that they cannot without
great labor be either found, or gotten; whereas he has placed the noblest
part of his creation above our heads; and that so open to our view, that we
cannot choose but every moment behold them: wherein what did he else intend, but
to draw away our minds from these worthless, and yet hidden treasures, to
which he foresawe we would be too much addicted, and to ca^l the^ unto the
contemplatio^ of those better things, which besides their beauty, are more
ob^iuious to us; that in the^ we might see and admire the glory of their Maker,
and withal seek our own. How do those men wrong themselves, and
misconstrue God, who, as if he had hidden these things, because he would have
them sought, and laid the other open for neglect, bend themselves wholly to the
seeking of these earthly commodities and do no more mind heaven, the^ if there
were non. If we could imagine a beast to have reason, how could he be more
absurd in his choice? How easy is it to observe, that still the higher we
go, the more purity and perfection we find So earth is the very dross and
dregs of all the elements, water somewhat more pure then it, yet also more
^eculent the^ the air above it; the lower air less pure the^ his uppermost
regions, and yet they as far inferior to the lowest heavens: which again are
more exceeded by the glorious and empireall seat of God, which is the heaven of
the just. Yet they (brutish men) take up their rest, and place their felicity
in the lowest and worst of all Gods workmanship; not regarding that, which with
it own glory can make them happy. Heaven is the proper place of my soul, I
will send it up thither continually in my thoughts whiles it soiournes with
me, before it go to dwell there for ever.

87 A man need not to care for more knowledge, then to know him self; he
needs no more pleasure then to content himse^fe; no more victory then to
overcome himself, no more riches then to enjoy himself. What fools are they
that seek to know all other things, and are strangers in themselves; that
seek altogether to satisfy others humors, with their own displeasure; that
seek to vanquish Kingdoms and Countries, when they are not Masters of
themselves; that have no hold of their own hearts, yet seek to be possessed
of all outward commodi^ies: Go home to thy self first, vain heart, and when
thou have made sure work there, in knowing, contenting, ouercomming, enjoying
thy self, spend all the superfluity of thy time and labor upon others.

88 It was an excellent rule that fell from Epicure, whose name is odi^us to us
for the father of loosnes. That if a man would be rich, honorable, aged, he
should not strive so much to ad to his wealth, reputation, years, as to detract
from his desires. For certainly in these things, which stand most upon
conceit, he has the most that desires least. A poor man that has little,
and desires no more, is in truth richer then the greatest monarch, that thinks
he has not what he should; or what he might, or that grieves there is no
more to have. It is not necessity but ambition that settes men's hearts on the
rack. If I have meat, drink, apparel, I will learn therewith to be
content. If I had the world full of wealth beside, I could enjoy no more then I
use; the rest could please me no otherwise but by looking on; and why can I
not thus solace my self, while it is others?

89
An inconstant and wavering mind, as it makes a man unfit for Society (for
that there can be no assurance of his words, or purposes, neither can we build
on them without deceit) so, besides that, it makes a man ridiculous, it
hinders him from ever attaining any perfection in himself For a roling stone
gathers no moss; and the mind whi^st it would be every thing, proves nothing;
often changes cannot be without loss: yea, it keeps him from enjoying that
which he has attained, for it keeps him ever in work: building^ pulling
down, selling, changing, buying, commanding, forbidding: so whiles he can be
no other man's friend, he is the least his own. It is the safest course for a
man's profit, credit, and ^^se, to deliberate long, to resolve surely, hardly to
alter. Not to enter upon that, whose end he fore-sees not aunswerable; and
when he is once entered, not to surcease till he have attained the end he
foresaw: so may he to good purpose begin a new work, when he has well
finished the old.

90 The way to Heaven is like that which ^onathan and his armor bearer passed
betwixt two rocks, one Bozez, the other Sene^; that is foul and thornie;
whereto we must make shift to climb on our hands and knees; but when we are
comne up, there is victory, and triumph. Gods children have three suits of
apparel, whereof two are worn dail^y on earth, the third laid up for the in the
wardrobe of Heaven; They are ever either in black mourning, in red persecuted,
or in white glorious: Any way shall be pleasant to me, that leade^ unto such
an end: It matters not what rags or what colors I wear with men, so I may
walk with my Savior in white, and reign with him in glory, Amen.

FINIS.

