THE KINGS Prophecy: OR Weeping Joy.

Expressed in a Poem, to the Honor of Englands too great Solemnities.

Ios. Hall.



LONDON Printed by T. C. for Simon Waterson.

1603.

THE KINGS PROPHECY or weeping Joy.
1.
WHat Stoic could his steely breast contain
(If Zeno self, or who were made beside
Of tougher mold) from being torn in twain
With the cross Passions of this wondrous tide?
Grief at ELIZAES toomb, orecomne anon
With greater joy at her succeeded throne?
2.
Me seems the world at once does weep and smile,
Washing his smiling cheeks with weeping dew,
Yet chearing still his watered cheeks the while
With merry wrinckles that do laughter show;
Amongst the rest, I can but smile and weep,
Nor can my passions in close prison keep.
3.
Yet now, when Grief and Joy at once conspire
To vex my feeble mind with adverse might,
Reason suggests not words to my desire,
Nor daines no Muse to help me to endite;
So does this civil strife of Passions strong,
Both move and mar the measures of my song.
4.
For long agone, when as my weaker thought
Was but assaylde with change of Joy and pain:
I wont to find the willing Muse unsought,
And vent my numbers in a plenteous vain,
Whether I wished to write some lofty verse,
Or with sad lines would straw some sable hearse.
5.
So, when but single Passions in the field
Meet Reason sage; soon as she list advance
Her awful head; they needs must stoop, and yield
Their rebel arms to her wise governance:
Whence, as their mutin'drage did rashly rise
Ylike by Reasons power it cowardly dies.
6.
But when that Passions rank arayes beset
Reason alone, without or friend, or Fere,
Who wonders if they can the conquest get
And reaue the crown her royal head did wear?
Go yet tumultuous lines, and tidings bring
What Passion (...) in Reasons silence sing.
7.
Often did I wish the closure of my light,
Before the dawning of that fearful day
Which should succeed Elizaes latest night,
Sending her glorious soul from this sad clay,
Up to a better crown then erst she bore
Upon her weary brows, and Temples hoare:
8.
For then I feared to find the frowning sky
Clothed in dismal black, and dreadful red,
Then did I fear this earth should drenched lie
With purple streams in civil tumults shed:
Caesar and Pompey.
Like when of yore in the old Pharsalian downs,
The two cross Eagles grapled for the crown.
9.
Or when the riper English Roses grew
On sundry stalks, from one self root ysprung, Lanc. and York.

And strove so long for praise of fairer hew,
That millio^s of our Sires to death were stung
With those sharp thorns that grew their sweets beside
Or such, or worse I ween'd should now betide.
10.
Nor were lewd hopes ought lesser the^ my dread,
Nor less their Triumphs then my plained woe,
Triumphs, and Plaints for great Eliza dead;
My dread, their hope for Englands overthrow:
I feared their hopes, and waild their pleasant cheer,
They triumphed in my griefs, and hoped my fear.
II.
Waiting for flames of cruel Martyrdom,
Already might I see the stakes addressed,
And that stale strumpet of imperious Rome,
Hie mounted on her seuen-headed beast,
Quaffing the blood of Saints in boules of gold,
Whiles all the surplus stains the guiltles mold.
12.
Now might I see those swarms of Locusts sent,
(...)
Hell's cursed offspring, hired slaves of Spain,
Till the world saw, and scorned their intent,
Of a sworn foe to make a Sovereign;
How could but terror with his cold affright
Strike my weak breast upon so sad foresight?
13.
Tho on that day before the world began
Eliza did, and with the closing year March. 25.

Her days vpclosde; when I the light did ban,
And chide the Heavens that they left not there:
And thought it wrong (yet God that thought forefended)
That the worlds course with her course was not ended.
14.
Now, not more worlds could hire my closed light
Ere but the setting of that Euen-sun,
Which late her breathing saw with beams so bright,
And early rising found her life for done;
Ah most unhappy wights that went beforne,
That did ere this, or that are yet unborn!
15.
Oh turned times beyond all mortal fear,
Beyond all mortal hopes! Not till this day
Began the fullness of our bliss appear;
Which dangers dimmed erst with fresh dismay:
Still ever checking joy with servile care,
Still charging us for Tragic times prepare.
16.
False stars, and falser wisards that foresaine
By their aspects the state of earthly things:
How been your bold predictions proved vain,
That here brake off the race of British Kings?
Which now alone began; when first we see
Fair Britain formed to a Monarchy.
17.
How did I better long agone presage,
(That joys me still I did presage so right)
When in the wardship of my weaker age Virgils fourth Egloge translated and
applied to the birth of Hen. the prince.

My puis-ne Muse presumed to recite
The vatick lines of that Cumean Dame,
(Which Maro falsely sung to Pollios name)
18.
To the dear Natals of thy princely son,
O dreadest Sovereign; in whose timely birth
Me seemed I saw this golden age begone,
I saw this weary load of Heaven and Earth
Freshly revived, rouse up his fainting head,
To see the sweet hopes this day promised.
19.
And now I live (I wished to live so long
Till I might see these golden days succeed,
And solemn vowed that mine eternal song
Should sound thy name unto the future seed)
I live to see my hopes; o let me live
Till but my vowed verse might me survive.
20.
So may thy worth my lowly Muse vpraise,
So may mine hie-vp-raised thoughts aspire
That not thy Bartas self, whose sacred lays
The yielding world does with thy self admire,
Shall pass my so^g, which naught ca^ rear so hye,
Save the sweet influence of thy gracious eye.
21.
Mean while, amongst those throngs of Poesies
Which now each triuial Muse dares harshly sing
This vulgar verse shall feed plebeian eyes,
Nor prease into the presence of my King;
So may it safely praise his absent name;
That never present tongue did void of blame.
22.
Well did the wise Creator, when he laid
Earth's deep foundations, charge the watery maine,
This Northern world should by his waves be made
Cut from the rest, and yet not cut in twain
Divided, that it might be blessed alone,
Not sundred, for this fore-set union.
23.
For here he meant in late succeeding time,
To seat a second Paradise below;
Or for composed temper of the Clyme,
Or those sound blasts the clensing North does blow.
Britain compared with the old Paradise
Or, for he saw the sinfill continent
Should with contagious vice be ouerwent.
24.
1 Rivers of Paradise.
For great Euphrates and the swelling Nile,
With Tigris swift; he bad the Ocean hoare
Serve for the great moate of the greatest I Will,
2 Word and Sacram:
And wash the snowy rocks of her steep shore
As for that tree of life fair Edens pride,
He set it in our mids, and every side.
25.
From often attempted, often repulsed spite
More then one Angel gards our safer gate;
Naught wa^ts of highest bliss, and sweet'st delight
That ever was attaind by mortal state.
But that gives life to all, and all exceeds
He sets his princely Image in his steed.
26.
His lively Image, in whose awful face
Appear deep stamps of dreadful majesty,
Whose glorious beams from his diuiner grace
Dazzle the weak, and dim the bolder eye.
Mercy sits on his brow; and in his breast
Under his Lions paw, does courage rest.
27.
Deep wisdom does adorn his princely head,
Justice his hand, his lips grave Eloquence,
And that which seld in Princes breast is bred,
(The Princes greatest praise, and best defense)
Purest religion has his heart possessed.
O Island more then fortunate and blessed.
28.
Heavens chiefest care, Earth's second Paradise,
Wonder of Times, chief boast of Natures style,
Envy of Nations, president of bliss,
Mistress of Kingdoms, Monarch of all Isles;
World of this world, and heaven of earth; no less
Can serve to shadow out thine happiness.
29.
Thou art the worlds sole glory, he is thine;
From him thy praise is fetched, the worlds from thee,
His from above; So the more famous been
His rarest graces, more thy fame shall be.
The more thy fame grows on, the fairer show
His heavenly worth shall make to foreign view.
30.
Like when by night, amids the cleansed sky,
The Suns fair sister by her lovely rays
Gathers a circled Halo up on hie,
Of kindly vapors that her spouse did raise:
She thus enclosed in her clear ouall round,
Doubles her light unto the gazing ground.
31.
But for the only bane of blessed state
Is ignorance of bliss; let me dear Dread
For thy diuiner Oracles relate
The sum of those sweet hopes that long have fed
Thy liegest Nation; Pardon thou the while
Mine high attempt, harsh verse, and ruder style.
32.
And yet thrice happy mates, who^ that great king
Endowes with equal peace: so more his reign
Above your hopes, eternal comfort bring
To your late Nephews race; as ye may daigne
Credulous ears to my Prophetic lines,
Truer the^ those were fetched from Delphick shrines.
33.
He that gives crowns (as crowns from heaven are sent The sum of Bazil. Doron
drawn in form of prophecy into verse.

Not since the day that Ishay's youngest son
Rose from the fold; has ever yet besprent
With the sweet oil of sacred unction
An holyer head: then that this present day
The weight of Englands roial crown does sway.
34.
Nor can his subjects more him fear or love,
(Loyal their love, and lowly is their fear)
Then he shall love and fear his King above,
Whose name, place, Image, Scepter he does bear,
Religions spring, Autumn of Heresy,
Winter of Atheism his reign shall be.
35.
And thou great Rome, that to the Martian plain
Long since did lowly stoop; and leave for lore
Thy lofty seat of Hills: shall once again
Creep lower to the shade of Tybers shore:
Yet lower shall his Arm thy ruins fell,
Down from thy Tyber into lowest Hell.
36.
Not number shall, but weight his laws commend;
Which wisely made, shall justly be maintained,
His gentle brows shall first severely bend
And lowre at vice: whose course eftsoons restraind
They smooth shall wax again; mixing by mesure
Ounces of grace, with drams of just displeasure.
37.
So have I seen a Morn of cheerful May
Orecast with clouds to threate^ sormfull stoures,
Which yet ere Noone, has proved the clearest day:
Whiles brighter morns have brought us evening shoures;
His frowns shall fright the ill; his mercious cic
Shall raise the humble soul of Modesty.
38.
The treble mischief that was wont infest
Our holy state (ah me what state can miss
Some stain of native ill) shall be redrest
By timely care: and now shall fairly rise
The noble name of our diuiner trade,
From out the dust wherein it long has laid.
39.
Longlay it in the dust of wrong disdain;
Exposed to every rascal Pesants spite:
O times! but now, were best my rage contain
Until I might a second Satyr write.
But ah fond threat, as if these mended days
Would once deserve the brand of my dispraise?
40.
Nor shall the Lordly Peers once ouerlooke
Their humble vassals dwelling all below:
Like as we see some large out-spreading Oak
Ore-drop the silly shrubs that under grow.
Nor noble blood shall want true honors fee,
Whiles it shall light on Grooms of low degree
41.
Nor now the greedy Merchant that for gain
Sails to both Poles, and sounds both Indian seas
When his long beaten bark from forth the maine
Vnlades her weary freight; shall as he please
Raise by excessive rate his private store,
And to enrich himself make thousands poor.
42.
Under the safer shadow of his wing
Shall exilde Aliens shroud their restless head;
And here alone shall forced exile bring
Better contentment to the banished
Then home-smelt smoke; O I land kind and free
In favoring those that once befrended thee.
43.
And for the Princes eye does life inspire
To loyal breasts (like as the vernall sun
Cheares the revived earth with friendly fires
That lustles lies when those hot rays are gone)
Often shall his presence bless our hungry eyes,
To our Horizon often this sun shall rise.
44.
For ere the worlds great lamp shall thrice decline
Into his Southern spherc, and thrice retire
Up to the turning of his Northern line,
Our second Sun shall in his earthly gyre
Turn once to all the realms his light does guide;
And yet observe his yearly race beside.
45.
Then shall my Suffolk (Englands Eden hight
As England is the worlds) be over blessed
And surfeit of the joy of that dear sight
Whose pleasing hope their hearts so long possessed
Which his great Name did with such triumph greet
When erst it loudly ecchoed in our street.
46.
And thou, renowned Drury among the rest,
Above the rest; whether thee still detain,
The snowy Alps, or if thou thoughtest it best
To trust thy speed unto the watery plain,
Shall him receive; he thee, with such sweet grace
As may beseem thy worth and noble race.
47.
The iron doors of Ianus by his hand
Shall fast be bard; unless some hostile might
(If any hostile might dares him withstand)
Shall break those bars; and boldly shall excite
Our sleeping Lion; who but once awoke
Woe to the wight that did his wrath provoke.
48.
Wise and not wrongful Stratagems shall speed
His justest war, and straiter discipline
Shall guide the war like troops himself shall lead
To doubtful field; O let the shield divine
Protect my Lieges head; and from on hie
Let it be girt with crowns of victory.
49.
His frequent Court (yet fear I to fore-saine
Too much of Princes courts, which ages past
Have long since noted with the secret stain
Of wanton daliance and luxurious wast)
His Court shall be a church of Saints: quite free
From silth, excess and servile flattery.
50.
Hence ye false Parasites, whose only guise
Is feeding Princes ears with wrongful praises,
And ever who might hope to honor rise,
By what large bribes their leuder brocage raises.
The Courtiers only grace shall henceforth lie
In learning, wisdom, valor, honesty.
51.
O Court fit for thy King; and like to none
But heavens Court, where naught impure may bide;
Like as thy King resembles God alone,
For such on earth were vain to seek beside.
Well might I here his virtues roll rehearse,
But them his life speaks better then my verse.
52.
Yet let me not thy learned Muse omit,
The only credit of our scorned skill,
Redoubted Liege; whose rarely polisht writ
Sauors of long sleep in that sacred hill;
Look that the Muses all shall once agree,
As thou have honored them, to honor thee.

