HOLY Observations.

LIB. I.

ALSO Some few of DAVID'S Psalms Metaphrased, for a taste of the rest.

By IOS. HALL.

AT LONDON Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham: and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1607.

To the right Honorable, EDWARD Lord Denny, Baron of Waltham, my most
bou^tifull Patron, Grace and PEACE.
Right Honorable:
THis advantage a scholar has above others, that he cannot be idle, and that
he can work without instruments* For, the mind inured to contemplation will
set it self on work, when other occasions fail: and has no more power not to
study then the eye which is open has, not to see something; in which business
it carries about his own Library, neither can complain to want books while it
enjoys it self.

I could not then neglect the commodity of this plentiful leisure in my so
easy attendance here; but (though besides my course, and without the help of
others writings) must needs busy my self in such thoughts as I have here
given account of, to your Lordship: such, as I hope will not be unprofitable
nor unwelcome to their Patron, to their Readers. I send them forth from hence,
under your honorable name; to show you that no absence, no employment can make
me forget my due respect to your Lordship: to whom (next under my gracious
Master) I have deservedly bequeathed my self and my endeavors. Your goodness
has not wont to magnify it self more in giving the^ in receiving such like
holy presents: the knowledge whereof has entitled you to more labors of this
nature (if I have numbered aright) then any of your Peers. I misdoubt not
either your acceptance, or their use. That GOD, who has above all his other
favors given your Lordship even in these careless times, an heart truly
religious, give you an happy increase of all his heavenly graces by my
unworthy service. To his gracious care I daily commend your Lordship with my
Honorable Lady; wishing you both, all that little joy earth can afford you, and
fullness of glory above.

Non-such. July 3. Your Lo: Most humbly devoted for ever, In all duty and
observance, Ios. Hall.

HOLY Observations.
AS there is nothing sooner dry then a tear; so there is nothing sooner out of
season the^ worldly sorrow: which if it be fresh and still bleeding, finds
some to comfort and pity it; If stale and skinned over with time, is rather
entertained with smiles then commiseration: But the sorrow of repentance comes
never out of time. Al times are alike unto that eternity, whereto we make our
spiritual moanes: That which is past, that which is future, are both present
with him. It is neither weak nor uncomely, for an old man to weep for the
sins of his youth. Those tears can never be shed either too soon, or too
late.

2
Some men live to be their own executors for their good name; which they see
(not honestly) buried, before themselves die. Some other of great place, and ill
desert, part with their good name and breath, at once. There is scarce a
vicious man whose name is not rotten before his carcass. Co^trarily, the good
man's name is often times yt heyr to his life; either borne after the death of the
parent, for that envy would not suffer it to come forth before: or perhaps so
well grown up in his life time, that the hope thereof is the staff of his age,
and joy of his death. A wicked man's name may be feared awhile; soon after, it
is either forgotten or cursed: The good man's either sleeps with his body in
peace, or waketh (as his soul) in glory.

3
Often times those which show much valor while there is equal possibility of
life, when they see a present necessity of death, are found most shamefully
timorous. Their courage was before grounded upon hope: that, cut off, leaves
them at once desperate and cowardly: whereas men of feebler spirits meet more
cheerfully with death; because though their courage be less, yet their
expectation was more.

4
I have seldom seen the son of an excellent and famous man, excellent: But,
that an ill bird has an ill egg, is not rare; children possessing as the
bodily diseases, so the vices of their Parents. Virtue is not propagated: Vice
is; eue^ in them which have it not reigning in themselves: The grain is sown
pure, but comes up with chafe and husk. Have thou a good son? He is Gods, not
thine. Is he evil? Nothing but his sin is thine: Help by thy prayers and
endeavors to take away that which thou have given him, and to obtain from God
that which thou have, and can not give: Else thou may name him a possession;
but thou shall find him a loss.

5
These things be comely and pleasant to see; and worthy of honor from the
beholder: A young Saint, an old Martyr, a religious soldier, a co^scionable
Statesman, a great man courteous* a learned man humble, a silent woman, a child
understanding the ey of his Pare^t, a merry co^panio^ without vanity, a friend
not changed with honor, a sick man cheerful, a soul departing with comfort
and assurance.

6
I have often observed in merry meetings solemnly made, that somewhat has fallen
out cross, either in the time, or immediately upon it; to season (as I think)
our immoderation in desiring or inioying our friends: and again, euentes
suspected have proved ever best; God herein blessing our awful submission with
good success. In all these humane things, indifferency is safe. Let thy
doubts be ever equal to thy desires: so thy disappointme^t shall not be
grievous, because thy expectation was not peremptory.

7
You shall rarely find a man eminent in sundry faculties of mind, or sundry
manuarie trades. If his memory be excellent, his fantasy is but dull: if his
fancy be busy and quick, his judgment is but shallow: If his judgment be
deep, his vttrance is harshe: which also holds no less in the actiuities of
the hand. And, if it happen that one man be quallifyed with skill of diverse
trades, and practice this variety, you shall seldom find such one thriuing in
his estate: with spiritual gifts it is otherwise; which are so chayned
together, that who excels in one has some eminency in more, yea in all. Look
upon faith: she is attended with a Beuie of Graces: He that believes, cannot
but have hope: if hope, patience. He that belieues and hopes must needs find
joy in God: if joy, love of God; he that loves God, cannot but love his
brother: his love to God breeds piety and care to please, sorrow for
offending, fear to offend. His love to men, fidelity and Christian
benefice^ce: vices are seldo^ single; but virtues go ever in troops: they go so
thick, that sometimes some are hid in ye crowd; which yet are, but appear not:
They may be shut out from sight; they cannot be severed.

8
The Heaven ever mooues, and yet is the place of our rest: Earth ever rests,
and yet is the place of our trouble: Outward motion can be no enemy to inward
rest; as outward rest may well stand with inward unquietness.

9
None live so ill, but they content themselves in somewhat: Even the beggar
likes the smell of his dish. It is a rare evil that has not something to
sweeten it, either in sense or in hope: Otherwise men would grow desperate,
mutinous, envious of others, weary of themselves. The better that thing is
wherein we place our comfort, the happier we live: and the more we love good
things, the better they are to us. The Worldlinges comfort, though it be good
to him because he loves it; yet because it is not absolutely and eternal good,
it fails him: wherein the Christian has just advantage of him, while he has
all the same causes of joy refined and exalted; besides more and hyer, which
the other knows not of: The worldling laughes more, but the Christian is more
delighted. These two are easily severed: Thou see a goodly picture, or an
heap of thy gold: thou laughest not, yet thy delight is more then in a jest
that shakes thy spleen: As grief, so joy is not less when it is least
expressed.

10
I have seen the worst natures, and most depraved minds not affecting all
sins: but still some they have condemned in others, and abhorred in
themselves: One exclaimes on covetousness, yet he can too well abide riotous
good fellowship: Another inueighes against drunkenness and excess, not caring
how cruel he be in usury and oppression. One cannot endure a rough and
quarrellous disposition, yet gives himself over to unclean and lascivious
courses: Another hates all wrongs, save wrong to God. One is a civil Atheist,
another a religious Usurer, a third an honest Drunkarde, a fourth an unchaste
Iusticer, a fifth a chaste Quarreller. I know not whether every devil excel in
all sins: I am sure some of them have denomination from some sins more
special. Let no man applaude himself for those sins he wants, but condemn
himself rather for that sin he has. Thou censurest another man's sin, he
thine; GOD curses both.

11
Gold is the heauiest of all metalles: It is no wonder that the rich man is
usually carried downward to his place. It is hard for the soul, clogged with
many weights, to asce^d to heaven: It must be a strong and nimble soul that
can carry up it self, and such a lode; yet Adam and Noah flewe up thither with
the double Monarchy of the worlds the Patriarchs with much wealth, maoie holy
Kings with massy Crowns and Scepters. The burden of covetous desires is more
heavy to an empty soul then much treasure to the full. Our affections give
poise or lightness to earthly things. Either abate of thy lode if thou find
it too pressing, whether by having less, or loving less: or add to thy
strength and activitie, that thou may yet ascend. It is more commendable, by
how much more hard, to climb into heaven with a burden.

12
A Christian in all his ways must have three guides: Truth, Charity, Wisdom:
Truth to go before him; Charity and Wisdom on either hand. If any of the three
be absent, he walks amiss. I have seen some do hurt by following a truth
uncharitably: And others while they would salve up an error with love, have
failed in their wisdom, and offended against justice. A charitable untruth,
and an uncharitable truth, and an unwise menaging of truth or love, are all to
be carefully avoided of him that would go with a right foot in the narrow
way.

13
GOD brought man forth at first, not into a Wilderness, but a Garden; yet then
he expected best service of him. I never find that he delights in the misery,
but in the prosperity of his servants. Cheerfulnes pleases him better then a
dejected and dull heaviness of heart. If we can be good with pleasure he
grudgeth not our joy: If not, it is best to stint our selves; not for that
these comforts are not good, but because our hearts are evil: falting not their
nature but our use and corruption.

14
The homeliest service that we do in an honest calling, tho it be but to plow,
or dig, if done in obedience, and conscience of Gods commandment, is crowned
with an ample reward; whereas the best works for their kind (preaching,
praying, offering euangelical sacrifices) if without respect of Gods iniunction
and glory, are loded with curses: God loves aduerbs; and cares not how good,
but how well.

15
The golden infancy of some has proceeded to a brazen youth, and ended in a
leaden age: All humane maturities have their period: Only grace has none. I
durst never lay too much hope on the forward beginnings of wit and memory,
which have been applauded in children. I knew they could but attain their
vigor; and that if sooner, no whit the better: for the earlier is their
perfection of wisdom, the longer shall be their witless age. Seasonablenesse
is best in all these things which have their ripeness and decay: We can never
hope too much of the timely blossoms of grace, whose spring is perpetual, and
whose harvest begins with our end.

16
A man must give thanks for somewhat which he may not pray for. It has been
said of Courtiers, that they must receive injuries and give thanks. God cannot
wrong his, but he will cross them* those crosses are beneficial; all
benefits challenge thanks: Yet I have read that Gods children have with
condition prayed against them, never for them. In good things we pray both for
them, and their good use: in evil, for their good use, not themselves: Yet,
we must give thanks for both. For, there is no evil of pain which God does
not; nothing that God does, is not good; no good thing but is worthy of thanks.

17
One half of the world knows not how the other lives: and therefore the better
sort pity not the distressed; and the miserable envy not those which fare
better, because they know it not. Each man judges of others condition, by his
own. The worst sort would be too much discontented, if they saw how far more
pleasant the life of others is: And if ye better sort (such we call those which
are greater) could look down to the infinite miseries of inferiors, it would
make them either miserable in compassion, or proud in conceit. It is good,
sometimes, for the delicate rich man to look into the poor man's cupboard: and
seeing God in mercy gives him not to know their sorrow by experience, to
know it yet in speculation: This shall teach him more thanks to God, more
mercy to men, more contentment in himself.

18
Such as a man's prayer is for another, it shall be in time of his extremity
for himself: For, though he love himself more then others, yet his
apprehensio^ of God is alike for both. Such as his prayer is in a former
extremity, it shall be also in death: this way, we may have experience even of a
thing future: If God have been far off from thee in a fit of thine ordinary
sickness, fear least he will not be nearer thee in thy last: what differs
that from this, but in time? Correct thy dullness upon former proofs: or else at
last thy devotion shall want life before thy body.

19
Those that come to their meat as to a medicine (as Augustine reports of
himself) live in an austere and Christian te^per, and shall be sure not to joy
too much in the creature, nor to abuse themselves: Those, that come to their
medicine as to meat, shall be sure to live miserably and dye soon: To come
to meat as meat, if without a gluttonous appetite and palate, is allowed to
Christians: To come to meat as to a sacrifice unto ye belly, is a most base and
brutish idolatry.

20
The worst that ever were, even Caine and Judas have had some ^autors that have
honored them for Saints: And the Serpent that beguyled our first Parents has
in that name had divine honor and thanks. Never any man trod so perilous and
deep steps, but some have followed, and admired him. Each master of heresy
has found some clients; even he, that taught all men's opinions were true:
Again, no man has been so exquisite, but some have detracted from him, even
in those qualityes which have seemed most worthy of wonder to others. A man
shall be sure to be backed by some, either in good or evil, and by some
shouldred in both. It is good for a man not to stand upon his Abbetters, but
his quarrel; and not to depend upon others, but himself.

21
We see thousands of Creatures dye for our use, and never do so much as pity
them: why do we think much to dye once for God? They are not ours so much as
we are his; nor our pleasure so much to us as his glory to him: their lives
are lost to us, ours but changed to him.

22
Much ornament is no good sign: Paynting of the face argues an ill complexion
of body, a worse mind. Truth, has a face both honest and comely, and looks
best in her own colors: but, above all, divine truth is most fair, and most
scorneth to borrowe beauty of man's wit or tongue: she loves to come forth in
her native grace like a Princely Matrone; and counts it the greatest indignity,
to be dallyed with as a wanton Strumpet: She looks to command reverence, not
pleasure: she would be kneeled to, not laughed at; To pranke her up in vain
dresses and fashions, or to sport with her in a light and youthful manner, is
most abhorring from her nature: they know her not, that give her such
entertainment; and shall first know her angry, when they do know her. Again
she would be plain, but not base, not sluttish: She would be clad not
garishly, but not in rags: She likes as little to be set out by a base
foil, as to seem credited with gaye colors. It is no small wisdom to know
her just guise, but more to follow it; and so to keep the mean, that while
we please her, we discontent not the beholders.

23
In worldly carryage so much is a man made of, as he takes upon himself: but
such is Gods blessing upon true humility, that it still procures reverence. I
never saw Christian less honored for a wise neglect of himself: If our
deiection proceed from the conscience of our want, it is possible we should be
as little esteemed of others, as of our selves: But if we have true graces,
and prize them not at the highest; others shall value both them in us, and us
for them, and with usury give us that honor we with held modestly from our
selves.

24
He, that takes his full liberty in what he may, shall repent him: how much
more in what he should not? I never read of Christian that repented him of too
little worldly delight. The surest course I have still found in all earthly
pleasures, To rise with an appetite, and to be satisfied with a little.

25
There is a time when Kings go not forth to warfare: Our spiritual war
admitts no intermission: it knows no night, no winter, abides no peace, no
truce. This calls us not into a gariso^, where we may have ease and respite, but
into pitched fields continually: we see our enemies in the face always, and
are always seen and assalted: ever resisting, ever defe^ding, receiving and
returning blows. If either we be negligent or weary, we die: what other hope
is there while one fights, and the other stands still? We can never have safet^^
and peace, but in victory. There must our resistance be courageous and
constant, whe^^ both yielding is death, and all treatyes of peace mortal.

26
Neutrality in things good or evil is both odious, and prejudicial; but in
matters of an indifferent nature is safe and commendable: Herein taking of
parts, makes sides, and breaks unity. In an unjust cause of separation, he
that favors both parts, may perhaps have least love of either side; but
has most charity in himself.

27
Nothing is more absurd then that Epicurean resolution, Let us eat and drink,
to morrow we shall die: As if we were made only for the paunch, and lived
that we might live: yet there was never any natural man found savor in that
meat which he knew should be his last: whereas they should say; Let us fast
and pray, to morrow we shall die: For, to what purpose is the body strengthened
that it may perish? whose greater strength makes our death more violent. No man
bestows a costly roof on a ruinous tenement: That man's end is easy and happy
whom death finds with a weak body, and a strong soul.

28
Sometimes, even things in themselves naturally good, are to be refused for
those, which (being evil) may be an occasion to a greater good. Life is in it
self good, and death-euill: Else David, Elias and many excellent Martyrs would
not have fled, to hold life, and avoid death; Nor Ezekiah have prayed for it,
nor our Savior have bidden us to flee for it, nor God promised it to his for a
reward; yet if in some cases we hate not life, we love not God, nor our
souls. Herein, as much as in any thing, the perverseness of our nature
appears, that we wish death, or love life upon wrong causes: we would live
for pleasure, or we would die for pain; Job for his sores, Elias for his
persecution, Jonas for his gourd would presently dye, and will needs outface
God that it is better for him to die, then to live: wherein we are like to
garrison soldiers, that while they live within safe walls, and show themselves
once a day rather for ceremony and pomp, then need or danger, like warrefare
well enough; but if once called forth to the field, they wish themselves at
home.

29
Not only the least but the worst is ever in the bottom: what should God do
with the dregs of our age? when sin will admit thee his Clyent no longer,
then God shall be beholde^ to thee for thy service: Thus is God dealt-with in
all other offerings; The worst and least sheafe must be Gods Tenth: The
deformedst or simplest of our Children must be Gods Ministers: The
vncleanlyest and most careless house must be Gods Temple; the idlest and
sleepyest hours of the day must be reserved for our prayers; The worst part
of our age for Devotion. We would have God give us still of the best, and are
ready to murmr at every little evil he sends us: yet, nothing is bad enough
for him, of who^ we receive all. Nature condemns this inequality: and tells
us, that he which is the author of good, should have the best; and he which
gives al should have his choice.

30
When we go about an evil business, it is strange how ready the devil is to
set us forward; how careful that we should want no furtherances: So that if a
man would be lewdly witty, he shall be sure to be furnished with store of
profane jests, wherein a loose heart has double advantage of the conscionable.
If he would be voluptuous, he shall want neither objects nor opportunities.
The current passage of ill enterprises is so far from giving cause of
encouragement, that it should justly fright a man to look back to the author;
and to consider that he therefore goes fast, because the Devil drives him.

31
In the choice of companions for our conversation, it is good dealing with men
of good natures: for, tho grace exercises her power in bridling nature, yet
(since we are still men, at the best) some swinge she will have in the most
mortyfied. Austeritie, sullenness, or strangeness of disposition, and
what-soeuer qualityes may make a man unsociable, cleave faster to our nature,
then those which are morally evil. True Christian love may be separated from
acquaintance, and acquaintance from entireness: These are not qualities to
hinder our love, but our familiarity.

32
Ignorance as it makes bold, intruding men carelessly into vnknow'n dangers; so
also it makes men oft-times causelessly fearful. Herod feared Christ's coming,
because he mistook it: If that Tyrant had known the manner of his spiritual
regiment, he had spared both his own fright and the blood of others. And hence
it is, that we fear Death, because we are not acquainted with the virtue of
it. Nothing but innoce^ce and knowledge can give sound confidence to the heart.

33
Where are diverse opinions, they may be all false; there can be but one true:
and that one Truth oft-times must be fetched by peece-meale out of diverse
branches of contrary opinions. For, it falls out not seldom, that Truth is
through ignorance or rash vehemence scattred into sundry parts; and, like to a
little silver melted amongst the ruins of a burnt house, must be tried out
from heaps of much superfluous ashes. There is much pains in the search of it;
much skill in finding it: the value of it once found requytes the cost of
both.

34
Affectation of superfluity, is in all things a sign of weakness: As, in
words he that uses circumlocutions to express himself, shows want of
memory, and want of proper speech: And much talk argues a brain feeble and
distempered: what good can any earthly thing yield us beside his use? and what
is it but vanity to affect that which does us no good? and what use is in
that which is superfluous? It is a great skill to know what is enough, and
great wisdom to care for no more.

35
Good things, which in absence were desired, now offering themselves to our
presence are scarce entertained; or at least not with our purposed
cheerfulness. Christ's coming to us and our going to him are in our
profession well esteemed, much wished: But when he singleth us out by a direct
message of death, or by some fearful sign gives likelihood of a present
return, we are as much affected with fear, as before with desire. All
changes, although to the better, are troublesome for the time, until our
settling: There is no remedy hereof but inward prevention: Our mind must change,
before our estate be changed.

36
Those are greatest enemies to religion, that are not most irreligious.
Atheistes, tho in themselves they be the worst, yet are seldom found hot
Persecuters of others: whereas those which in some one fundamental point be
heretical, are commonly most violent in oppositions. One hurts by secret
infection, the other by open resistance: One is careless of all truth, the
other vehement for some untruth. An Atheist is worthy of more hatred, an
Heretic of more fear; both, of auoidance.

37
Ways if never used cannot but be fair; if much used are made co^modiously
passable; if before often used, and now seldom, they become deep and dangerous.
If the heart be not at al inured to meditation, it finds no fault with it
self; not for that it is innocent, but secure; If often, it finds comfortable
passage for his thoughts; If rarely, and with intermission, tedious and
troublesome. In things of this nature, we only escape complaint, if we use
them either always or never.

38
Our sensual hand holds fast whatsoever delight it apprehe^deth: our spiritual
hand easily remitteth; because appetite is stronger in us the^ grace: whence it
is that we so hardly deliver our selves of earthly pleasures, which we have
once entertained; and with such difficulty draw our selves to a constant course
of faith, hope, and spiritual joy, or to the renewed acts of the^ once
intermitted. Age is naturally weak, and youth vigorous; but in us the old man
is strong, the new faint and feeble: the fault is not in grace, but in us:
Faith does not want strength, but we want faith.

39
It is not good in worldly estates for a man to make himself necessary. For,
herupon he is both more toyled, and more suspected: but in the sacred
Commonwealth of the Church, a man cannot be engaged too deeply by his
service: The ambition of spiritual well-doing, breeds no danger. He that does
best, and may worst be spared, is happiest.

40
It was a fit comparison of worldly cares, to thorns: For, as they choke the
word, so they prick our souls: Neither the word can grow up amongst them, nor
the heart can rest upon them: Neither body nor soul can find ease while they
are within, or close to us: Spiritual cares are as sharp; but more
profitable; they pain us, but leave the soul better. They break our sleep,
but for a sweeter rest: we are not well but either while we have them, or after
we have had them. It is as impossible to have spiritual health without these,
as to have bodily strength with the other.

41
In temporal good things, it is best to live in doubt; not making full account
of that, which we hold in so weak a tenure. In spiritual, with confidence; not
fearing that which is warranted to us by an infallible promise and sure
earnest. He lives most conte^tedly, that is most secure for this world, most
resolute for the other.

42
God has in nature given every man inclinatio^s to some one particular
calling; which if he follow, he excells; if he cross, he proves a
non-proficie^t, and changeable: But all men's natures are equally indisposed to
grace, and to the common vocation of Christianity: we are all borne heathens.
To do well; nature must in the first be observed and followed, in the other
crossed and overcome.

43
Good Man, is a title given to ye lowest; whereas all Titles of Greatness,
Worship, Honor, are observed and attributed with choice. The speech of the
World bewrayes their mind and shows the common estimation of goodness compared
with other qualities. The World therefore is an il Herald, and unskillful in the
true styles: It were happy that goodness were so common; and pity that it
either should not stand with greatness, or not be preferred to it.

44
Amongst all actions Satan is ever busiest in the best, and most in the best
part of the best; as in the end of Prayer when the heart should close up it
self with most comfort. He never fears us, but when we are well employed:
and the more likelihood he sees of our profit, the more is his envy, and
labor to distract us. We should love our selves, as much as he hates us; and
therefore strive so much the more toward our good, as his malice strives to
interrupt it. We do nothing, if we contend not, when we are resisted. The
good soul is ever in contradiction; denying what is granted, and contending
for that which is denied; suspecting when it is gayne-saide, and fearing
liberty.

45
God forewarnes ere he try, because he would be prevented: Satan steals upon
us suddenly by temptations, because he would soil us. If we relent not upon
Gods premonition, and meet not the lingering pase of his punishments to
forestall them, he punishes more by how much his warning was more evident and
more large; Gods trials must be met when they come: Satan's must be seen
before they come; and if we be not armed ere we be assaulted, we shall be
foiled ere we can be armed.

46
It is not good to be continual in denunciation of judgment: The noise, to
which we are accustomed (tho loud) wakes us not; whereas a less if unusual
stirs us: The next way to make threatenings contemned, is to make them
common. It is a profitable rod that strikes sparingly, and frightes somewhat
oftener then it smites.

47
Want of use causes disabilitie, and custom perfection. Those that have not
used to pray in their closet, cannot pray in public, but coldely and in
form. He that discontinues meditation shall be long in recovering; whereas the
man inured to these exercises (who is not dressed till he have prayed, nor has
supped till he have meditated) does both these well, and with ease. He, that
intermittes good duties, incurres a double loss: of the blessing that
follows good; of the faculty of doing it.

48
Christianity is both an easy yoke, and an hard; hard to take up, easy to
bear when once taken. The heart requires much labor, ere it can be induced
to stoop under it; and finds as much contentment when it has stooped. The
Worldling thinks Religion seruilitie: but, the Christian knows whose slave
he was, till he entered into this service; and that no bondage can be so ill,
as freedom from these bonds.

49
It is a wonder how full of shifts nature is; Ready to turn over all good
purposes. If we think of death, she suggests secretly, Tush it shall not come
yet: If of judgment for sin, this concerns not thee; it shall not come at
all: If of heaven and our labor to reach it; Trouble not thy self, it will
come soon enough alone: Address thy self to pray; it is yet unseasonable,
stay for a better opportunity: To give alms; thou know not thy own future
wa^ts: To reprove; what neeedest thou thrust thy self into wilful hatred?
Every good action has his let: He can never be good, that is not resolute.

50
All Arts are Maids to Divinity; therefore they both veil to her, and do
her service: and she like a grave mistress controlls them at pleasure:
Natural philosophy teaches, that of nothing can be nothing made; and, that
from the privation to the habit is no return: Divinity takes her up, for
these; and, upon supernatural principles, teaches her a Creation, a
Resurrection. Philosophy teaches us to follow sense, as an infallible guide;
Divinity tells her, that faith is of things not seen. Logic teaches us first to
discourse, then to resolve: Divinity, to assent without arguing. Civil law
teaches, that long custom prescribes: Divinity that old things are passed;
Moral Philosophy that tallying of injuries is justice: Divinity, that good
must be returned for ill; Policy, that better is a mischief then an
inconvenience: Divinity, that we may not do evil that good may ensue. The
School is well ordered, while Divinity keeps the chair: but, if any other
skill usurp it, and check their mistress, there can follow nothing but
confusion and Atheism.

51
Much difference is to be made betwixt a reuolter, and a man trained up in
error. A Jew and an Arryan both deny Christ's deity: yet this opinion is not in
both punished with bodily death. Yea, a revolt to a less error is more
punishable then education in a capital heresy. Errors of judgment, tho less
regarded then errors of practice, yet are more pernicious: but none so deadly
as theirs that once were in the truth. If truth be not sued to, it is
dangerous; but if forsaken, desperate.

52
It is an ill argument of a good action not well done, when we are glad that it
is done. To be affected with the comfort of the conscience of well performing
it, is good: but merely to rejoice that the act is over, is carnal. He never
can begin cheerfully, that is glad he has ended.

53
He that does not secret service to GOD with some delight, does but
counterfaite in public. The truth of any act or passion is then best tried,
when it is without witness. Openly, many sinister respects may draw from us
a form of religious duties: secretly, nothing but the power of a good
conscience. It is to be feared, God has more true and devout service, in
closets, the^ in churches.

54
Words and diseases grow upon us with years. In age we talk much, because we
have seen much, and soon after shall cease talking for ever: We are most
diseased, because nature is weakest, and death which is near, must have
harbingers: such is the old age of the World. No marvel, if this last time be
full of writing, and weak discourse; full of sects and heresies, which are
the sicknesses of this great and decayed body.

55
The best ground untilled soonest runs out into rank weeds. Such are Gods
Children; Ouer-growne with security ere they are aware, unless they be well
exercised both with Gods plow of affliction, and their own industry in
meditation. A man of knowledge that is either negligent, or uncorrected, cannot
but grow wild and godless.

56
With us vilest things are most common; But with GOD the best things are most
frequently given. Grace which is the noblest of all Gods favors, is
impartially b^^^^wed upon all willing ^eceiuers; whereas Nobility of blood and
height of place, blessings of an inferior nature, are reserved for few.
Herein the Christian follows his Father; his prayers which are his richest
portion he communicates to al; his substance according to his ability, to few.

57
God therefore gives, because he has given; making his former favors,
^^^^ments for more: Man therefore shuts his hand, because he has opened it.
There is no such way to procure more from God, as to urge him with what he has
done. All Gods blessings are profitable and excellent; not so much in
themselves, as that they are inducements to greater.

58
Gods immediate actions are best, at first. The frame of his creation how
exquisite was it under his hand! afterward, blemished by our sin: man's
endeavors are weak in their beginnings, and perfitter by degrees. No science,
no devise has ever bin perfect in his cradle; or at once has seen his birth
and maturitie: of the same nature are those actions which God works mediately
by us according to our measure of receipt. The cause of both is, on the one side
the infiniteness of his wisdom and power which cannot be corrected by any
second assayes: On the other, our weakness helping it self by former grounds
and trials. He is an happy man that detractes nothing from Gods works, and
adds most to his own.

59
The old saying is more common then true; that those which are in hell know no
other heaven: for this makes the damned perfitly miserable, that out of their
own torment, they see the felicity of the saints; together with their
impossibility of attayning it. Sight without hope of fruition is a torment
alone: Those that here might see God and will not, or do see him obscurely
and love him not, shall once see him with anguish of soul and not enioie him.

60
Sometimes evil speeches come from good men, in their unadvisedness* and,
sometimes, even the good speeches of men may proceed from an ill spirit. No
confession could be better then Satan gave of Christ: It is not enough to
consider what is spoken, or by whom; but whence, and for what. The spirit is
oft-times tried by the speech: but other-times the speech must be examined by
the spirit; and the spirit, by the rule of an higher word.

61
Greatness puts hie thoughts, and big words, into a man; whereas the dejected
mind takes, carelessly, what offers it self. Every worldling is base-minded;
and therefore his thoughts creep still low upon the earth. The Christian both is
and knows himself truly great; and thereupon minds and speaks of
spiritual, immortal, glorious, heavenly things. So much as the soul
stoopeth to earthly thoughts; so much is it unregenerate.

62
Long acquaintance as it makes those things which are evil, to seem less
evil; so it makes good things which at first were unpleasant, delightful.
There is no evil of pain, nor no moral good action, which is not harsh at
the first. Continuance of evil, which might seem to weary us, is the remedy
and abatement of weariness: and the practice of good, as it profits, so it
pleases. He that is a stranger to good and evil, finds both of them
troublesome. GOD therefore does well for us, while he exercises us with long
afflictions: and we do well to our selves while we continually busy our
selves in good exercises.

63
Sometimes it is well taken by men, that we humble our selves lower then there
is cause. Thy servant JACOB, says that good Patriarch; to his brother, to his
inferior. And no less well does God take these submisse extenuations of our
selves; I am a worm and no man: Surely I am more foolish then a man, and have
not the understanding of a man in me. But I never find, that any man bragged
to GOD although in a matter of Truth, and within the compass of his desert,
and was accepted. A man may be too lowly in his dealing with men, even unto
contempt: with God he cannot; but the lower he falls, the higher is his
exaltation.

64
The soul is fed as the body, starued with hunger as the body, requires
proportionable diet and necessary variety, as the body. All ages and
statures of the soul bear not the same nourishment. There is milk for
spiritual infants, strong meat for the grown Christian. The spoone is fit for
one, the knife for the other. The best Christian is not so grown that he
need to scorn the spoone: but the weak Christian may find a strong feed
dangerous. How many have been cast away with spiritual surfets; because
being but newe-borne they have swallowed down big morselles of the highest
mysteries of godliness, which they never could digest; but together with them
have cast up their proper norishment. A man must first know the power of his
stomach, ere he know how with safety and profit to frequent Gods Ordinary.

65
It is very hard for the best man, in a suddayne extreamitie of death, to
satisfy himself in apprehending his stay, and reposing his heart upon it:
for the soul is so oppressed with sudden terror, that it cannot well
command it self, till it have digested an evil. It were miserable for the
best Christian, if all his former prayers and meditations did not serve to aid
him in his last straites, and meet together in the center of his extreamitie:
yielding though not sensible relief, yet secret benefit to the soul; whereas
the worldly man in this case, having not laid up for this hour, has no
comfort from God, or from others, or from himself.

66
All external good or evil is measured by sense: neither can we account that
either good or ill, which does neither actually avail, nor hurt us:
spiritually this rule holds not. All our best good is insensible. For, al our
future (which is the greatest) good, we hold only in hope; and the present
favor of God we have many times, and feel not. The stomach finds the best
digestion even in sleep when we least perceive it; and whiles we are most
awake, this power works in us either to further strength or disease, without
our knowledge of what is done within: And on the other side, that man is most
dangerously sick, in whom nature decays without his feeling, without his
complaint. To know our selves happy, is good: but woe were to us Christians,
if we could not be happy, and know it not.

67
There are none that ever did so much mischief to the Church, as those that
have been excellent in wit and learning. Others may be spightfull enough, but
want power to accomplish their malice. An enemy that has both strength and
craft is worthy be feared. None can sin against the Holy Ghost, but those
which have had former illumination. Tell not me what parts a man has, but
what grace: honest sottishnes is better then profane eminence.

68
The intertainement of all spiritualll events must be with fear or hope; but,
of all earthly extreamities, must be with contempt or derisio^. For, what is
terrible, is worthy of a Christians contempt; what is pleasant, to be turned
over with a scorn. The mean requires a mean affection betwixt love and
hatred. We may not love them, because of their vanity: we may not hate them,
because of their necessary use. It is an hard thing to be a wise host; and to
fit our entertainment to all comers: which if it be not done, the soul is
soon wasted, either for want of customers, or for the mis-rule of ill guests.

69
God and man build in a contrary order. Man lays the foundation first, then
adds the walls, the roof last. God began the roof first, spreading out this
vault of heaven, ere he laid ye base of the earth. Our thoughts must follow
the order of his worke-manship. Heaven must be minded first; earth afterward:
and so much more, as it is seen more. Our meditation must herein follow our
sense: A few miles give bounds to our view of earth; whereas we may near see
half the heaven at once. He that thinks most both of that which is most
seen, and of that which is not seen at all, is happiest.

70
I have ever noted it a true sign of a false heart, To be scrupulous and nice
in small matters, negligent in the main: whereas the good soul is still
curious in substa^tiall points, and not careless in things of an inferior
nature; accounting no duty so small as to be neglected, and no care great
enough for principal duties: not so tithing mint and cummin, that he should
forget justice and judgment; nor yet so regarding judgment and justice, that
he should contemn mint and cummin. He that thus misplaces his conscience,
will be found either hypocritical or superstitious.

71
It argues the world full of Atheistes, that those offenses which may impeach
humane society, are entertained with an answerable hatred and rigor: Those
which do immediately wrong the supreme majesty of God, are turned over with
scarce so much as dislike. If we conuersed with God as we do with men, his
right would be at least as precious to us as our own. All that converse not
with God are without God: not only those that are against God, but those that
are without God are Atheists. We may be too charitable: I fear not to say,
that these our last times abound with honest Atheists.

72
The best thing corrupted, is worst: An ill man is the worst of all creatures,
an ill Christian the worst of all men, an ill professor the worst of all
Christians.

73
Naturally life is before death, and death is only a privation of life:
Spiritually it is contrary: As PAVL says of the grain, so may we of man in
the business of his Regeneration. He must die before he can live; yet this
death presupposes a life that was once, and should be. God chooses to have the
difficultest, first: we must be content with the pain of dying, ere we feel
the comfort of life. As we die to nature, ere we live in glory: So, we must
die to sin, ere we can live to Grace.

74
Death did not first strike Adam the first sinful man: nor Cain the first
hypocrite; but Abel the innocent and righteous. The first soul that met with
death, overcame death: the first soul that parted from earth, went to Heaven.
Death argues not displeasure: because he who^ God loved best, dies first; and
the murderer is punished with living.

75
The lives of most are misspent, only for want of a certain end of their
actions. Wherein, they do as unwise Archers, shoot away their arrows they know
not at what mark: They live only out of the present, not directing themselves
and their proceedings to one universal scope: whence they alter upon all
change of occasions, and never reach any perfection; neither can do other
but continue in uncertainty, and end in discomfort. Others aim at one
certain mark, but a wrong one. Some (tho fewer) level at the right end, but
amiss. To live without one maine and common end, is idleness and folly. To
live to a false end is deceit and loss: True Christian wisdom both shows the
end, and finds the way. And as cunning Politickes have many plots to compass
one and the same design by a determined succession: so the wise Christian,
failing in the means, yet still fetches about to his steadie end with a
constant change of endeavors: Such one only lives to purpose, and at last
repents not that he has lived.

76
The shipwreck of a good conscience is the casting away of all other
excellencies. It is no rare thing to note the soul of a wilful sinner
stripped of all her graces, and by degrees exposed to shame: so those, whom we
have known admired, have fallen to be level with their fellows; and from
thence beneath them, to a mediocrity; and afterward to sottishnes and
contempt, below the vulgar. Since they have cast away the best, it is just
with God to take away the worst; and to cast off them in lesser regardes, which
have rejected him in greater.

77
It has ever bin counted more noble and succesfull, to set upon an open enemy
in his own home, then to expect till he set upon us, whiles we make only a
defensive war. This rule serves us for our last enemy Death: whence that old
demand of Epicure is easily answered; whether it be better Death should come
to us, or that we should meet him in the way: meet him in our minds, ere he
seize upon our bodies. Our cowardlinesse, our vnpreparation is his advantage:
whereas true boldness, in confronting him, dismayes and weakens his forces.
Happy is that soul that can send out the scoutes of his thoughts
beforehand, to discover the power of Death afar off; and then can resolutely
encounter him at unawares upon advantage: such one lives with security, dies
with comfort.

78
Many a man sends others to heaven, and yet goes to hell himself: and not
few having drawn others to hell, yet themselves return by a late repentance,
to life. In a good actio^ it is not good action, it is not good to search too
deeply into the intention of the agent, but in silence to make our best benefit
of the work: In an evil, it is not safe to regard the quality of the person,
or his success, but to consider the action abstracted from all circumstances,
in his own kind. So we shall neither neglecte good deeds because they speed
not well in some hands, nor affecta prosperous evil.

78
God does some singular actions, wherein we cannot imitate him; some wherein
we may not; most wherein he may and would fain be followed. He fetches good
out of evil; so may we turn our own and others sins to private or public
good: we may not do evil for a good use; but we must use our evil once done,
to good. I hope I shall not offend, to say, that the good use which is made of
sins is as gainefull to God, as that which arises from good actions. Happy
is that man, that can use either his good, well, or his evil.

79
There is no difference betwixt anger and madness, but continuance: for,
raging* anger is a short madness. What else argues the shaking of the hands
and lips, palenesse or redness, or swelling of the face, glaring of the
eyes, stammering of the tongue, stamping with the feet, vnsteadie motions of
the whole body, rash actions which we remember not to have done, distracted
and wild speeches? and madness again is nothing but a continued rage, yea
some madness rages not: such a mild madness is more tolerable then frequent
and furious anger.

80
Those that would keep state, must keep aloof off; especially if their
qualities be not answerable in height to their place. For, many great persons
are like a well-wrought picture upon a course cloth; which afar off shows
fair, but near hand the roundnesse of the thread marres the good workmanship.
Concealment of gifts, after some one commended act, is the best way to
admiration, and secret honor: but he that would profit, must vent himself often
and liberally, and show what he is, without all private regard. As therefore,
many times, honor follows modesty, unlooked for; so, contrarily, a man may
show no less pride in silence and obscurity, then others which speak and
write for glory. And that other pride is so much more the worse, as it is more
unprofitable: for, whereas those which put forth their gifts, benefit others
while they seek themselves; these are so wholly devoted to themselves, that
their secrecy does no good to others.

81
Such as a man's delights and cares are in health, such are both his thoughts
and speeches commonly on his deathbed: The proud man talks of his fair
suits, the glutton of his dishes, the wanton of his beastliness, the religious
man of heavenly things. The tongue will hardly leave that, to which the heart
is inured. If we would have good motions to visit us while we are sick, we
must send for them familiarly in our health.

82
He is a rare man that has not some kind of madness reigning in him: One a
dull madness of melancholy, another a co^ceited madness of pride, another a
superstitious madness of false devotion, a fourth of ambition, or
covetousness, a fifth the furious madness of anger; a sixth the laughing
madness of extreme mirth, a seventh a drunken madness, an eightth of
outrageous lust, a ninth the learned madness of curiosity, a tenth the worst
madness of profaneness and Atheism. It is as hard to reckon up all kinds of
madnesses, as of dispositions. Some are more noted and punished then others;
for that the mad in one kind does as much condemn another, as the sober man
condemns him. Only that man is both good, and wise and happy, that is free
from all kinds of phre^sie.

75
There be some honest errors, wherewith I never found that God was offended;
That an husband should think his own wife comely, although ill-fauoured in the
eyes of others; that a man should think more meanly of his own good parts
then of weaker in others; to give charitable (though mistaken) constructions of
doubtful actions and persons (which are the effects of natural affection,
humility, love) were never censured by God: Herein alone we err, if we err
not.

84
No marvel if the worldling escape earthly afflictions. God correctes him not;
because he loves him not. He is base-borne and begot: God will not do him the
favor to whip him. The world afflicts him not; because it loves him. For each
one is indulgent to his own. God uses not the rod where he means to use the
sword; The pillory or scourge is for those malefactors which shall escape
execution.

85
VVeake stomachs which can not digest large meals, feed often and little: For
our souls, that which we want in measure, we must supply in frequence. We can
never fully enough co^prehe^d in our thoughts the joys of heaven, the
meritorious sufferings of Christ, the terrors of the second death: therefore
we must meditate of them often.

86
The same thoughts do commonly meet us in the same places; as if we had left
them there till our return. For that the mind does secretly frame to it self
me moratiue heads, whereby it recalls easily the same conceits: It is best to
employ our mind there, where it is most fixed. Our devotion is so dull, it
cannot have too many advantages.

87
I find but one example, in all scripture, of any bodily cure which our
Savior wrought by degrees: Only the blind man, whose weak faith craved help
by others, not by himself, saw men first like trees, then in their true shape.
All other miraculous cures of Christ were done at once, and perfect at first.
Contrarily, I find but one example of a soul sully healed (that is)
sanctified and glorified, both in a day; all other by degrees and leisure. The
steps of grace are soft and short. Those external miracles he wrought
immediately by himself; and therefore no marvel if they were absolute like
their Author. The miraculous work of our regeneration he works together with
us; He gives it efficacy: we give it imperfection.

SOME few of David's Psalms Metaphrased, for a taste of the rest.

By J. H.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Samuel Macham. 1607.

TO MY LOVING and learned Cosen, Mr SAMVEL BVRTON, Archdeacon of Gloucester.
Indeed, my Poetry was long sithence out of date, and yielded her place to
grauer studies: but whose vain would it not revive to look into these
heavenly songs? I were not worthy to be a Divine, if it should repent me to be
a Poet with DAVID, after I shall have aged in the Pulpit: This work is holy
and strict, and abides not any youthful or heathenish liberty; but requires
hands free from profaneness, looseness, affectation. It is a service to God
and the Church by so much more carefully to be regarded, as it is more common.
For, who is there that will not challenge a part in this labor? and that
shall not find himself much more affected with holy measures rightly composed*
Wherefore I have often wondered, how it could be offensive to our adversaries,
that these divine ditties which the spirit of GOD wrote in verse, should be
sung in verse; and that an Hebrew Poem should be made English. For, if this
kind of composition had been unfit, God would never have made choice of
numbers, wherein to express himself* Yea, who knows not, that some other
Scriptures, which the spirit has indicted in prose, have yet been happily and
with good allowance put into strict numbers? If histories tell us of a wanton
Poet of old, which lost his eyes while he went about to turn MOSES into verse;
yet every student knows with what good success and commendatio^ NONNVS has
turned JOHN'S gospel into Greek Heroicks; And APOLLINARIVS that learned Syrian,
matched with BAZIL and GREGORY (who lived in his time) in the terms of this
equality, that BAZILS speech was (...), but APOLLINARIES (...), wrote, as
SVIDAS reports, all the Hebrew scripture in heroicks, as Sozomen (somewhat more
restrainedly) all the Archaiology of the Jews, till SAVLS government, in 24.
parts; or as SOCRATES yet more particularly, all MOSES in Heroicks, and all the
other histories in diverse meeters: but how ever his other labors lie hid, his
Metaphrase of the Psalms is still in our hands with the applause of all the
learned: besides the labors of their own FLAMINIVS and ARIAS MONTANVS (to
seek for no more) which have worthily bestowed themselves in this subject.
Neither do I see how it can be offensive to our friends, that we should
desire our english Metaphrase bettered. I say nothing to the disgrace of that
we have: I know how glad our adversaries are of all such advantages; which
they are ready enough to find out without me, ever reproachefully vpbrayding
us with these defectes. But since our whole Tralation is now universally
reuised; what inconvenience or show of innovation can it bear, that the verse
should accompany the prose? especially since it is well known how rude and
homely our English Poesy was in those times, compared with the present; wherein,
if ever, it sees her full perfection. I have been solicited by some reuered
friends to undertake this task; as that which seemed well to accord with the
former exercises of my youth, and my present profession. The difficulties I
found many, the work long and great; yet not more painful then beneficial
to Gods Church. Whereto as I dare not profess any sufficiency; so will I not
deny my readiness, and utmost endeavor, if I shall be employed by
Authority: wherefore, in this part, I do humbly submit my self to the grave
censures of them, whose wisdom menageth these common affairs of the Church:
and am ready either to stand still or proceed, as I shall see their Cloud or
Fire go before or behind me. Only (howsoever) I shall for my true affection
to the Church, wish it done by better workmen. Wherein as you approve, so
further my bold but not unprofitable motion, and commend it unto greater
cares: as I do you to the greatest.

Non-such July, 3. Your loving Kins-man, IOS. HALL.

Psalm. 1. In the tune of 148. Psalms; Give laud unto the Lord.
1 WHo has not walked astray,
In wicked men's advise,
Nor stood in sinners way;
Nor in their companyes
That scorners are,
As their fit mate,
In scoffing chair,
Has ever sat;
2 But in thy laws divine,
O Lord sets his delight,
And in those laws of thine
Studies all day and night;
Oh, how that man
Thrice blessed is!
And sure shall gain
Eternal bliss.
3 He shall be like the tree,
Set by the water-springs,
Which when his seasons be
Most pleasant fruit forth-brings:
Whose boughs so green
Shall never fade,
But covered been
With comely shade.
So, to this happy wight,
All his designs shall thrive:
4 Whereas the man unright,
As chaff which winds do drive,
With every blast
Is tossed on hy,
Nor can at last
In safety lie.
5 Wherefore, in that sad doom,
They dare not rise from dust:
Nor shall no Sinner come
To glory of the just.
For, God will grace
The Iust-mans way;
While sinners race
Runs to decay.
Psalm. 2. In the tune of the 125. Psalm; Those that do put their conf.
WHy do the Gentiles tumults make,
And nations all conspire in vain,
And earthly Princes counsel take
Against their God; against the reign
Of his dear Christ? let us, they saine,
Break al their bonds: and from us shake
Their thraldoms yoke, and servile chain.
VVhiles thus alas they fondly spoke,
He that aloft rides on the skies,
Laughs all their lewd devise to sco^
5 And when his wrathful rage shall (...),
With plagues shall make the al forlorn,
And in his fury thus replies;
6 But I, my King with sacred horn
Anointing, shall in princely guise
His head with royal crown adorn.
Upon my Syons holy mount
His Empires glorious seat shall be.
And I thus raised shall far recount
The tenor of his true decree:
7 My Son thou art, said God, I thee
Begat this day by due account:
Thy scepter, do but ask of me,
All earthly kingdoms shall surmount.
All nations, to thy rightful sway,
will subject; from furthest end
9 Of all the world: and thou shall bray
Those stubborn foes that will not bend,
With iron mace (like potters clay)
10 In pieces small: Ye Kings attend;
And ye, whom others wont obey,
Learn wisdom, and at last amend.
11 See, ye serve God, with greater dread
Then others you: and in your fear
Rejoice the while; and (lowely spread)
12 Do homage to his son so dear:
Least he be wroth, and do you dead
13 Amids your way. If kindeled
His wrath shall be; O blessed those,
That do on him their trust repose.
Psalm. 3. As the 113. Psalm; Ye Children which, etc.
1 AH Lord! how many be my foes!
How many are against me rose,
2 That to my grieved soul have sed,
Tush: God shall him no succor yield;
3 whiles thou Lord art my praise, my shield
And do advance my careful head.
4 Loud with my voice to God I cried:
His grace unto my suit replied,
From out his Sions holy hill.
5 I laid me down, slept, rose again.
For thou O Lord do me sustain,
And sav'st my soul from feared ill.
6 Not if ten thousand armed foes
My naked side should round enclose,
Would I be thereof ought a-dred.
Up Lord and shield me from disgrace:
7 For thou have broke my foe-mens face,
And all the wickeds teeth have shed.
8 From thee O God is safe defense;
Do thou thy free beneficence
Upon thy people largely spread.
Psalm. 4. As the x. Commandments; Attend my People.
1 THou witness of my truth sincere,
My God unto my poor request
Vouch-saue to lend thy gracious ear:
Thou have my soul from thral releast.
2 Favor me still, and daigne to hear
Mine humble suit. O wretched wights,
3 How long will ye mine honor dear
Turn into shame through your despites?
Still will ye love what thing is vain,
4 And seek false hopes? know the^ at last,
That God has chose and will maintain
His favorite, whom ye disgraced.
God will regard mine instant moan.
5 Oh! tremble then, and cease offending;
And, on your silent bed alone,
Talk with your hearts, your ways amending.
6 Offer the truest sacrifice
Of broken hearts; on God besetting
7 Your only trust. The most devise
The ways of worldly treasure getting:
But thou, O Lord, lift up to me
The light of that sweet looks of thine;
8 So shall my soul more gladsome be,
Then theirs with all their corn and wine.
9 So I in peace shall lay me down,
And on my bed take quiet sleep;
Whiles thou, O Lord, shall me alone
From dangers all securely keep.
Psalm. 5. In the tune of 124. Psalm; Now Israel may say, etc.
1 BOw down thine ear
Lord to these words of mine,
And well regard
the secret plaints I make.
2 My King, my God,
to thee I do betake
My sad estate
oh do thine ear incline
To these loud cries
that to thee powered bin.
3 At early morn
thou shall my voice attend:
For, at day break,
I will my self address
Thee to implore,
and wait for due redress.
4 Thou do not Lord
delight in wickedness;
Nor to bad men
wilt thy protection lend.
5 The boasters proud
cannot before thee stay:
Thou hat'st all those
that are to sin devoted:
6 The lying lips,
and who with blood are spotted,
Thou do abhor,
and wilt for ever slaie:
7 But I unto
thine house shall take the way,
And through thy grace
abundant shall adore,
With humble fear
within thine holy place.
8 Oh! lead me Lord
within thy righteous trace:
Even for their sakes
that malice me so sore,
Make smooth thy paths
my dimmer eyes before.
9 Within their mouth
no truth is ever found:
Pure mischief is
their heart: a gaping toome
10 Is their wide throat;
and yet their tongues still sound
11 With smoothing words.
O Lord give them their doom,
And let them fall,
in those their plots profound.
In their excess
of mischief them destroy
12 That rebels are;
so those that to thee fly
Shall all rejoice
and sing eternally:
13 And whom thou do
protect, and who love thee,
And thy dear name,
in thee shall ever joy.
^ Since thou with bliss
the righteous do reward,
And with thy grace
as with a shield him guard.
Psalm. 6. As the 50. Psalm; The mighty God, etc.
LEt me not Lord
be in thy wrath reproved:
Oh! scourge me not^
when thy fierce rage is moved.
2 Pity me, Lord,
that do with languor pine:
Heal me whose bones
with pain dissolved bin;
3 Whose weary soul
is vexed above measure.
Oh Lord how long
shall I'bide thy displeasure!
4 Turn thee O Lord,
rescue my soul distressed;
5 And save me, of thy grace.
Among those that rest,
In silent death
can none remember thee:
And in the grave
how should thou praised be?
6 Weary with sighs,
all night I caused my bed
To swim: with tears
my couch I watered.
7 Deep sorrow has
consumed my dimmed eyne,
Sunk in with grief
at these lewd foes of mine:
8 But now hence, hence,
vain plotters of mine ill:
The Lord has heard
my lamentations shrill;
9 God heard my suit
and still attends the same:
10 Blush now, my foes,
and fly with sudden shame.
Psalm. 7. As the 112. Psalm; The man is blessed that God does fear.
1 ON thee, O Lord my God, relyes
Mine only trust: from bloody spite
Of all my raging enemies
Oh! let thy mercy me acquit;
2 Least they like greedy Lions rend
My soul, whiles none shall it defend*
3 Oh Lord! if I this thing have wrought,
If in my hands be found such ill:
4 If I with mischief ever sought
To pay good turns; or did not still
Do good unto my causeless foe,
That thirsted for my overthrow;
^ Then let my foe, in eager chase,
Ore take my soul, and proudly tread
My life below; and with dis-grace
In dust lay down mine honor dead.
6 Rise up in rage, O Lord, eft-soone
Advance thine arm against my fo'ne:
And wake for me till thou fulfill
My promised right; so shall glad throngs
Of people flock unto thine hill.
For their sakes then revenge my wro^gs,
And rouse thy self. Thy judgments be
Over all the world: Lord judge thou me;
As truth and honest innocence
Thou find'st in me, Lord judge thou (...)
9 Settle the just with sure defense:
Let me the wicked's malice see
10 Brought to an end. For thy just eye
Does hearts and inward reyns descry
11 My safety stands in God; who shields
The sound in heart: whose doom each day
12 To just men and contemners yields
13 Their due. Except he change his way
His sword is whet, to blood intended,
His murdring bow is ready bended.
14 Weapons of death he has addressed
And arrows keen to pearce my foe,
15 Who late bred mischief in his breast;
But when he does on travel go,
^6 Brings forth a ly. Deep pits he delues,
And falls into his pits himselue.
^7 Back to his own head shall rebound
His plotted mischief; and his wrongs
^8 His crown shall craze: But I shall sound
Iehouah's praise with thankful songs,
And will his glorious name express,
And tell of all his righteousness.
Psalm. 8. As the 113. Psalm; Ye Children, etc.
1 HOw noble is thy mighty name,
O Lord over all the worlds wid^ frame
Whose glory is advanced on hye
Above the rouling heavens rack!
2 How for the graceless scorners sake,
To still th'auenging enemy,
Have thou by tender infants tongue,
The praise of thy great name made strong,
While they hang sucking on the breast*
3 But when I see thine heavens bright,
The Moon and glittering stars of night*
By thine almighty hand addressed;
Oh! what is man, poor silly man,
That thou so mind'st him, and do daine
To look at his unworthy seed!
Thou have him set not much beneath
Thine Angels bright; and with a wreath
Of glory have adorned his head.
Thou have him made hy sovereign
Of al thy works; and stretched his reign
Unto the herds, and beasts vntame,
To fowls, and to the scaly train,
That glideth through the watery main.
How noble each-where is thy name!
Psalm. 9.
To the tune of that known song, beginning; Preserve us Lord.
1 THee and thy wondrous deeds, O God
With all my soul I sound abroad
2 My joy, my triumph is in thee,
Of thy drad name my song shall be,
3 O highest God: since put to flight,
And fallen and vanished at thy sight,
4 Are all my foes; for thou have past
Just sentence on my cause at last:
And sitting on thy throne above,
A rightful Judge thy self do prove:
The troops profane thy checkes have stroid
And made their name for ever void.
^ Where Is now, my foes, your threatened wrack?
So well you did our cities sack,
And bring to dust; whiles that ye say,
Their name shall die as well as they.
^ Lo, in eternal state God sits,
And his by throne to justice fits:
Whose righteous hand the world shall weeld
And to al folk just doom shall yield.
The poor from hy find his relief,
The poor in needful times of grief:
10 Who knows thee Lord, to thee shall cleave,
That never do thy clie^ts leave.
11 Oh! sing the God that does abide,
On Sion mount; and blazon wide
12 His worthy deeds. For, he pursues
The guiltless blood with vengeance due:
He minds their case; nor can pass over
Sad clamours of the wronged poor.
13 Oh! mercy Lord; thou that do save
My soul from gates of death and grave:
Oh! see the wrong my foes have done;
14 That I thy praise, to all that gone,
Through daughter Sions beauteous gate
With thankful songs may loud relate*
And may rejoice in thy safe aid.
Behold: the Gentiles, whiles they made
A deadly pit my soul to drown,
Into their pit are sunken down;
In that close snare they hid for me,
Lo their own feet entangled be.
16 By this just doom the Lord is known,
That the will are punished with their own.
17 Down shall the wicked backward fall
To deepest hell, and nations all
18 That God forget; nor shall the poor
Forgotten be for evermore.
The constant hope of souls oppressed
19 Shall not ay die. Rise from thy rest,
Oh Lord, let not men base and rude
Prevail: judge thou the multitude
20 Of Lawelesse pagans: strike pale fear
Into those breasts late stubborn were:
And let the Gentiles feel and find,
They been but men of mortal kind.
Psalm. 9. As the 51. Psalm; O Lord consider
1 WHy sta^d'st thou Lord aloof so long
and hid'st thee in due times of need
2 Whiles lewd men proudly offer wrong
Unto the poor? In their own deed,
And their devise let them be caught.
3 For lo, the wicked braues and boasts
In his vile and outrageous thought,
And blesses him that rauins most.
4 On God he dares insult: his pride
Scorns to inquire of powers above,
But his stout thoughts have still denied
5 There is a God; His ways yet prove
Aye prosperous: thy judgments hye
Do far surmount his dimmer sight.
6 Therefore does he all foes defy:
His heart says; I shall stand in spite,
Nor ever move; nor danger 'bide.
7 His mouth is filled with curses foul,
And with close fraud: His tongue does hide
8 Mischief and il: he seeks the soul
Of harmless men in secret wait,
And in the corners of the street,
Does shed their blood; with scorn and hate
His eyes upon the poor are set.
9 As some fell Lion in his den,
He closely lurkes the poor to spoil,
He spoils the poor and helpless men,
When once he snares them in his toil.
10 He croucheth low in cunning wile,
And bows his breast; whereon whole thro^gs
Of poor, whom his fair shows beguile,
Fall to be subject to his wrongs.
11 God has forgot, (in soul he says)
He hides his face to never see.
12 Lord God arise; thine hand vp-raise:
Let not thy poor forgotten be.
13 Shall these insulting wretches scorn
Their God; and say thou will not care?
14 Thou see, (for all thou have forborne)
Thou see what al their mischiefs are;
That to thine hand of vengeance just
Thou may the^ take: the poor distressed
Rely on thee with constant trust,
The help of Orphans and oppressed.
15 Oh! break the wickeds arm of might,
And search out al their cursed trains,
And let them vanish out of sight.
16 The Lord as King for ever reigns.
From forth his coasts, the heathen sect
17 Are rooted quite: thou Lord atte^dest
To poor men's suites; thou doo'st direct
Their hearts: to the^ thine ear thou be^dest;
18 That thou may rescue, from despite,
The woeful fatherless, and poor:
That, so, the vain and earthen wight
On us may tyrannize no more.
FINIS.

