The Acts of Englysh votaryes, comprehendynge their unchaste practyses and
examples by all ages, from the worlds beginning to this present year,
collected out of their own legendes and Chronycles By Johan Bale.

Learn herin (good reader) to prove all spretes, and to judge false miracles,
rebukynge no Christen beleuer, but those obstynate hypocrytes only, which yet
live after their popes old rules. Read, but laugh not.

O thu maiden of Chaldea, Thu shall no more be called tender and plesaunt. Thy
shame shall be dyscouered, and thy preuytees shall be seane, for I (says the
lord) will avenge me of the, and no man shall let me. Esa* 47. The preface of
this book.
GIldas that ancient Brytayne, in his first treatise of the dolorouse
destruccyon of his coutreye, has this worthy sentence against them which
were the chief cause thereof* And borrowed yt is of the.xxiiii. chaptre of
Salomons proverbs. Who so ever co^me^deth the wicked (says he) and reports
them ryghtuouse or holy, the same shall ones have the curse of the people, and
the commynalte shall ab horre him. Plentuouse has the Popes clergy been in
this point, specyallye in the church here of England. Not only have they
commended unto us whoremo^gers, bawdes, brybers, Idolaters, hypocrytes,
trayters, and most filthy Gomorreanes, as Godly men and women, but also they
have canonysed the^ for most holy saints, set them up gylt Images in their
temples, commanded their vygyls to be fasted, appointed them holy days and
the peoples to do them honor with eue^songes, hours, processyons, lyghtes,
masses, ryngynges, syngynges, sensynges, and the devil and all of soche
heythnysh wares. They have done by us as their old predecessors the
Idolatrouse prestes ded by the auncyeut Romans. They have set us up a sort of
lecherouse Gods to be worshypped in our temples, to be our advocates, and to
help us in our needs. Old gods etc. new.
Instead of Jupiter, Saturn, Mercurye, Mars, Juno, Proserpina, Diana, and
Venus, which ded all their feats in whoredom, as the poets verefyethe, they
have given us Wenefryde, Cuthbert, Dunstane, Oswalde, Anselme, Becket, Brigyde,
Audrye, Modwe^, Edith, Osith, Ethelburge, and a great sort more of vnpure
workers out of marryage.

Mark the lives of their English saints, almost from the beginning, and ye
shall not find one of them canonysed for preaching Christ's veryte a right,
neither yet for leadynge a life after the perfyght rules of the Gospel. Not
one commend they for worshyppynge God without mennys tradycyons, nor yet for
executyuge the works of Mercy, unless se yt were to their advantage. Never
reckened they wedlock any Godly estate of lyuyuge, though yt were an only
order instytuted of God in the begyunynge, yea, for his prestes also. Commo^lye
they have dyswaded both men and women from yt, as from a most pernycyouse
evil, Dyffa* /
or from a myschefe of all myschefes, calling yt folyshnesse, fylthynesse,
beastlynesse, macyo^s of Marryage.
a walking in darkness, a mayntenau^ce of lechery, a fulfyllyng of fleshlye
desires, a ground of all vice, an entrance of death, a corruptynge of
maydenhode, a lake of myserye, a claye pytt of uncleaness, a thraldom of
Egypt, a net of Satan, a snare of the devil, and a ponde of perdycyon, look
Johan Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglie, specyallye in the lives or
legendes of Clarus, Eanswyde, kyneswyde, Etheldrede, we nefrede, Mylburge, and
Myldrede with soche other like, and ye shall find my words most true. In the
hystorye of Saint Vrsula have they named the^ Angels of darkness which has
persuaded marryage laufull. blasphemye.
Of whose no^bre was first God the eternal Father, and tha^ Moses and the
Prophets for the old law. And afterward Jesus Christ his eternal Son,
with Peter, Paul and the other apostles for the new law. Were not the men
(think you) well ouerseane?

So perverse stomakes have they borne to women, that the more part of their
temptynge spretes they have made she deuyls (look their Saints legendes) but
he that tempted Christ was an he devil, a relygyouse devil, and a prestlye
devil. Wha^ they have been tempted with lecherouse spretes in the likeness of
wo^men, The deuyls.
they have (they say) by the suffren virtue of holy water, turned them into
denyls again. But never were they yet so comiyuge with all their holy water,
as to make of their whores honest married women. No* yt is not their order, to
do soche miracles In the life of Saint Godrick is mencyon of a she devil, but
in the conclusyon, he apereth with hanging ware of no small quantyte, having
his young ones following him with shaue^ crowns. Of a lykelyhode therefore he
was some spyrytuall he tempter, and his children within holy orders. Soche
power had Saint Guthlake over those watchynge worms, that he made them to
tarrye with him, and to build him up a monasterye at Asendyck, now called
Crowla^de, some say. To be short in this matter. Saints unmarried
Their saints in a manner were all unmarried. If any were married that would
needs be saints, they were ano^ compelled by oath, or by the way of penance,
to leave their makes to the occupyenge of others, the man his wife, and the
woman her husband, as ye shall behold in this book by most plentuouse
examples. For matrimonye has ever been such a black bugge in their synagoge
and church, that never would canonysacyon serve yet, where he was in place.

Notwithstanding we are thoroughly assertayned by innumerable scripturs and
arguments, that matrymonye is of God, and by their innumerable examples of
fylthynesse, that their vowed wyuelesse and husbandelesse chastyte is
altogyther of the devil. Votaryes.
Sens the gloryouse aperaunce of the Gospel have that Sodo mytycall swarm or
broad of Antichrist (that ye call the spirytualte) been often times admonyshed of
their fleshlye errors by the manifest scripturs thereof, that they should ones
repent their most horrible myschefes, and grant unto marriage the fredome due
thereunto. And what have they done, think you? Nothing else at all but laughed
them to scorn, reportynge them to be but fables and lies. The learned
allegacyons, reasons, and arguments of Phylyp Mela^chton, Christian doctors.
Luther, Lambert, Pomerane, Barnes, and soche other, they have heard, but the
answer is yet to make. They mock and mow at the^ like Jack a napes, or like
them which went up and down by the cross when Christ was crucyfyed, and that
is enough for them. For they have yt of their popes law to answer no man, yea
although they write their abhomynacyons to the uttermost, unless they have him
in preson. I have therefore thought yt best, The antour.
seeing they regard not the sacred scrypturs, to lay before them their
abhomynable practyses and examples of fylthynesse, by their own legendes,
chronycles, and saints Lives, that all men may know what legerdemaynes they
have used, and what lecherouse lives they have led here in England sens the
worlds beginning. Let them now be ashamed of their beastlynesse, or else put
on their mothers face altogyther.

In the first part of this book, may men breuelye behold how and by whom
this realm was first inhabyted, which thing has been hitherto in all
Englysh Chronycles, Chronycles.
doubtfullye, vnagreablye, yea, and untruly treated, upon coniecturs,
fantasyes, and lies only, by reason of ignorance in the scripturs and most
auctorysed hystoryes. They shall also perceive, what peoples have here by all
ages remained, what doctryues, has been taught by their true and false
prophets, what worshyppynges of God they have used, and what laws in relygyon
they have followed. Fynallye they shall know clerelye, the deceytfull
workema^shyp of the instruments of Satan, their bishops, prestes.
prestes, and monks, with other dysgysed locustes of the same generacyo^.
Whose contynuall stodye, labor, and seeking was always to blind them by a
color of chaste living, Marriage.
making them to believe, that their marryenge of wives was a profane layte, a
brutysh beastlynesse, and a thing which greatly dyspleased God. Their own
vowynge of vyrgynyte was again (they said) a spirytuall order, Vyrgynyte.
a life of Angels, and an holy relygyon which pleased God above all other,
what though they never had yt in their lives. For true vyrginyte is a faith
uncorrupted, Faith
or a believe governed by the only word of God without all superstycyons of
men. This was the only vyrgynyte that Marye was commended of, Luce. 1. This
vyrgynyte perteyneth chefelye to marryage, as testyfyethe Saint Paul. 2. Cor.
11. 2. Cor.^^.
And as apereth in Abraham and other just fathers which had faithful wives. No
people are less acquaynted with this vprgyuyte than sectaryes, or they that
vow vprgynyte, for they thefelye depend upon mennys tradycyons and rules.

But if a tree may be known by his fruits, and a man by his deeds, as our
sauer says they may, Math. 7. ye shall easelye perceive by their acts, Mat.
7.
that these vyrgyuall votaryes has been the very Angels of darkness. Mark
their gostlye conueyauuces, and their other good works (as they will have them
yet called) like as they are here regestred in course. And ye shall find them
more fyt for hell than for heaven. Yet must they be canonysed saints, and do
most wonderful miracles. Miracles.
But those miracles are the strong delusyons (saint Paul says) that the
lord will send unto the^ that shall perysh for their vnbeleues sake. 2.
Thessalon 2. I doubt not but this labor of mine, though yt be very simple,
will mynystre some light as well to the learned as unlearned. At the least yt
shall teache the^ to judge false miracles, that they be no more so deuylyshly
deceived. Let not the often cytynge of authors be greuouse to the readers, my
occasyon iustlye considered. Autours.
For thereby shall the papystes have shame always, if they report them fables,
or else me a liar for the telling of them, being in their wrytynges so
manifest. And as conceruyuge those autours, they were their own dear fryndes,
and wrote the best they could of them. If they had been their enemies, and so
showed the worst of them, or else but indyfferent writers as they were most
parcyall wytuesses, it had been a far other show of their mischefes than
here will apere.

Men trusted they would have seane themselves in this clear light of the
Gospel, and so have repented their former factes of falsehede. Bishops
But truly they are of a far other kind than so. Their nature is not to
repent, do they never so many myschefes. Rather stodye they out new practyses
of tyranny and cautels of cruelte, to add myschefe to myschefe, till the
great vengeance promised, light fullye upon them. Who so ever has promoted
forewarde Gods veryte (they thank God of yt) they have been non of them as
yet. Gospel
If they should make their boastes with Paul. 1. Corin. 15. that they have done
therein more labors than the other discyples, men of knowledge would by and by
say, that they lied most falselye. In deed they have with Menelaus, Alchinius,
Ananias, and with Capphas gone before all worldly tyrauntes in the murtheringe
up of them which has done yt. And for errors, Error
they say. But who ever erred as they have done, sens the worlds beginning?
Truly non as yet. Neither, Turk, Jew, Saracene, Pagane, nor devil, as the
examples herafter will show, they shall not be able to avoid yt, unless they
dyspute with fire and faggottes as they have done hitherto. For stark naught
are they in dysputacyons, where as they are not at hand. For this book, I
shall have their common lyuerye, and be called a thousand times heretyke. But
neither look I for reasonable answer of them, nor yet for amendment of their
knaueryes.

In this book of mine, Face of Antichrist.
is one face of Antichrist chefelye dysclosed (parauenture iij. under one)
wherewith he has of long time painted out his whore, the Rome church, that
she might to the world apere a gloryouse madame. That face is her vowed
chastyte, whereby she has deceytfullye boasted herself spiritual, being but
whore and thief, Marryage makes lay.
and dysdayned marryage as a vile draffe sack and dyrtye dyshe cloute,
calling all them but lewd lay persons that were under yt, though they were
kings and queen's, lords and ladies. Ye noble gouerners and learned lawers,
unto whom God has in this age delivered the measurynge rod of his word, as
he ded to Johan. Apocal. 11. that ye should measure all things ryghtlye. Be not
now slack in your offices, as in the blind time, but throw fourth that
wretched bond woman with her daughter, that Rome church with her
whoryshnesse. No point of nobylyte were yt, Nobylyte.
nor yet of learned worthynesse, to be as ye have been of late years. still
servant slaves to a most filthy whore, and to her whoredom and whoremongers.
Our most christen Emprour of England, king He^rye the. King Henry.
vii. of that name, as a most worthy mynystre of God, has goue before you in
that behalf. He has made open unto ye the way, and dryue^ away from your
gates the great aduersarye that should most have noyed you. Dysdayne not than
you to follow, Take from your true subjects, the popes false Christ with his
belles and bablynges, Christ.
with his myters and mastryes, with his fannoms and fopperyes, and let them
have frelye the true Christ again that their heavenly father sent them from
above fashyoned out unto the^ in the Gospel. For much more bewtifull is he in
the sight of true beleuers, tha^ are all the corrupt children of men, with all
their gorgyouse aparelynges. Look you thereunto with ernestnesse, for nothing
will be at the lattre daymore strayghtlye required of you tha^ that.



The Acts of Englysh votaryes, comprehendynge their unchaste practyses and
examples by all ages, from the worlds beginning to this present year,
collected out of their own legendes and Chronycles By Johan Bale.
Marryage instytuted of God.
IN paradyse our eternal and merciful father instytuted marriage, Matrymonye.
inmedyatlye after mannys first creacyon, and left yt with him as an honest,
comelye, wholesome, holy, and needful remedy against all beastlye abusyons of
the flesh that should after happen, and granted thereunto his eternal
blessing. Increase (says he) multyplye, and fill the earth, Gene. 1. And
this repeted he thryse after that* Gene. 8. ct. 9. to the intent yt might be
groundedlye marked, and well known of men to be his most ernest ordinance.
the first relygyo^
This was the first order of Relygyo^ that ever was made, and of must
holiness, if we dewlye respect the maker thereof with the other cyrcumstaunces
besides, preferrynge his wisdom to ma^nys wisdom. And for that yt should not
be reckened a thing vnaduysedlye done of him, he looked thereupon again among
all his other works, and could behold no imperfeccyon therein, but perceived
that yt was of exceeding goodness. Yet has there sens risen a sort, which
have against Gods heavenly wisdom, Unmarried prestes.
set their fleshlye folyshnesse, which are non other to be reckeued than the
very sede and of spring of the serpent. Though these have known that there
is a God, yet have they not gloryfyed him in faith and meekness, but have
become most vayue in their ymagynacyons. Where as he has declared marryage
excedynglye good, Gods adversaries.
they have condemned it as a thing execrable and wicked. And where as he has
spoken yt by his own mouth, that yt is not good for man to be alone, they
have improued that doctrine and taught the contrary, as a thing more perfyght
and Godly.

Marryage contempned of Satan.
THus Satan erected himself against God in that wicked generacyon, which
began first in Cain, Cain.
and has ever sens continued in that posteryte. For this presumpcyon God gave
them clerelye over, and left them to themselves with all their good intentes
and vows, whereupon they have wrought sens that time fylthynesse unspeakable.
Their chaste women, vestals Monyals, No^nes and Monks.
Nonnes, and Begynes, changynge the natural use, have wrougth unnaturally.
Like wise the men in their Prelacyes, presthodes, and innumerable kinds of
Monkerye, for want of women has brent in their lusts, and done abhomynacyons
without nombre, so receyuynge in themselves the just reward of their error.
Of these most hellyshe and dyabolyck trutes, holy Saint Paul admonyshed the
Romans, in the first chaptre of his Epistle unto them, knowing before hand
that out of their corrupted christy anyte, Sodomytes.
should rise soche a filthy flock as should work them every where. But
neither of Paul nor yet of Peter have the fore warnynges away led, but those
brockysh boores have gone freely forewarde without check till now of late
days, where in God has given us as more pure sight to behold their
buskelynges.

Marryage of Prestes in both laws.
TO make manifest unto the^, what wives the lord appointed by his servant
Moses, Prestes wives.
unto the leuytycall prestes in the sacred posteryte of Aaron Leuit. zi. et
Ezech. 44. yt were but labor lost. Prestes wives.
Either to put them in remembrance that Christ was borne in marryage, though
his mother were always a maid, and that he left unto his Apostles marryage in
lyberte evermore yt were in vein also. For all this has God showed unto them
playnelye, by his true prophets in this lattre age, declarynge the fynall
destruecyo^ of that wretched kyngedome. As by Martyn Luther, Haters of the Pope.
Johan Pomerane, Frances lambert, Oswaldus Myconius, Philpp Melanchto^, and
soche other (as is said before) but all have they taken for fables. That lord
sent them one unto their own doors, which effectuallye ded his massage, even
Robert Barnes by name, ^arnes.
of whose grounded arguments they have not yet dyscharged the least, besides
that they have had from him by good Wyllyam Turner and George Joy. And all
this have they dysdaynouslye laughed to scorn. Considering therefore that no
ge^tyll speech will amend them, nor yet sharp threttenynges call them to
repentance, The autour.
he will now cast their own vile donge in their faces, that yt shall cleave
fast upon them, Mala. 2. He will throw in their tethe by this book and soch
other the styukynge examples of their hypocrytysh lives, with their calkynges
and cloynynges to patche up that dauberye of the devil, their vowed wyuelesse
and husbandelesse chastyte.

England inhabyted before Noe and after.
ANd for as much as the tyttle of this present treatise only respects
England, England.
only shall yt treat the unchaste examples of the spirytualte thereof, with
serten examples of Romysh Popes which than wrought their iuggelynge mastryes
there. To fetch the matter from the first foundacyon, and so to stretche yt
forewarde, I am fullye assertayned by auncye^t writings, that this land was
with people replenyshed long before Noes days. Before Noe.
Yea, soche time as men were multyplyed upon the universal earth, Gene. 6. As
they than had left God appointed Relygyo^, and had taken ways unto them after
their own good intentes, soche unspeakable fylthynesse followed, as brought upon
them the great dylu^ye or universal flod, which left non alive, The flood.
but drowned them up as yt ded all other quarters. This witnesses both Moses
and Berosus, the most auncye^t writers we read of. After the said flood, was
yt again inhabyted by the of spring of Iapheth the third son of Nor. Iapheth
For of the^ (says Moses) were the Isles of the Gentyles sorted out into
regyons, every one after, known diverse from other, by their languages, kind
redes, and nacyons, Gene. 10. And in the days of Phaleg the son of Heber,
Phaleg
was that dyuysyon of Prouynces, like as follows in the same chapter. Samothes
the Brother of Gomer (who^ the Bible calls Mesech) restored than again this
land in his posteryte, Samothes gygas.
the prestes thereof called Samothei, for so much as he was the first that
fournyshed yt with laws, as witnesses Ioannes Annius in commentarijs Berosi.

Albion with his Samothytes.
AFter this grew yt into a name, and was called Albion. Albion gigas.
Not ab albis rupibus, as fryre Bartylmew has fantasyed in his work De
proprietatibus reru^. Nor yet ab Albiana the kings dougter of Syria, as
Marianus the monk has dreamed yt. For of latyne words could yt have no name,
before the latyne yt self was in use. And the other without grounded autoryte,
apereth a plain fable, as witnesses both Volateranus and Badius But rather yt
should seem to be called Albion, ab Albione Gygante, the son of Neptunus,
Neptunus.
which was afterward slain of Hercules for stoppynge his passage at the
enteraunce of Rhodanus, as testyfyeth Diodorus Siculus and also Pomponius Mcla.
Not only because the said Albion was a gyaunt, like as the before said Samothes
was before him, but also for that his father Neptunus was than take for the
lord of great God of the sea, wherein yt is enclosed. What the chastyte was of
the Samothytes or prestes for that age, Samothytes.
the Poets does declare at large. Venus was than their great Goddess, and
ruled all in that spirytuall famelye, as she has done ever sens.

The Samothytes and their chastyte.
THey had in their temples, vestals (whom now we call No^nes) who se office was
to maynteyne the fire for perfourmaunce of the sacryfyces, least yt should at
any time go out. vestals.
These were chosen in before they were.xvi. years old, there remaynyng
unmarried the space of.xxx. years, and others always by that time succeeded in
their rowmes. Some of these were presbyteresses, as they pleased the spyrituall
fathers. And as the lyghtes went out by their negligence, their ponnyshmentes
were to be beaten of the Bishops. More over if any of the^ chanced to fall
in aduoutery, except they ded yt in the dark with them, chastyte
their judgment was to be buried in the ground quycke. Always they went
away vyrgynes from them (what so ever was done in the mean season) and at
the.xxx. years end, they were in lyberte to marrye if they would. This
testyfyeth Hermanus Torrentinus, and Johannes Textor, Tyranny now.
with other autours. Yet was not this abhomynable superstyeyon so tyrannouslye
handeled among them than, as yt has been sens a monge their successors the
papystes, whom by their cruel conceyons (syned they never so long) they sent
at the last to hell with a conscience adust, were not the lord more merciful.

Brute with his Druydes.
IN process of time, got Brutus Syluius brutus syluius.
this land of the Albyons by conquest, in the.xviij. year of Heli the high
pressed of the Israelytes, like as Aeneas ded Italye, and other great
adue^tourers their regyons. And of him was yt called Brytayne, and the people
thereof Brytaynes. After he had fournyshed yt with new regymentes and laws,
there entered in a new fashyoned sort of prestes, all diverse from the other,
and they were called Druydes. Druydes.
These dwelt in the forestes like heremytes and procures both publyque and
pryuate sacryfyces to be done. To them was yt always put, to dys usse all
matters of relygyon, to appoint thereunto the ceremonies, to bring up youth in
natural dyscyplyne, and to end all controuersyes* Plinius, Strabo, Cornelius
Tacitus, Caius Julius, and other approved autours, report the^ to have their
first orygynall in this land, but that apereth not true. Rather should they
seem to come first hither from Athens, Athens
a most famous city of the Greeks. Johan Hardynge reports in his Chronycle,
that king Bladud brought them first from thens, allegynge there Merlyne for
his autour.

The Druydes and their chastyte.
What their rule was conceruynge women, we shall not need to seek farther than
to the.vi. chaptre of Baruch, and the.xiiij. chaptre of Daniel in the Bible.
whores
Baruch says there, that their custom was to deck their whores with the
Jewels and ornaments of their Idolles. Daniel says, that they with them
devoured up the daily offerynges and sacryfyces of Bell. Yet Hector Boethius
writes in the second book of his Scottysh Chronycle, that there were some
among them, one god
which taught one everlasting God alone to be worshypped, without Image made
or other symylytude else. Neither allowed they them (says he) that applied unto
their Gods the symylytudes of beasts after the Egyptyanes manner (as the
Papystes do yet to this day Saint Mark to a Lion, beasts worshypped
Saint Luke to a calfe, and Saint Johan to an egle, beside Saint Antonyes
pygge, Saint Georges colte, and Saint Dunstanes devil) but greatly reproved
them. Nevertheless yet were they great teachers of sorcerye. For as testyfyeth
Johan Textor in his offycynes, so expert were the Brytaynes in art magyck in
the days of plynye, that in a manner they passed the Parthyanes, which were
the first masters thereof.

Prestes married and unmarried.
NOw as concerning the prestes of the Hebrews or Israelytes for all these ages
(which were the peculyar flock of God) they had all wives that were
ryghtuouse among them, Prestes married
according to the Relygyon that he first appointed them. Not, Melchisedech,
Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Phinees, Samuel, Nathan, Zorobabel, Jesus, Esdras,
Mathathias, and soche other, were all married men and had children. The
Scripturs report that these men were beloved with God, and that' in holiness
non were ever found like unto them. But neither was that for their vows nor
yet for their good intentes, Eccli. 44. and so fourth.vi. chapters more. If
any were chaste vowers that time the.ij. Votaryes.
prestes that lusted after Susanna, were of them, Daniel. 13. So were the
wa^ton sons of Heli and Samuel, 1. Reg. 2. and 1. Reg. 8. with soche other
like. Which were before God very reprobates, for despysynge his order, as well
in that as in other things. Of soche chaste vowers were there some, at the
very time wha^ Christ was borne, both relygyouse prestes and leuytes, which
were most high lie taken among them. These thinking marryage unholy,
abstayned from the use of women, but they spared not to work execrable
fylthynesse among the^ selves, Zacharye married.
and one to polute an other. Zacharye a married pressed, and father of holy
Johan Baptyst, a man for his marryage found just before God, reprehended that
abhomynacyon in them, and was cruellye slain for yt, as testyfyeth Epiphanius
li. 1. To. 2. De heresibus. He was put unto death (says Philip Melanchton
upon the.xi. chaptre of Daniel) for rebukynge the vices of his college.

Christ allows marryage in his.
Jesus Christ the eternal son of God, never contempned the first ordinance
of his everlasting father, but had yt insuche reverence, that he would not be
borne but under yt. He found his worthy mother Mary no professed Nonne, Marye a
wife.
as the dottynge papystes have dreamed, to cover their sodometrye with a most
precyouse color, but an honest mannys wife, married according to the custom
than used, Matt. 1. and Luce 1. In her so married without either vow or promise
of virgynyte, No nonne.
by the holy Ghostes most wonderful workynge was he incarnated and so became
man, to redeem us from the captyuyte of sin, and restore us again to the
full fauer of his father. He honored marryage with the first miracle that he
outwardlye wrought in our manhood, and called unto his Apostleship, not
wyuelesse vowers, but married men. Joan, 1. and Mar et. 1. Peter married
He went very gentyllye unto peter's house, and healed his wives mother which
lay there syeke of a fever, taking his repast there, tarryenge with the^ all
the night, and doing great cures there also. And at his departure in the
morning, he neither commanded Peter to break up howsholde, nor yet to
forsake his wife and make her a vowesse. Marci. 1. Luce. 4. Math. 8. He never
commanded, No vows commanded
nor yet exacted the vow of vyrgynyte in all his whole Gospel, but left all
men in lyberte to marrye if they list, forbyddynge al men fyrmelye, to make
any law of coaccyon or of separacyon, where God has set fredome in
marryage. Math. 19. Marci. 10. No forsakynge of wife and children admytted he
ever, but as the immovable and constaunt sta^dynge by his word requires yt,
in them that he has appointed to suffer death under the worlds tyranny for
yt.

The Apostles and first preachers married
Peter's wife went with him in the time of his preaching. Peter's wife.
1. Cori. 9. and was put to death at Antioche for confessinge Jesus Christ, as
witnesses Clemens Alexandrinus in.7. li. Stromatum, and Eusebius Caesariensis
li. iij. Ca. 30 Ecclesiastice history. Paul left his wife at Philippos, Paul
married.
a city of the Macedoneanes, by consent of them both. Phil 4. and 1. Cor. 7.
For this only cause (says both Clemens and Eusebius) that he might the more
easelye thereby and with the less co^beraunce, preach the Gospel abroad. Isi
dorus hispale^sis in his book De ortu and obitu sanctorum patrum, and
Freculphus lexouiensis in the second book and fort chaptre of his Chronycles,
reports both, that Philip the Apostle preached in france to the very extent
of the Occeane see, Phylpp married.
and was afterward done unto death in hierepoli a city of the Phrygiaues,
and at the last honorablye buried there with his daughters. By whose occasyon
this real me than called Brytayne was converted unto the Christen believe For in
the year from Christ's incarnacyo^ Joseph of Arimathe. An. do. 63
lxiij. was Joseph of Arimathe and other dyscyples sent over of the said Philip
to preach Christ, and entered both with their wives and children, Armagus than
being King of the land. This testyfyeth Johan Capgraue in Catologo sanctorum
Anglie, Thomas scrope de anti. carm. Scrope
ca, 7. Ioha^ Hardyng in his. 47. chaptre, and Polidorus uergilius. li. z.
Anglice history.

Brytayne first converted by me^ married.
THese were surely the orygynall begynnynges (says Polidorus of the Christian
Relygyo^ in Brytayne. Gildas witnessyth also, in his first treatise De excidio
Britannie. That the Brytaynes took the christen faith at the very spring or
first going forth of the Gospel, gospel.
wha^ the church was most perfyght, and had most strength of the holy ghost.
All that time and a long season after, the mynysters held their wives,
according to the first order of God, without, vowynge or yet professinge of
vyrgynyte, and so continued to the days of Lucius, which is called in the
Chronycles the first Christian King. King.
Though this Lucius were a good man, Lucius.
and began well to inclyne to the Gospel, yet was he worldly minded, and
thought that yt wanted dew auctoryte so long as yt was mynystred but of
simple and poor lay married men. Anon therefore he sent unto Rome.ij. Rome.
of those minysters called Eluanus and Meduinus unto Eleutherius the Bishop
(for they had than no pope) to have some autoryte from thens. And this was done
in the year of our Lord. L. lxxix. Anno domini 179.
Whereupon Marcus Sabellicus says, Enneade. 7. li. 5. That of all provynces
Brytayne was the first that received the Christen fay the with public
ordinance.

Christyanyte somewhat corrupted.
THa^ Eleutherius sent hither.ij. of his doctors, called fugacius and Damyanus,
to set here an order. These first baptized lucius with a great part of his
nobylyte and commons, and than with his consent changed the Idols temples into
christen churches (as they no we all them) the flamynes or Idol sacryfycers,
Churches.
which were than.xxviij. in no^bre, into so many bishops, and the.iij.
archyflamynes into.iii. archebyshoppes, as wytnessyth Galfridus Monemthensis in
his second book. Autours
De origin and gestis Britonum. cap. i. Alphredus Beuerlacensis in his
Chronycle, Vincencius, Antoninus, Nauclerus, Bergomas, Polidorus, and a great
sort more. This chrystianyte endured in Brytayne, Chrystianyte
the space of.CC. and.xvi. years, unto the persecucyon of Dyoclesyane, says
Ranulphus in Polichronico. li. 4. Ca. 16, Upon this took the Rome church first
occasyon, Dyoce^ses paryshes.
to deuyde the christen prouynces into dyoceses and parryshes. Mark well these
first buyldynges of Antichrist, or of Nemroth the yongar, and consydre out of
what good stuff they rise without Gods word. All this have I written
hitherto, not as matters correspondynge to the tyttle of my book, but that
their spirytuall fruits may apere what they are, even from the very roots.

The first spring of monkerye in Brytayne.
AS this new chrystiantye from Rome, had gotten here of the Paganes both
temples and possessions, Temples
and were well fauerdlye satled (their bishops and prestes perchance being
the same mynysters that had served the Idolles in them before) anon after there
arose out of yt a serten kind of monkerye, Mo^kerye.
not in apparel, but in aperaunce of a more sober life. These within a while
seemed better lerued than the other, and more depelye fell into the peoples
estymacyon. Whereupon arose sone after great strife and unquietness among
the^, Heresyeu.
and out of that strife most detestable he resye^. For one of them called
pelagius, Pelagius.
being of the great monasterye of Be^cornaburch in Chestre shyre (though so me
call yt Ba^gor) began to dyspute with them for the stre^ghte of ma^nys fre
will, and said that man might be saved thereby, frewyll
without the grace of God, so deuyenge the effect of Christ's blood, as his
folowers are not ashamed to do yet to this day. Against this heretyke
pelagius, wrote Saint Augustyn, Saint Hierom, Cyrillus, Orosius, Innocencius,
Gennadius, and at the last Thomas Braduuardin a doctor here in England, with
diverse other.

Heresye in Brytayne aryseth of monkerye.
YEt came there in no vowynge of chastity all this time, neither was vyrgynyte
thought any holyar among them than marryage. For one Seuerus being both a
monk, Seuerus
pressed, and bishop, had a son there called leporius a monk also and a pressed,
Leporius
which vexed the land with that leruynge taught of his father, in the year of
our Lord. CCCC xxxij. 432
as wytnessyth both Prosper Aquitannus, and also Flores historiarum. This
leporius made his boast, that he was able to live purelye of him self, and by
force of his own fre will, without the assiste^ce of God, as reports of him,
Gennadius Massiliensis, Antors
Honorius Augustudunensis, and Ioannes Tritemius, in suis illustriu^ uirorum
Catalogis, and now last of all, Co^radus Gesnerus in uniuersali bibliotheca..
Of the same sort was there an other called Agricola, Agricola.
a prestes son also, which in the year of our Lord.CCCC.xivi. trobled the
Brytaynes with the same doctrine, 446.
as flores historiarum shows. The errors of both these were at the same time
confuted by Germanus and Lupus with other french doctors, which came thydre
tha^ for the same purpose, specyallye of Saint Augustine in Africa.

A prestes son was Saint Partrick.
Saint Partrick the great Apostle of Irelande, Partrick
was borne here in this Brytayne about the year of our Lord.CCC.lxi. and had
a pressed to his father called Calphurnius, 361.
which was also a deacons son that was named Fodunus. His mothers name hight
Conches, and was holy Saint Martynes systre. Martinus.
Thus testyfyeth Ranulphus Cestrensis in Polychronico, li. 4, ca. 29. and Johan
Capgraue in Catologo sanctorum Anglie. If this had been foul play in those
days, Saint Martyne would never so pacyentlye have suffered yt. For we read
that he was very tender unto the said Partrick, Patricius.
after that his fryndes had sent him thydre, and taught him many Godly things.
What rule this partrick kept in that behalf, I have not read. Yet find I in
his life written, that he had a ladde waiting on him called Benignus, Benignus.
which always reported him, to be his own propre father, he never deuynege
yt. I read also that one Moduenna an Iryshe woman was very famylyar with him,
whether yt were by the way of marryage or no, that can I not tell. Ex ante
nominatis autoribus.

Saints were begotten in whordome.
TO enter more depelye into the peoples oppnyon, Chastyte.
a chastyte was pretensed anon after in that mo^kerye, Modwenna.
but not yet solempnelye vowed, and in many places of the realm were
monasteryes builded both of men and women, But mark what followed thereof
immedyatlye after. Christ chanced in those days to have many brethren. For
many virgynes had than children with our fathers, at the least the fathers of
the^ were never yet known.

Saint Dubrice that was after ward the great archebyshop of Cairlegyon and
metropolytane of all the land, Dubritius.
had a maid to his mother, called Eurdila, but never would she confess him to
have any father. Ke^tigernus.
Saint Ke^tigerne bishop of glasghu) that ye now call Saint Asses or Asaphes
(had in like case a fair maid to his forth bryngar, but father would she
grant non to him, for no co^pulsyon. merlinus
Merlyne also the great soth sayer of wales, was an holy Nonnes son in saint
Peter's of Cairmardyne, no father yet known to him but a sprete of the air.
The first.ij. shows Johan capgraue in Catal sanc. Ang. And this lattre wondre
is mencyoued of all famous writers. A great sort of the hystoryes roude I
rehearse, but these are enough at this time.

Like examples are among the Turks.
SOche an other knauerye is used among the Turks relygyouse buggerers to this
present day, Turks
and those children that are begotten among them, are holden for most holy
saints, as these were. They take it for no maruele that Christ was borne of a
vyrgyne, for (they say) they have soche among them at all times. But to turn
again to my purpose. The cause why the fathers of the before said children
might not than be known, was this, Johan capgraue says. A awe
The law was that time in Brytayne, that if a young wenche had be begotten
with child in her fathers house, or any where els^, this was her judgment.
Judgment.
She should have been brought unto an high mountain, and there throune down
headlonges, her corruptour being byheaded. If this law had still continued,
and never so been put to the spirytuall court without conseyence, never had
the vow of their chastity run so far as yt has done, to many a
thousands dempnacyon.

More Saints yet begotten in whoredom
Saint David of wales the great archebysehop of Mentuia, David.
which had so many prophecyers and so many Angels sent before to give warning
of his coming.xxx. years ere he was borne, was begotten out of marriage in
stynkyng whoredom. For his mother was a Nonne, and his father the earl of a
contreye there called Cairdigam shyre. A prince called Dyhocus in King Arthurs
time, inflamed at the deuyls suggestion with the fleshlye love of his own
natural daughter, begat of her Saint Kynede the holy hermpte, kynedus
that in Wales wrought so many great miracles. One Dubtacus an Iryshe man
begat holy saint Brigyde of his maid servant called brocsech, brigida.
even underneath his wyure nose to spyght her with it, which had so many
re^e^lacyons from heaven, and so many popes pardons from Rome. Saint Cuthbert
the great God, Cuthbert.
of the North, and he that was wont to defend us from the Scotts, was a
mysbegotte^ also, for his mother was unmarried. And his father in Irelande to
have the good occupye^g of her, slew both her father and mother. These were
the spirytuall begynnynges of the Saints of that age. If ye believe not me,
look Johan Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglie. capgraue.
and he shall tell ye much more of the matter. I could show you many more
yet of soche holy saints byrthes, but let these for this time suffice.

Whoredom esteemed most holiness.
Mark how abominable whoryshnesse in all these whorysh fruits, whoredom is
holy
is auaunced of that whorysh Rome church, to the great blemyshynge of Godly
marryage. The spyrytuall Sodomytes and knaves has not been ashamed to write yt
in the lives and lyenge lege^des of all these, that is to say of Dubricius,
David, Kynedus, Kentigerne, Cuthberth, and Brigyde, with soche like, and
solempnelye so to read and sing yt as Gods service in their se^ples, Their
Gods service
that they were sanctyfyed in their mothers wombes. Se what aduauncementes they
have for stynkynge whoredom, and now little devotion to chaste marryage
instituted of God. Never were the sons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of
Moses, Eleazar, and Phinees, so painted out with miracles and wonders, nor
yet so pranked up with tabernacles and lyghtes, sensynges and massynges, as
these whores birds. Thus judge they whoredom holiness, and wholso^ marriage
sin, Come out of Sodom ye whoremongers and Hypocrytes, The Popes. chaplaynes.
popysh bishops and prestes, for as yet ye have not reformed this
abhomynacyon, but still uphold yt for your Romyshe Gods service. Come out
thieves and knaves come out.

Women greuouse and solacyouse.
What a do these holy saints of theyrs had and their vowers (wha^ they come
ones to vows making) for women and with women, women
as to keep them out of their monasteryes, and to make the^ bear children wha^
they were barre^, it were in infynyte thing to write. David
Saint David's monks were sheared away with naked women at a broke side in
Rosidaualle. So were Saint Theliaes hermytes also in an other place not far
from thens. dubricius
Saint Dubrices brethren had many hot mouynges in their flesh, and were
feign often times to stand naked in the cold river. Kentigernus.
Saint Kentigernes disciplen took great pains upon them, to make barren women
fruitful. When saint Brigyde was at the very point of marryage, brigida
she stole away preuylye with her iij. maids, and waited long after upon
bishop Machyll, doing many great cures in his service with holy water. Saint
Modwe^ Saint Modwen.
also after soche an other sort, waited upon bishop Hiber and his brethren
with her maids. A woman the same season accused bishop Broon for begettynge
her with child, brigida.
and Brigyde like a good body, by a charm or ij made all safe again. As one
of her maids was going to her lou^r a prestes bed, for returning again in
time, she could her much thank. All these holy hystoryes shall ye find in
Ioha^ capgraue.

A spirytuall example of a votarye.
Saint Iltute, Iltutus
which had been always a most valeaunt captain among the Brytaynes, at the
suggestyon of saint of Cadoc an Hermpte, put from him his most virtuous and
chaste wife, leaving her nothing else to live upon, but barlye bread and
water, an homelye repast for her that had been a lady and tenderlye brought
up. his wife.
And as she on a time resorted unto him only to have heard the sweet word of
the Lord, her coming thydre so sore discontented his mind, that with a
charm he put out both her eyes. For I am certain, yt come by no Godly power,
she being led of so Godly a sprete. Not Paul's lernyng
If this be saint Paul's learning, a man so myserablye to leave, his wife, and
so ungodly to use her for axynge good counsel, I report me to you. Yet must
he be still a faynte in the Popes holy church, because he was a tyrau^t to
marriage, for non other holiness had he. So the Saints reckon I more fytt for
hell tha^ for heaven. Wale, this story has also Ioha^ Capgraue in Catalogo
sa^ctoru^ Anglie

Vrsula with her sort, appointed to marrye.
OF Vrsula and her.xi. Vrsula cum.xi millibus
thousand companyons, have the spyrytuall hypocrytes by help of their
spirytuall father the devil, practysed innumerable lies, by them to make their
newlye sought out vyrgynyte to apere sumwhat gloryouse to the worldly
dodypolles that never will be wise. The veryte of the hystorye is this, after
all just writers. When our Brytaynes had ones gotten by their war, Armorica.
the land of Armorica (that we now call the lesser Brytayne) and were put in
perpetual possessyon thereof by their King Maximus about the year of our
Lord.CCC. and XC. 390
they accorded among themselves through the assent of Conanius their captain,
Conanus.
only to marrye with their, own nacyon, and in no wise to have a do with the
french women there, for diverse parels. Dionothus.
Whereupon they sent by and by over the sea to Dionothus the duke of Cornewale,
which than in the kings absence had gouernan^ce of all the realm, instau^tlye
desyerynge him, to make prouysyon for them Which immedyatlye gathered from all
parts of the land, For marriage
to the nombre of.xi. thousand maids and other women, and so shypped them at
London upon the Thamys with his own dear daughter Vrsula, for so much as
Conanus despered to have her to wife. And as they were abroode upon the main
sees, soche contrary wyndes and te^pestes fell upon the^, Drowned.
as drowned some of their ships, and drove the resydue of them into the
hands of their enemies the hunnes and the pyctes, which slew a great nombre
of them, as they found them not agreeable to their fleshlye purposes. This
shows Galfredus Monemuthe^sis, li. 2. Autours
ca, 4. Alphredus Beuerlacensis, Ranulphus Cestre^sis, Ioa^nes Harding,
Robertus Fabia^, Tritemius in Co^pe^dio, Volateranus, and Polydorus.

An historye to their ghostlye purpose.
But se here the co^ueyaunce of these spyrytuall gentylmen, in Playsterynge up
their unsavory sorcerye^. With lies.
They say, they all vowed vyrgynyte, and were persuaded of saint Michaell the
Archa^gell and of saint Ioha^ the Evangelist, never to marrye (as though they
were dyswaders of marriage for their lecherouse vows) and so went from the^s
relygyously to Rome on pilgrimage, Pylgrimage
with great deuocyo^.ij. and.ij. together, and were honorablye received there
of the Pope and his clergy. If this be not good ware, tell me. I think there
wanted no spyrytuall occupyenge, for the time they were there, if the storye
were true. For Daniel says, that the lust of that proud kyngedome, should be
upon women. Daniel. 11. Dan. 11
In all fleshlye desires (says Hieremye) they are become like rank stoned
horse, neyenge at every mannys wife. Hieremi. 5. Hiere. 5.
And in deed foam writers have uttered yt, that they were never good sens their
being there. Now mark the sequese. In their return homewarde again toward
Coleynt, they had in their cumpanye (say their writers) pope Ciriacus Names
teyned.
(if there ever were any soche) Poncius, Petrus, Vincencius, Calixtus,
kilianus, Florencius, Ambrosius, Justinius, and Christianus, all cardinals.
Cesarius, Clemens, Columbanus, Yuuanus, Lotharius, Pantalus, Mauricius,
Maurilius, Foillanus, Sulpicius, Iacobus, Guilhelmus, Michael, Eleutherius,
Bonifacius, and vij more of the Popes howsholde, all Bishops, besides a great
nombre of Prestes and Chaplaynes. Hystoryames
Diversely is this holy legende handeled of Iacobus Bergomas in Li. De claris
mulieribus, of Sigebertus, Vincencius, Antoninus, Hartma^nus, Carsulanus,
Vorago, Vuernerus, Nauclerus, Mantuanus, Vuicelius, Caxton, Capgraue, Hector
Boethius, Mayor, and a great sort more, scarselye one agreynge with an other.

Fine workemanshyp to be marked,
HE that would take the pain, Prove the spretes.
to confer their Chronycles and writings, but concerning this only matter,
observing dylygentlye their diverse bestowynge of times, places, and names,
with other things perteynynge to the cyrcumstaunce of hystorye, should anon
perceive their subtyle co^ue yaunce in many other matters. The solemn feast
of these.xi. thousand she pilgrims, for their going to Rome, is yet no small
matter in their Idolatrouse church, and yet they poor sowles never came
there, as the most auctentyue writers does prove. Only to marrye.
Their going out of Brytanie was to become honest Christen mennys wives, and
not to go on pilgrimage to Rome, and so become bishops bonylasses, or prestes
playefers Se what our auncye^t English writers has said in this matter, which
more experimentlye knew yt, and let the fore^ liars go, which being far
of cared the less to lie. In deed this is a very strange procuring of
Saints, if ye mark yt well, but that the monks and prebendes of Coleyne
thought to do sumwhat for the pleasure of their Nonnes there, No^nes of Coleyne.
which had gathered together an heap of dead mennys bones. For their bones
could they not have, being drowned in the great Occeane see, as Galfredus and
the other autours veryfyeth before. But both Christ and Paul ones told us,
that we should be subtyllye cyrcumuented of that wylye generacyan, when they
should work their deceytfull wonders. Math. 24. and. 2. These. 2.

Vowynges ded not yet constrayne.
ALl this time were there no constraynynge vows but all was fre to leave or to
hold. For Constans Co^sta^s
the eldeste son of king Constantyne the second, being a monk of Sayt
Amphibalus abbeye in Cairguent, that ye now call Saint Swythunes in wynchestre,
was taken out of yt without dyspensacyon, about the year of our lord.
CCCC.xliij. 443.
and crowned king of Brytayne, being in full lyberte of marryage. Galfredus,
Ranulphus, Hardyng, Capgraue, Caxton, and Fabyan. In like case Maglocunus
Maglocunus.
(as Gildas reports) was first a monk, and afterward constytute king in
the year of our lord.CCCCC.lij. contynuynge still by the space of more
than.xxxiiij. 552.
years, and had for the time.ij. wives besides his concubynes. This Maglocunus
was rekened the most comelye person of all his regyon, and a man to whom God
had than given great vyctoryes against the Saxons, Norweyes, and Danes. Yet was
he in his age as was long before him, Mempricius Mempricius.
his predecessor, given to most abhomynable sodometrye, which he had served
in his youth of the consecrate chastyte of the holy clergy. Galfredus,
Ranulphus, Hardynge, Fabian, and Flores Historiarum. Very vehement was Gildas
being tha^ a monk of Bencornaburch not far from Chestre, Gildas prophecyeth.
in his daily preachynges, both against the clergy and layte, concerning that
vice and soche other, and prophesied before hand of the subuersyon of this
realm by the Saxons for yt, like as yt sone after followed in effect. Look in
both his books, De excidio Britannie, et in scriptis Polidori, Galfredi, et
Ranulphi, with the preface of Wyllyam Tyndals obedyence.

The Saxons enter with new Christyanyte.
ANon after the Saxons had gotten of the Brytaynes the full conquest of this
land, Saxons.
the name thereof was changed, and has ever sens been called England of Engist
which was tha^ their chief captain, England
as wytneseth Johan Hardyng, Ioha^ Mayor, Christyanyte.
Hector Boethius, Caxto^, Fabya^. Tha^ came there in a new fashyoned
Christyanyte yet ones a gain from Rome with many more heythnysh yokes than
before. And that was upon this occasyo^, as all writers agree. Gregorye the first
of that name (now called Saint Gregorye) beheld in the open market at Rome,
Gregorye.
Englysh boys to sell. Mark this ghostlye mysterye, for the prelates had than
no wives. And women in those days might sore have dystayned their newlye rysyn
opynyo^ of holiness, if they had chanced to have been with child by them,
and therefore other spirytuall remedies were sought out for the^ by their good
prouyders and proctours, ye may (if ye will) call the^ apple squyres. Instead
of marryage.
And as this Gregorye beheld them fair skynned and bewtyfullye faced, with
hear upon their heads most comelye, ano^ he axed, of what regyon they were.
And answer was made him, that they were of an isle called England. Well may
they be called Angli Angli.
(says he) for they have very Angelyck vysages. Se how curyouse these fathers
were, in the well ^yenge of their wares. Wares
Here was no cyrcumstaunce unlooked to, perteynynge to the sale. Yet have this
Bishop bent of all writers reckened the best sens his time. This storye
mencyoneth Iacobus de Voragine, Vincencius, Antoninus, Ioannes Capgraue, Mayor,
Polydorus, and an hundred Autours more.

More Englysh boys sold at Rome.
AN other example like unto this, tells the seyde Johan Capgraue in his
Cataloge. That as one Macutus Macutus.
an Englysh Brytayne, and Bishop of Ale^h in Irelande, being at Rome about the
year of our lord.CCCCC. ^00.
perceived serten Englysh boys to be lolde there openly. He gave the price of
them, and sent them home again. Of a like lyhode he smelled the spirytuall
occupyenge there, and pysyed the most da^pnable casting away of those poor
innocents, whom Christ had so derelye redeemed with his blood. Soche an other
act of christian pitye wrought king Eteluuolphus Ethelwolphus
there (after diverse writers) when he in the year of our lord. DCCC. xlvij.
847.
made suit to Pope leo the fort, to be clerelye dyspensed with for the order of
subdeacon, which he had in his yowthe received (wholesome ware I warande you)
of Helmestane tha^ Bishop of wynchestre. For by that time they had crepte into
the seat of the Serpent, Apoca. 13. Apo. 13.
and obtained full autoryte to dyspense with all pactes, professyons, promyses,
vows, ^thes, oblygacyons, and sealynges to the Beasts holy service. Mark
always the times. Times
This storye has Vuylyam of Malmesburye, li. 2. De regibus, Ranulphe, Hardyng,
Fabyan and Polydorus with other. And that the one wants, the other always
habundauntlye supplyeth. Possessyon was taken of that seat of the Beast under
phocas the emproure in the year of our lord. DC and.vij. 607.
when the papacye first bego^ne.

Augustyne enters with his Monks
NOw to return again unto Gregorye. He sent upon the aforesaid occasyon, into
England in the year from Christ's in carnacyo^.CCCCC. xcvi. 596.
a Romy she monk called Augustyne, Augustinus.
not of the order of Christ as was peter, but of the superstycyouse seete of
Benet, there to sprede abroad the Romyshe faith and relygyon, for Christ's
faith was there long before. With him entered Melitus, Iustus, Laurencius,
Ioannes, Petrus, Rufinianus, Paulinus, and a great sort more to the nombre
of.xl. all monks Monks
and Italyanes. Well armed were they with Aristotle's artylerye, as with logyck,
Phylosophye, and other craftye scye^ces, craftye science.
but of the sacred scripturs, they knew little or nothing. If ye believe not
me, read in Johan Capgraues Cataloge, Inu ita Augustini, his interrogacyo^s,
Ad Gregorium per laurenciu^ et Petrum, and ye shall find the^ void of all
christen learning, either of law or Gospel. yea, most incypyent and folyshe.
Yet was the said Augustyne the best learned among the^. Ignorant apostles.
These took with the^ a great nombre of french interpretours, because they
were all ignoraunte of the languages there. Here was a noble christyanyte
toward, wha^ the preachers knew neither the scripturs nor yet the speech of
the people. Well, yet they ded miracles. Miracles.
Yea, so said Christ they should do, wha^ he bad us in any wise to be ware of
the^. Mat. 24. For this storye, mark specyallye Johan Capgraue in Catalogo
sanctorum Anglie, Sigebertus, Vince^^ius, Antoninus, Tritemius, Christianus
Masseus, and the church legendarye. Dyuersly were they of women entreated

ANd as concerning women, Women
greuousslye were they vexed with them coming hytherwarde, specyallye at a
vyllage called Say, Say.
within the cou^tye of Angeu in france. In the which was builded immedyatlye
after, a church (they say) in the honor of the said Augustyne, where as no
women come, but are plaged with most sudden death, for the dyspleasure there
showed them than, angrye saints
yet ded thy but laugh upon the^. This shows Alexa^dre the prior of Esseby in
his Annual of Saints by these verses.

Cetus aput Say uexauit eos mulierum,
Quas peccasse probat, lux noua fo^sque nouus.
Plebs parat ecclesia^, mulieribus haud resera^da^,
Introitum tentat una, sed inde perit.
This storye has also Johan Capgraue, and the old Englysh Festyuall Festyuall.
of Saints, which was sometime the only taught Gospel of England.
Notwithstanding this dyspleasure of women abroad, yet found they women
favorable within England. For Bertha the queen of Kent, than being a french
woman, caused King Ethelbert to admyt the^ with all their tyr^erye trashe.
Ethelbert.
Yet for the small trust he had unto them at their first metynge, he would in
no wise comme^ with the^ within any house (the storye says) least they should
after any sorcerouse sort by wytche him. The first point of Relygyo^ they
showed, was this. They spread fourth a banner with a painted crucifixe and a
silver cross thereupon, and so come to the king in processyon, Processyon.
singing the letanye. Well might this be called a new christyanyte, for
neither was yt known of Christ nor of his Apostles, nor yet ever seane in
England before. It came altogyther from the dust heap of their monkerye.

Their first spirytuall prouysyons here.
AS the king admytted their enteraunce, he couenaunted thus with them, and
very wyselye. That his people should always be at lyberte, lyberte.
and no man constrained to their new found Relygyon, sacryfyces* and
worshyppynges. But alac that fredome con^yaued not long with them, as ye shall
well perceive here after. Than ded Augustyne get him into France again, and
caused one Etherius than Archebyshop of Arelas, Etherius
to consecrate him the great bishop of all England, without eleccyon or
consent of the people that we read of. And in the year of our Lord even.DC.
600
ded Gregorye send unto him from Rome, Iustrume^tes.
his prymates pall, with superaltares, ch^lyces, copes, candelstyckes,
vestymentes, surplyces, alter clothes, singing books, relly^kes, and the
blessings of Peter and Paul. And so admytted him for the first metropolitan
of all the whole realm, appoyntynge his seat from thens fourth at
Canterburye, than called Doroberna, Doroberna*
the worthy city of london ever after depryued of her former title, and so
made an vnderlynge. But the spyrituall fathers knew well enough what they ded,
beholdynge before hand many hydden mysteryes. They perceived that Caunterbury
was well out of the way, Cau^terburye.
and much nygher the sea than was London, and so much the fytter for their
craftye conueyaunces, and flyghtes to their holy father if need should require
yt, with many other commoditees else. Mark always these nombers of Syxes and
their mysteryes, Nombers.
for the age of Man and the Beast, Apoca, 13.

Their preparacyons for Antichrist,
THe first stodye of these fathers after they were ones satled, primitie
was all about mass offerynges, ceremonies, bishops seats, consecracyons,
church hallowynges, orders geuynge, tithes, personages, puryfycacyous of
women, and soche like. Whereupon a Syunode was called, Synodus.
and there comman^ dementes were given that all things should be here observed
according in the customs of Rome. In England was there before their coming
a christyanyte, Christyanyte.
but it was all without masses, and in a manner without choice of ey^her days
or meats. The Brytaynes in those days had non other Gods service but the
Gospel. Brytaynes,
Seldom admytted they any dyfference of times with the Jews, either any
Idol sacry^yces with the Gentyles, but followed the plain rules of the
scripturs. If any superstycyons were among their Monks, they had naught to
do there with, but were evermore. at lyberte. For Princes at that time were not
yet becomen the Beasts Images, Princes
to speak out of their spretes, or to make laws according to their lusts.
The labor of Augustyne with his monks, from the forseyd year of our Lord
DC. 600
was to prepare Antichrist a seat here in England, against the full time of
his perfyghtage, of. 666. 666
For though he were first conceived in the wicked church of Cain, yet could he
not show himself in his own likeness, that is to say, Christ's open
adversary, till Christ came in the flesh. And than he apered at all one time
with him, in the malygnaunt church of the Jews or spyrytualte of Herod,
Antichrist
which than first began to persecute him and to seek his death.

The proving of Augustynes Apostleship.
IN the year of our Lord.DC. 602
and ij held Augustyne an other counsel in the west part and countye of
worcestre, Synodus
in a place that is yet called Augustynes oak, whereunto he called by
commandment, the vij. bishops of the Brytayne church with their principal
doctors. And as they were taking their iournaye thydreward, they counseled
with a serten solytarye man, which was known to be of amost perfight chri sten
life, Solytarye man.
what was to be done concerning the before said Augustyne. Anon he made them
this christen answer: If he be a man of God (says he) in any wise follow his
counsel. If he be not, utterly refuse it. How shall we know that? Christian
counsel
say they. Ye shall well perceive yt by his gentle sprete, says he again.
For Christ bad his scolers, learn of him to be meke hearted. If he be of that
sort, he is like to bring ye non other than Christ's most easy yoke. But if
ye find him proud, be ware of the importable burdenes of the high minded
Pharysees. A proud monk.
And as they were commen thydre, they found him sitting a loft in a throue of
high honor, showing unto them no countenance of gentylnesse. Wherefore they
regarded him not, but utterly withstode all his enforceme^tes.

The Englysh church begins with tyranny.
AFter long dysputacyons and other weywarde wrangelynges, he laid unto their
charges, that they were in many things, contrary to the universal Christen
church, Notwithsta^dynge, Three points
if they would consent unto him in these.iij. points. That is to say, to
baptyse after the Romysh manner, to celebrate the feast of Eastre as they do
there, and preach to the Englysh Saxons as he should appoint them, he would
well bear with them in all other causes. In no case would they grant unto
him, nor yet accept him for their archebyshop* but said playnelye, they would
still hold their ancient tradycyo^s, which they perfyghtlye knew to be
agreeable to the holy Apostles doctrine. A tyrant
Than said Augustyne furyouslye unto them, that if they would not peceably
grant to his requests, they should be enforced thereunto by most cruel
battle. And so in the year next following, were slain of their preachers by
Augustynes procurement, A murderer.
to the nombre of a thousand and ij. hundred, with their great mastre
Dionothus. Look Flores Historiarum, Amandus Zierixensis, Galfrede, Ranulph,
Capgraue, Caxton, Fabianc, their church legendarye, and other. A carnal
Synagoge.
Thus ded that carnal Synagoge (than called the Englysh church) which came
from Rome with Augustine, most cruellye persecute, at her first coming in,
the Christian church of the Brytaynes in these holy martyrs. Their synefull
Syon builded they than in blood, Bloody Syon.
for that their wicked instytutes were Godly dysobeyed. But he they sure, yt
shall be plowed up in this lattre age, and lie wast like a uoyde field,
according to Mycheas prophecye. Mich. 3

What the Brytayne church was before.
TRue is the faithful saying of Johan Leylande in assertione Arturij. Johan
Leyla^d.
fo. 35. That the Romysh Bishop sought all means possible to uphold the
Englysh Saxons in a kyngedome falselye gotten, the Brytaynes hatynge him for
yt, and he again of myschefe provoking those Saxons fearcelye to invade them.
Mark yt hardelye, for yt is worthy to be noted. Mark also the agreement of
the Brytayne church with the vij. Brytayne church.
churches of Asia in Saint Iohans time. Not only for the just no^bre of their
bishops, but also for their obseruacyon of Eastre before this Augustynes
coming. For in their argumentacyons about that matter, they laid always
for themselves the vsages of that church received first of Johan the
Evangelist, Philip the Apostle, Policarpus, Traseas, Sagaris, Papirius, and
Meliton, allegynge the saynges of Policrates, and Eusebius, in that behalf.
The church that Augustyne than planted in England, English church
was more governed by bishops polycyes for their advantage, than by the
express word of God to his honor, as it has beue ever sens. And therefore yt
was and is yet in outward obseruacyons, rather a polytyque church than a
Christian church, the Iewyshe and Heythnishe superstycyons not reckened. God
grant yt ones a shappe after his prescripte laws and ordynaunces. Amen.

Antichrist approached fast to his full age.
IN the year of our Lord (as I said before). 607
DC. and.vij. Antitechrist fast approchynge to the fullness of his age, full age
grew into a universal fatherhode. For than first began the papacye at Rome
under the false Emproure phocas, as witnesses Abbas Vrspergensis, Hermannus
Contractus, Sigebertus, Ranulphus, Matheus Palmarius, Christianus Masseus,
Archilles Pirminius, Ioannes Carrion, et Martinus Lutherus in Mundi
supputacione. Than obtained Bonifacius the third of that name, The papacye.
of the said Phocas for money, in the mids of all seysme, strife, myschefe,
and murder, to be Satan's great steward here, and the deuyls leftenau^t. For
in his power yt was not, to make him Christ's vycar, nor yet saint Peter's
successor. Thus gave the Dragon, then his autoryte and power to the Beast
with.vij. heads, that arose out of the sea, or from the superstycyouse
wauerynge multitude, Apoco. 13. Apo. 13.
Than wanted he nothing else, but to sytt in the place of God, which is the
conscience of Man, 2. these. 2
that he might there exalte himself above all that is called God. 2 Thessa. 2.
To bring that to pass, the Monks and the prestes sturred quycklye about
them, and left no cautels unsought out to bring all Christen realms under his
deuylysh domynyon. For than had the Monks autoryte to preach, Mon^^s autoryte.
baptyse, and assoyle from sin, which they never had before. How and what they
wrought here in England, is euydent by that has been showed af^re, and will
be yet more plain in that which herafter follows. Mark yt therefore in the
name of God, for now is the time, wherein he must he reveled, that the Lord
Jesus may consume him with the breathe of his mouth. Esa, 11. Esa. 11
and 2. These, 2.

The chastyte of his masmongers.
NOw conceruynge the contynencye of this new broched brood or newlye fashyoned
clergy. For so much as they were Monks and came from Rome, they had
professed a false chastyte, A false chastyte
to apere more holy than the prestes, and thereby in process of time to rob
them of their benefyces or appointed lyuynges. Gregory.
Though Gregory in his time made these constytucyons, that no^ should be
admytted a pressed which had married ij wijues, nor yet they be accepted that in
presthode, kept concubynes, as testyfyeth Sabellicus, yet durst he not
utterly condemn prestes marryage, Example
by reason of a most terryble example of innumerable chyldrens heads seane
drowned in a ponde. But mark the spyrytuall occupye^ge of these hot fathers,
for greuouslye were they than vexed with night pollucyo^s. Whereupon Augustyne
sent unto Gregory, Monks chastyte
to know if they might well say mass having them the night before. Unto whom
after many words, he makes in effect this answer. That like as they chance
unto men iiij. ways, that is to say, by superfluyte of nature, iij.
by glottenouse eating and drinking, ways.
by intyrmyte of the flesh, and by filthy cogytacyons of the mind, so ought
they to have.iiij. consyderacyons. For the first.iij. a pressed ought not (he
says) to abstain from his mass saying. Colored Sodomye.
The fort he describes by suggestyo^, dylectacyon, and consent, leaving yt
without any conclusyon. If this be not good wholesome dyuynyte of your holy
Romysh dayntes, tell me. This has Johan Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglie.

Contempt of marryage, with tails.
I think a man might find as honest stuff as this, stews dyuynyte.
in the scooles of my lord of wynchestres rentes at the bank side at London,
if he had need of yt. Ye may se by this, the virtuous stodye of these holy
chaste fathers, and the clarkelye conueyaunce of their fleshlye mouynges. Great
pytie had yt been, but yt had had place in their holy saints legendes to the
ghostlye infourmacyon of other, but that we should not else well have known
their bawdye hypocresye. If their vnuirginall vows had not been, Vota^yes
learning.
little should the world have neded this lecherouse learning. Honest marryage
has no knowledge thereof, and yet is yt a pleasyuge service unto God. Is not
that (think you) a strange kind of chastyte, that is thus every weke
poluted? Yet may they after this leruynge, every day say Mass, their vow
never hyndered, but in marryage they may not so under pain of death. Now
forsooth yt is wholesome ware, and yt should come even unto from the deuyls
black bowgett. This is the reverence these poluted wretches have to
matrymonye, being Gods clear instytucyon, Marryage conte^pned.
that they prefer all their fleshlye knaueryes unto yt. For yt only, have
they named men lay and women lewd, Lay, with tails
appoyntynge their children tails here in England in dysdayne and scorn. For
naught was yt not that Saint Paul called their learning Hypocresye, and the
detestable doctrine of deuyls. 1. Timoth 4. Johan Capgraue and Alexandre of
Esseby says, that forcastynge of fyshe t^yles at this Augustyne, Dorsett shyre
men had tails ever after. But Polydorus applies yt unto kentysh men at
Stroude by Rochestre, Dorset and Stroude.
for cuttynge of thomas Beckettes horses tail. Thus has England in all other
lands a perpetual dyffamye of tails by their written lege^des of lies, yet
can they not well tell, where to bestow them truly.

Strife about the Eastre celebracyon.
NExt after this Augustyne was Laurencius archebyshop of Caunterburye. And
after him Melitus. Than Iustus, Laurencius cu^ alijs.
than Honorius, than Theodatus, and Theodorus, all black monks and Italyanes
borne to the nombre of.vij. This Laurence held a great Synod with his other
prelates in the I Will of Ma^ne, dysputynge there with the Scottyshe and Iryshe
Bishops, Synodus.
for the feast of Eastre, what day yt should be yearlye celebrated, writynge
from thens unto their other prelates a treatise of the same. More tha^ an
hundred years space, were the Papystes tha^ in controuersye for the day of
that Eastre celebracyon, ere they could be quyeted. the feast of Eastre.
Great pains the relygyouse fathers took in those days to strain out a
gnatt, that their lecherouse posteryte after them, might the better swallowe in
a mighty camel. Math. 23. In things of small value they were tha^ very
scrupulose, but the wayghtyer causes they could let slyppe well enough. What
so ever this Laurence was to women by his life, Women
he was (they say) very cruel unto them after his death. For in a se^te^
town called fordune, was a church builded in his name, where no women might
enter with offering nor without offering, but they had ever more sore bellyes
of yt. Sore bellyes.
I pray God they went not many times thens with child, for there were many
fat Canons and prebendes. This superstyeyouse fable borowe they of the
paganes, whose opinion was that no woman might enter into the temple of Venus
their great Goddess in the mount of Olympus, Venus
with out a great vyllanye. Iacobus Zieglerus in sua Syria.

Great business for their other tradycyons.
HEre pass I over the clowtynge in of their canonycall hours, Ceremonies and
rytes.
of their absolucyo^s for sins, their temples, their aulters, their bell
ryngynges, their le^tes, their dyuersyte of orders and dyuysyons of paryshes,
least I should be therein to tedyouse unto the readers. Aidanus, Good men.
Finnanus, and Colma^nus, being all iij. bishops of lyndysfarne in
Northunberlande one after an other, and Scottysh men borne, could not well
away with the pride and wanton toys which they beheld in their Romyshe
rytes, but perseuered still in the simple order of the prymatyue church, not
contented to change yt. For the which in those days, they had much a do with
these high stomaked Romans. Hilda in like case, that was tha^ abbasse of
Streneshalt (that we now call Whytby) a woman learned, Hilda et Colma^nus.
wise, and virtuous, dysputed with them in their general counsel upon
Colmannus side, in the year of our lord.DC. and lxiiij. concerning the day
of their eastre celebracyon, 664.
their head shauynge, and other unsavory ceremonies, and wrote afterward an
ernest treatise against Agilbertus a french man and at that time bishop of
Wynchestre. Agilbertus.
All this might not help than, but in process of time they had their whole
minds, magry all their hearts. Bedas Giruuinus li. 3. Ca. 25. De gestis
Anglorum, Guilhelmus Malmesburye li. 3. De Pontificibus Ranulphus. li. 5. Ca.
17. Ioann es Capgraue and other.

Relygyouse examples dysuadynge marryage.
AFter Laurencius followed Melitus melitus
in the Archebyshoppes seat of Caunterburye, in the year of our lord.DC.
and.xix. which (they say) both alive and dead, 619.
dysuaded young men from christen marryage. As Saint Columbanus a Scott,
Columbanus.
about the same time, came to the sell of an holy Nonne for ghostlye counsel.
She bad him, away, least wanton youth would bring them together wild they
nylde they. Saint Edwyne king of Northumberlande gave unto saint Paulinus the
archebyshop of york, Paulinus.
his young daughter Eanfleda, so sone as she was baptized in the year of our
lord. DC. and. xxvi. that he should make her an unholy Nonne. And the day
after the said Edwyne was slain, he took with him both the daughter and
mother, and so fled with them unto Rochestre in kent be water, never returning
thydre again. fiacrius
Saint fiacre a Scottysh hermyte had so great malice unto women, that he
plaged so many of the^ with the foul evil, as came within the precynct of
his monasterye, because one woman had ones complained to the bysh^p of his
prodygyouse charmynges. Hector Boethius. Foillanus.
Saint Foillanus an Iryshe Bishop with his brethren was very famy^yar and
seruysable unto Saint Ger^ruyde and her nonnes at Nigella, and made diverse
barren women full gracyouslye to conceive. Saint keynwirye a Keyna.
virgyne of wales, conte^mpnynge marryage, fled from the^s to Saint Myhels of
the mount, to keep her vowed virgynyte among the holy fathers there, as
vower with vowers. All these stories has Johan Capgraue.

Other relygyouse examples of that age.
SEbba king of the East Saxons, Sebba is monked.
was so bywytched of the Bishop of London and his caskynge collygeners there
for his substance, that he had made himself a monk, leaving unto them both
his wife and possessions, if she had been no wyser than he.

Yet was she by their incantacyous at the last deceived, they having of him an
innumerable sum of money, and he nothing of them again but a mangye monks
cowle and his buryall in Paul's. Egbinus
When Saint Egbynes father was ones departed in wales, his mother resorted with
him to the abbeye of Saint Sampson, Sa^pson
and there received of him the habyte of a Nonne, bestowynge the rest of her
life among the good brethren there. Eanswida.
Saint Eanswyde abbess of folkstane in kent, inspyred of the devil, dyffyned
christen marryage to be barren of all virtues, to have but transytoryouse
fruits, and to be a filthy corrupcyo^ of virgynyte. Yet ware Marye, Johan
Baptyst, and Jesus Christ sweet fruits, thereof, Fruits of marryage.
the just fathers of the old law not reckened. Saint Paul says also, that
by virtue of marryage, the unfaithful man is sanctyfyed by the woman that is
faithful. 1. Cor. 7. Neither ded he at any time teach marryage to be either
a corrupcyon or yet an impedyme^t of christen virgynite, when he coupled the
Corintheanes (which ^ed still married) a chaste vyrgyne to Christ. 2. Cor.
Eanswida.
11. But this gentylwoman Eanswyde was much better acquaynted with the monks
learning than with Christ's, and with a chastyte rather to their behoue than to
his. Yet drove she out all the gyantes there, if their church legende be true.
These stories shows Johan Capgraue.

The wanton toys of the holy fathers.
ABout this same time sent Pope Bonyface the fifth, a shyrte with a golden
collor, babyshe joys.
and a fine petycote of strange making, unto king Edwyne with the blessings
of Peter and Paul. And unto his wife Ethelburge a silver glass and a comb of
yvoriye with the same, to uphold them in this new christyanyte. Se these
wanton fathers what toys they use, to set up their kyngedome here. Never shall
ye read that Christ's dysciples had any soche wyttye polycyes. Saint Petrock
an hermyte of Cornewale, Petronus.
was feign every night from the crow of the cock to the spring of the
morning, to stand naked in a pyt, to abate the hot mouynges of his flesh.
And never could he have remedy of that disease, till he went on pilgrimage to
Rome and Jerusalem. Here was a new sought out salve for that sore. Piranus
Saint Pyrane a Bishop also in Cornewale, had a fair dammesell in the
monasterye of his mother wingell, called Brunett, whom the Lord of the soil
took up for his occupye^ge. At the last he a greed with him no lo^gar to have
her, tha^ the bernacle or butture should break him of his sleep, which chanced
sone after, and than he sent her home again. If these be not good honest
legendes to be redd in the popes holy church, lege^des
tell me. Plentuouse shall ye find Johan Capgraue in the rehersall of them and
soche other.

The ghostly bestowynge of their vows
A Nonne belo^gynge to saint Cota, Chastyte of ^^^ar^es.
and a monk perteyninge to saint Pyrane, about the same time struck up a
covenant of love. And as they met in a wode for perfourmaunce of the same, a
young pygeon fell betwixt the^ and made them both ashamed, and so they went
home again* i^ like matter. Soche an other pagent was played at york, but it
was long after. Vows observed.
The monks of saint Marye abbeye, and the nonnes of Clement thorpe met
together there at hay making, the abbottes fool being with them. And as the
abbot inquired of him at supper for pastyme, where he had done all that day.
He fell in a great laughing and declared before all his gestes, that a sore
battle had been foughten that after none betwixt his monks and the monks of
clement thorpe. But he thanked God that his monks had the best, for they lay
ever aloft. Because that one of Saint modwe^s maids, Modwenna.
had laid her best beloues shoes at her beds head, the spretes of heaven
that were wont to vysyte her, would not come there that night. After she had
been at Rome, and was comen home again, she dwelt at Scalesclyf, Heremite.
where as an holy hermyte ded often times vysyte her, and much refreshe her
with a legende book of saints lives. But no tidings was there among them, of
Christ's holy gospel. Look Johan Capgraue.

Erkenwalde and Osith, with their Nondryes.
Saint Erkenwalde the son of Vffa the first King of the east a^gles,
Erkenwaldus
abbot of Cherteseye and Bishop of London, builded a Nondrye at Berkynge. And
because there were at that time in England no Nonnes to his mind (for Hilda
his kynswoman was to great a scripture woman in those days) he sent over the sea for an old acquayntaunce of his called Hildelitha, learned in art, but not
in Christ's dyuynyte, Her made he there abbasse, committing unto her
governance, his systre Ethelburge and a great sort more of young maids,
Ethelburga
to be taught and made no^nes there. Soche rule was kept among the^ within a
short space after, that God sent upon them a plage of pestyle^ce, which took
away all their chaplaynes, the cruel Da^^s following and burning up that was
left, monasterye, nonnes and all. Saint Osith was married to Sigher King of
the East Saxons. Ositha.
But because she loved the spirytualte much better tha^ him, whyls he was on a
time in hunting, she sent by a preuye lettre for Accas, and Bedeuuinus,
Spiritual knauerye.
Bishops of the East Angles, contaynynge Northfolke and Sothfolke, causynge
the^ to put upon her a nonnes aparell. So made she him to believe in his
return, that she had professed the vow of chastyte, and gave him thereby a
most wretched occasyon to live all the days of his life after, in most
synnefull aduoutrie. But a just plage followed. For in the year of our
Lord.DC.liii. 653
was she slain of the Danes, and her whore house (nondrye I should say)
utterly destroyed. Yet was she in the Popes church allowed for a stynkynge
martyr, for contempnynge marryage. Johan Capgraue.

The perfyght age of the Beast.
THeodorus a Greek, Theodo^^s
was of pope vptelianus constytute the sixth archebyshop of Caunterburye, from
Augustyne or sens the Papacye began, to make all sure here to Antichrists
behoue, in the sixtye and six year of his age, and in the year from Christ's
incarnacyon six hundred, syxtie, and six, which is in saint Iohans Apocalypse
the full age of the Beast, Apoc* 13.
and the full nombre of man. Mark yt good reader. For now of a Beast, The
fullye complete age.
becomes he a king, ye, as Daniel calls him, the unshame fast King of
faces. Daniel. 8. Presumynge to sit above God in every mannys conscience 2.
Thessa. 2. Named yt is there, the nombre of man, and the nombre of the Beast,
No^bre of the beast
for so much as yt was the time, wherein ma^nys learning most stronglye
withstode the learning of God, to the prankynge up of that odyouse aduersarye,
the very man of sin, and son of perdycyon, all blasphemies thereupon
following. Euydent is yt, by all the Englysh Chronycles, that than this
Theodorus came hither with the seal of that execrable Beast, to mark up all
to that most blasphemouse kingdom. For never before wrought the sprete of
Antichrist, the mystery of iniquite so strongelye as at that time. For hither
than brought he all vain and craftye scyences, Crafty scye^ces.
of countinge, calkynge, measurynge, singing, rymynge, reasonynge, arguing,
dyffynynge, shauinge, oylynge, exorcysynge, incantynge, and conjuring. Look
Johan Capgraue, in uitis Adriani, et Theodori Besides that Bedas writes li. 4.
Capit, 2. and Ranulphus li. 5. Ca* 18.

For the varyaunce had in supputacio^s
TO avoid co^trouersyes in the supputacyo^ of years, for so much as some
writes him to have come^ hither in the year before rehearsed, and some.ij years
after. Ye shall understand that Theodatus which was his predecessor, Theodatus
departed in the year of our Lord.DC.lxv. as witnesses Herma^nus Co^tractus
in Chronico de sexetatibus mundi. In the year following was this Theodorus
admytted of V^^elianus, Theodorus
and received his full autoryte of byndynge and losing (says Platina) to
hold the English nacyon still in that faith. Mark yt. But by reason of
serten delays, yt was more than a year after ere he entered into England.
One cause of his tarryaunce (Johan Capgraue says) was the growing of his
hear concerning his crown, Shauynge
which was shaue^ before after a far other sort, he being a Greek. His
abiding there for that only cause, was more tha^.iiij. Months, besides other
nedye matters. So that yt was the year of our Lord.DClxviij. 668.
the xxvi. day of May, and the second year of his consecracyon ere he came
into Ke^t, as witnesses both Bedas and Ranulphus With him sent Vitelianus a
monk borne in Aphrica, called Adria^, Adrianus.
to look to his doctrine, least he taught any thing in the English church
that were not agreeable to the Romyshe faith (as the marriage of prestes, and
the howselynge with leuened bread) for he ded not in all points trust him,
because he was a Greek borne. A scole.
Anon after he set up a Greak scole at Caunterburye of all manner scyences, as
Rhetoryck, Logyck, philosophy, Mathesye, Astrology Geometrye, Arithmetyck,
and Musyck, and taught them there openly both in latyue and Greek, Strange
sciences
besides the art Magyck Sortilege, Physuomye, Palmestrye, Alcumye, Necromancye,
Chyroma^cye, Geomancye, and witcherye, that was taught there also. Bedas,
Ranulphus, and Johan. Cap

Sealynges to the Beasts obedyence
THan constytute he the said Adriane both abbot and general reader there,
Adrianus
whyls he co^pased about all the whole regyon for the Eastre celebracyon and
other Romyshe rytes. This is the first archebyshop (says Johan Capgraue) that
all the English church was sworn to. Character.
Mark here the Seal of the Beast. Apo. 13. In the year of our Lord.
DC.lxxij. 672
he held a Synod at Thetforde in Northfolke, Synodus
where as he inquired of every mannys faith toward the Church of Rome.
Than constytute he bishops for every quarter, and deposed all them that were
not confirmed by the popes auctoryte, of whose nombre Ceddas the bishop of
york was one. Ceddas
More over he publyshed there a book of the churches ordynaunces, Ordinances
made by the foresaid Vitelianus, with permyssion of organes to make them myrye,
commaundynge yt only to be observed, Christ's order set a part. If this were
not the departing that Paul prophesied to come.2. The.2. where shall we look
for any. A saying has Ioannes de Molinis, Ioa^nes de Molinis
in speculo carmel. Ca. 6. which (though he were a papyst) I find here most
true. From the days of Heraclius the Emprour (says he) unto our times, the
day drawing toward night, the church sufferinge a sore eclippes, is come
to a down going. Yea, she is almost at the case of a full departing, et c. I
think a truer sentence could not than be uttered all circumstaunces thereupon
co^sydered. Great pytye was yt, that the churches posteryte than perceived not
so manifest a defeccyon.

More sealynges yet to Antichrists kingedome.
IN the year of our Lord DC. 680
and lxxx. Synodus.
held this Theodorus an other counsel at hatefelde in the west parties. Where
as he demanded a reckenynge of the bishops and other curates, what faith
and fauer their peoples had than to the church of Rome, as pope Agathon had
commanded him to do by his wrytynges, Agatho^
which wrote than unto him, to do all things wyselye. Ye know what that
means* I think. Here was non enquirye made, what believe they had than there
in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. No, yt was an other manner of matter,
No Gospel.
that they sought. Oh, wonderful was the workynge of that Serpents
generacyon. Polidorus says, li. 4. Anglice history, that false relygyon and
counterfett presthode, was than throughlye satled and placed there, the Acts
of the, iiij general counsels received instead of the.iiij. Eua^gelies.
Synodus generalis.
In the next year folowinge, was a general Synod kept at Consta^tynople in
Greece, where as marryage was for ever permytted unto the Greek prestes, and
utterly forbidden the latynes, or all other besides the^, Mass.
the latyne mass receyuynge there his first confirmacyon. But Theodorus and
his monks were at a good indyffere^t point for that, which had veyled within
one mounsterye in the I Will of Thanete lxx. Mildreda.
Nonnes, making fair Myldrede their abbasse. Look Ioha^ Capgraue Ranulphe and
other English autors. In spyght of the former Act, Vitiza.
ded Vitiza the king of Spain, permytt his prestes by a law newlye made, to
keep so many concubynes as they would. Michael Ricius de regibus Hispanie, et
Paulus Constantinus Phrigio in Chronicis regnorum.

Chastyte, Monks, Monasteryes, and Penance.
VVernerus Cartusiensis says, in Fasciculo temporum, Chastyte fre.
that vowynge of chastyte was fre without constraynt, in the time of Saint
Gregorye and sumwhat after. Bedas reports li. 3. Ca. 6. De gestis Anglorum,
et Ioannes Mayor in gestis Scotorum li 2 Ca. 11. That a monks cowle, after
they had ones vowed chastyte, was holden in soche reverence, that no man would
in a manner than iourneye, unless he had their blessings Into a most
wonderful madness were the people than brought, Hypocresye works
by their hypocrytycall wytcherye, the very elect persons scant fre from that
dampnable error. Matthew. 24. Marci. 13. For the unthankfulness of men (says
Job) in setting his veryte light, does God permytt the Hypocrytes to reign
over them in all power of deceytfull wonders. Job. 34. 2. Thessal. 2. They ded
than spedelye set up monasteryes without no^bre, Monasteryes.
all the realm over. Johan Hardynge says in his Chronycle, that king Oswye
builded within Nor thumberlande. oswius.
xij. in one years space. In the year of our lord. DC. and.lxxxiiij. 684.
held Theodorus yet an other counsel in the North parties at Twyforde,
Synodus.
where as he publyshed a serten book of his own making, called A penytencyall
sum, commaundynge his clergy to put yt every where in practyse. Therein were
contained all manner of sins and excesses, with aggrauacyons, Su^ma
peniten^ialis.
reseruacyons, penaltees, sorrows, penuaunces, and ponnyshmentes. And this was
to terryfye, captyue, and snare the wretched co^scyences of men, even to vttre
desperacy on. And where could have been sought out a practyse of more
deuylyshnesses Sigebertus, Sabellicus, Tritemius, et Scriptores ferme omnes.

The foundacyon of their Purgatory.
AT the same very time, was there one Drithelmus in Northumberlande, which
leaving both wife and children in the year of our lord.DC. and.lxxi.
Drithelmus 671.
made himself a monk at Mailros, Saint Cuthbert tha^ being abbot there. The
said Drithelmus feigned himself on a time to be dead there was knauerye upon
knauerye) and reported in his return, Fou^dacyon of purgatory.
that he had seane by an Angels demo^stracyon, both purgatory and paradyse,
hell and heaven. After that he had subtylly declared this unto king Alphrede
and other great men of the contreye there, at the request of the monks, much
people resorted unto him for counsel for their sowles from all quarters of
England. So redye are the foles of this world to hear lies and illusyons,
Illusyons.
which never had love to the veryte. This knave evermore commended unto them
confession and penance, Confession.
fasting, prayer, and alms deeds, specyallye and above all other, mass
saynges, Masses
and monasteryes building. Was not this think you, a virtuous christyanyte
of these chaste fathers, to begin their holy church with? Were yt not pytie
but they were canonysed saints, and their feastfull days solempnysed twyse in
the year, Canonysed deuyls?
with ryngynges, syngynges, sensynges, and massynges, as this Cuthbertes were
and are yet to this day? I think the Turks church had never more knaves to
their Saints tha^ these. For this Drithelmus is one of their saints also.
Johan Capgraue post uitam Adriani, Sigebertus, Vincencius, Antoninus, with
diverse other,

Chastyte of Cuthbert and doctrine of Colfride.
SO cruel was this Cuthberte unto women, Cuthbertus.
after he became a Saint of theirs, that no^ might come within his sayntuaryes
(they say) at Doilwein, Coruen, and Mailros in Scotland, nor yet at Durham,
Tynmouth, and Lyndefarne here in England, under pain of sode^ death, their
cha^bers and selles exempted always. Yet was the said Cuthbert very famylyar
in his time with Ebba, No^nes.
Elsteda, and Verca.iii. holy abbasses, and builded for his pleasure, a
solemn nondrye at Carliell. Fynallye for the special good love he had unto
Verca above all other, Verca.
he commanded in his testament, that his body after his departing, should be
wrapped in the fine lynnen clothe that she had given him. Ye may se by this,
that these chaste fathers had their lovers, and set sumwhat by their own
precyouse bodies. Saint Colfryde abbot of Girwin in Northumberlande, Colfridus.
wrote unto Atho^ king of the Pyctes, that yt was as necessary for the vow
of a monk or degree of a pressed (prestes were than no vowers) to have a shaven
crown for restraynt of their lusts, Shaue^ crowns.
as for any christen man to bless him against spretes when they come upon
him. What wise learning this is, I report me unto you. Yet is yt regettred of
Bedas in his.v. book, De gestis Anglorum, Walde^
and also of Thomas Vualden in his volume, De sacrame^talibus. ti. 9. Ca 80 to
stop heretypkes mouths with, besides that Johan Capgraue has said in yt.

The fallen star, and.ij. Horns of the Beast.
ABout this time were many wonderful things seane in diverse quarters of the
world, specyallye a great Comete or blasynge star, A comete.
which seemed with flamynges of fire to fall into the sea, great morren
following both of beast and man. Not all unlike was this to that is described,
Apoca. 8. And betokened than (in my opinion) both the vttre fall of the
pryncelye governance and also the christen presthode, Regnu^ et sacerdotium.
or of both under one, as powers of one God. For both they heynge as stars in
the firmament or powers from about. Romano. 13. most wretchedlye than declyued
from the true obedyence and faithful ad ynystracyon of Gods eternal veryte,
unto the beastlye subieccyon and tradycyons of that execrable Pope. Sens that
time have they comen from the sea. They have taken their autoryte of that Beast
which rose out of the sea. Apocal. 13. Apo. 13.
(till now of late days) the.ij. horns of the other Beast, that is to say,
of hypocresye, pryckynge them than forewarde. Those. ijhornes
.ij. horns of that earthlye Beast were here in England, the.ij. monkysh
sects that in those days first entered. The first of them were the black
monks of Saint Benet, which entered first of all with the before named
Augustyne in the year of our lord.CCCCC. Augustinus.
and xcvi. 696.
to peruerte the South Saxons and kentysh men. The other were the black
Chanons of the other Saint Augustyne (both black) which came in with Berinus
the archebyshopp of Dorcestre in the year of our lord.DC.xxxvi. Berinus
from Pope Honorius the first, 636.
to deceive the west Saxons. For yche Pope and bishop preferred evermore the
sect he was of. ij. sects
These.ij. wrought so their wicked feats in those days, with lyenge signs in
hypocresye, that they caused the before named stars, Regnum et Sacerdocium,
Regalyte and presthode, to fall clerelye from heaven. Johan Capgraue,
Ranulphus, et Polydorus.

The fall of kyngedoms, and raise of the Papacye.
Mark in the Chronycles, and ye shall find this most true. Papacye.
That like as the Papacye had his first raise in and of the fall of the
Empire, so had those kingdoms which first obeyed yt, their orygynall
begynnynges of the overthrow of the inferyour kyngedomes. As England under
king Inas by the fall of the Brytaynes, Kyngedomes popysh^
and France under king Pypyne by the putting a side of the Merouyngeanes.
Sens these lecherouse locustes crepte first into England, never throue that
kyngedome of the ancient Brytaynes (whose spirytuall head was God alone) but
every day more and more decayed, Brytaynes.
till yt was fullye ended. Mark yt hardelye from the first coming hither of
the said Augustyne, cadwal
till the year of our lord.DC.lxxxix. lader. 689.
wherein Cadwallader their last king dyed a most desolate pilgrim at Rome,
offering himself up there most myserablye to the Pope.

Ever sens has yt been to him obedyent in all blasphemouse errors and do
^ryues of Deuylles, by the space of.DCCC. and.xliiij. years, Mark yt. 1533.
till the year of our lord.M.D. and.xxxiij. wherein at our noble kings most
wholesome request, we utterly by oath renounced that odyouse monstre. Now is yt
Gods own fre kyngedome again, and our king his inmedyate mynystre. That
Lord grant of his infynyte mercy, england
that like as we have put a side his name, we may even from the heart also
cast over his Idolatrouse yokes* following from henceforth the vncorrupt rules
of the Gospel. Amen. A like conparyson has Paulus Orosius, li. 2. Ca. 4.
Historiarum mundi, Roma et Babylon.
of Babylon and Rome. Very like begynnynges (says he) had Babylon and Rome,
like powers, like prydes, like contynuaunces, like fortunes, and like ruynes,
saving only that Rome arose of the fall of Babylon, and so fourth.

An old prophecye of Merlyne dysclosed.
AS I was in writing this matter an old prophecye of Merlyne came unto my
remembrance. Merlyne.
That after the manyfolde irrupcyons of strangers, the kings of this realm
should be ones again crowned with the Dyademe of Brute, Brute.
and bear his ancient name, the new name of strangers so vanyshynge away.
He that applies unto this a right understanding, shall find yt very true.
The dyademe of Brute is the pryncelye power of this whole regyo^, of God
inmedyatlye given of God without any other mean mastrye worker to
Antichrists behoue. F^re was that power f^m the great whores domynyon (which
is the Rome church) till the vyole^t conquest of the Englysh Saxons* Saxons.
which they had of the Brytaynes for their iniquitees sake* And now (praise be
unto that Lord) yt is in good way to that fredo^ again, and would fully
attain thereunto, were her heythnysh yokes in relygyo^ ones thrown a side, as
I doubt yt not but they will be within short space. As well may ye give
crede^ce to this Merlyne when he uttered the veryte, Merlyne.
as unto old Balaam the sothsayer, Balaa^*
which at a time prophesied the coming of Christ. Numeri 24. And as
concerning the return of the name, mark in this age the wrytinges of learned
men, and ye shall well perceive the change, for now co^monlye do they write us
for Englysh men, Brytaynes.

The whores flesh eaten of the x. horns.
THe.x. horns of the first Beast (which were kyngedomes maynteynynge that
whore (now joined all into one, The.x. horns of the Beast*
does mortallye hate her at this present instaunt* and is making her desolate
and naked in England. In the end they shall eat her flesh, and clerelye
consume her with the fire appointed. England was sumtyme into.vij. kyngedomes
divided, by the consent of all writers, and wales into.ij. called Cambria and
Demecia or north wales and South wales; Irelande making up the tenth. Or if ye
hold wales but for one, let Scotland supplye that rowme, which owes unto
England perpetual homage. As all these are now in one most worthy and
vyctoryouse King but one, so will God put into all their hearts one consent to
fulfill his will, and to give her kyngedome unto the Beast, or to send yt
again to the Devil from whens yt first came. Apoca. Apo. 17
17 Consydre with your selves the late overthrow of the monasteryes, couentes,
collegys, and chaunteryes, alleages of unclean spretes, and holds of most
hateful birds by the manifest word of God. And think not but the filthy
habytacyons of the great mastre deuyls will follow sone after. Apoc. 18. Apo. 18
Let the gogle eyed Gardyner of wyncestre gyrde at yt till his rybbes ache, and
an hundred dyggynge deuyls upon his side, Wynker of wyles
yet shall not one Jot of the Lords promise be vnfulfylled at the time
appointed for that blasphemouse whores overthrow, his most holy mother. Pray
in the mean season (good christen readers) pray, pray, pray, that his
heavenly will be done in earth and not mannys, and fashyon your lives to the
form of his most dear son Jesus Christ's doctrine. Amen.

Acts of vowed virgynyte for that age.
NOw to return again to their spirytuall acts of chastyte for that age.
Sedia.
Wha^ one Sedia the father of saint Aidus, perceived that he by no means could
have a child by his wife, he brought her to these co^tyne^t fathers for remedy
of her barrenness, and she was spedde the next night after by a miracle, for
all were miracles they ded. Ioa^ Cap, Guenhera
Guenhera a Cornysh woman (whom some writers call fair Elyne) that made King
Arthure a cuckolde, was after his death deuoutelye received into Ambesburye
nondrye, as a penitent to their spirytuall use. Oswaldus.
Guilhelmus Malmesburye. Saint Oswalde laid his wife Bebla in bed with a
relygyouse hermyte. Bebla
And when the great heat came upon him (as the spirytuall fathers are hastye
^he found the means that he was cast in cold water to abate his hot courage.
This is one of the holy acts whereupon the pope has made the said Oswalde a
saint. Johan Hardyng. Ebba.
Saint Ebba which was in those days the mother of all nonnes, was generate of
an whore, as were all her fathers children besides her ij. of the^ only
excepted. This Ebba had in the monasterye of Coldyngham not far from Barwyck,
both men and women dwell lynge together sell by sell) as the manner was than of
all Nondryes in England) which exercysed the battayles of chastyte so long,
that in their night metynges they went to bed together by couples, their
relygyouse love was than so great, till God sent a wild fire upon them for
that contempt of marryage. Ionnes Mayor. libro secundo. Capittulo. 12. and
Ioannes Capgraue.

A spirytuall conueyaunce to be marked.
ETheldred (whom ye call Saint Audrye of helye) married.ij. Etheldreda
great princes, Tombert of the South Girwyes, and Egfride the King of
Northumberlande, mocking them both by the space of more than.xiij. years, in
not geuynge them due benevolence according to the holy doctrine of saint
Paul 1. Cor. 7. And in occasyonynge them to aduouterouse living. The lattre
of them knowing that she minded wilfryde tha^ Bishop of york much more than
him (for the storye says that she loved that monk above all the men living)
required him in Gods behalf to admonysh her of her duty, Wilfridus.
that he might according to his laws have increase of succession by her. And
he like a false traitor knave, not withstanding his promise to the contrary,
Knauerye.
persuaded her to persevere in her obstynacye and utterly to resyst him,
allegynge her vow and requyrynge a diuorcement from him. Whereupon he was than
compelled to marrye an other wife, called Ermenburgis, and Eteldrede was
professed a Nonne in Coldyngha^ with Ebba, by the said wilfryde. This King
after that perceiving his knauerye, Theodorus
by assent of Theodorus the archebyshop of Caunterburye, bannyshed him out of
his land. Than followed she after a pace, and whyls he was bishop of Eastsexe,
A waiting hounde.
she bycame abbasse of hely, not far from his elboue, Mark this conueyaunce
for your serving. If this were not knauerye, where shall we find knauerye:
Yet was this ge^tylmii co^ueyer admytted for a saint, because he builded a
college at Rippon, where my self was ones bayted of his Basan bulls, The
autour.
for maynteynynge the Kings prerogatyue against their Pope, as good mastre
Ioha^ Hercye can full well tell. Ioannes Capgraue in uitis Etheldre de, and.
Vuilfridi.

Kings became pilgrims, and their wives Nonnes.
A Very proper cast the women had in those days, by the ghostly counsel of
the prelates. Pylgrimes.
They sent their husbands to Rome on pilgrimage by heaps, whyls they kept
them spyrituall company at home. Ethelburge made great have and left no
calling on, till her husband King Inas was thydrewardes, Inas
with scrippe hatte and staff, she lokynge for his no more coming home in the
abbeye of Berkynge, This Inas became a monk there, and was the first that
clogged the west Saxons with payment of the Rome shot, or Peter Pens to the
Pope. Volateranus, and Fabiane. After him followed Ethelrede King of Mercia in
like fashyon of Pilgrimage, Ethelredus.
and became afterward abbot of Bardeneye. Johan Capgraue. Co^redus
Conredus also King of the same prouynce, dyed a solys he monk at Rome. So
ded King Offa of the East Saxons, Offa
the self same year of our Lord.DCC. and.ix. 709
besides Ke^redus, Kenredus
Ethelwolphus, and a great sort more. Hermannus Contractus, Platina and
Polidorus. Colwolphus King of Northu^berlande, Colwolphus
returned again to Gyrwyn, and there dyed a monk. Robert Fabiane, Great
layser would yt require, to show here how many of soche Kings, the ghostlye
fathers sent at diverse seasons unto Rome, that they for the time might have
the spirytuall occupyenge of their wives, and how many of their own bastardes
they made Kings for them. Bastardes.
And therefore at this time I pass them over. Innumerable knaueryes wrought they
in those days, and all under the color of vowed chastyte.

Great experymentes of virgynyte.
AS Saint Aldelmus, Adelmus.
the bishop of Sherborne (that ye now call Salysburye) chanced to be at Rome,
the people there made a foul exclamacyon upon Pope Sergius the first, for
begettynge a wenche with child, which he (they say) by a little strange
workynge pacyfyed. Synodus
In whose return, a Synod was holden in England against the Brytaynes or
welche men, for not co^formynge their churches to the Romysh obseruacyons, he
there required to inueye against them. Upon the which mocyon, he wrote than two
books, ij. books
one for the Eastre celebracyon, and an other in the praise of virgynes, to
blemyshe the marriage of their prestes there, and also to advance their newlye
professed chastyte. For that he had also in commandment of Sergius, Sergius.
not withstanding his own known lecherye. This Aldelmus never refused women,
but would have them co^mo^lye both at board and at bed, to mock the devil
with. In the time he was abbot of Malmesbury, he appointed often times to his
flesh this martyrdo^. As he felt any sore mouynges thereof, he laid by him
naked, the fairest maid he could long time as an whole David's psalter was in
saying. And when his heat was past, he sent her home again as good a maid as
he left her. Is not this (think you) a strong argument to prove that all
prestes may live chaste? This tells Bedas, Ranulphus, Johan Capgraue, and
many other English Autours more.

Images admytted, with chaste examples.
ABout the same time, Egwinus
saint Egwine abbot of Euesham, and bishop of Worcestre (than called wyckes)
hearing tell that labor was made to the pope, to have the christen temples
replenyshed with Images, Images
to promote that markett forewarde, he hyed him apace to Rome. And there he
declared to the holy father, the secret reuelacyons and commandments of
our lady that he had, to set up an Image of her to be worshypped at
Worcestre, Lady of worcestre.
delyuerynge him a book which he had written of the same apparycyons, besides
the life of Aldelme. The pope than called Constantyne the first, hearing this
new wondre sent him home again with his bulls of autoryte, Brithwaldus
co^maundinge Brithwalde than Archebyshop of Caunterburye (with all have) to
call a general Synod of all the clergy for confirmacyon of the same, sinodus
the kings required not to be absent that day. And thy^ was done in the year
of our lord. Dcc and.ix. 709.
This Brithwalde being also a monk, was the first Englysh man that was
Archebyshopp of Caunterburye. Mark yt. Saint Guthlake an hermyte of Rependon,
Guthlacus.
told a serten abbot the same time, that going homewarde, he should find in a
wydowes house.ij. of his holy monks which had lain with her the night before
for easement of their chastyte. Bartellinus.
Saint Bartellyne hermyte of Stalforde, stale out of Irelande the kings
daughter there. And as she was afterward trauelynge of child in a forest,
whyls he was seeking the mydwyfe, a wolf came and devoured both her and her
child. These stories has at large Johan Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum
Anglie, Guilhelmus Malmesburye et Ranulphus.

Englysh monks become Antichrists Apostles.
IN those days the monks of England were becomen so mighty in
superstycyouse learning, Monks Dyspersed.
that they were able to pervert all other christen regyons, as they ded than in
deed. Some of them went into Germanye, some into France, some into Italye and
Spain, and became the Popes instruments of all falshed, falshyonynge him up
there a new kyngedome of all deuylyshnesse to withstand the manifest glory
of God, and subduynge thereunto all pryncelye Powers. You that are exercysed in
Chronycles and Saints Lives, mark for that age what is written of Columbanus,
Colomannus, Totimannus, Vuenefridus, Vuilibrordus, The popes apostles.
Vuilibaldus, Vuenebaldus, Burghardus, kilianus, Vuigbertus, Egbertus,
Heuualdus the whyght and the black, Etto, Bertuuinus, Eloquius, Lullius,
Lebuinus, Liuinus, Ioa^nes, Embertus, Gallus, Gaudus, Ga^abaldus, Gregorius,
Megingolus, Sturmio, and a great sort more with their women, and ye shall se in
them practyses wonderful. I will give ye out one here breuelye for an example,
for to much yt were to write of them all. Wenefridus.
Wenefridus was admytted of Pope Gregorye the second, for the Archebyshop of
Magunce and great Apostle of all Germanye, and for his bold countenance was
of him named Bonifacius. Bonifacius.
In London was he first borne, and professed a black Monk at Cissancestre
(now called Chichestre) under abbot wolfharde. After the great Synod holden at
London by the before named Brithwalde, Synodus.
about the year of our Lord.DCC. and.x. 710.
where as prestes Marryage was judged fornycacyon, and the honourynge of Images
accepted for a christen relygyon. Daniel
Daniel than Bishop of Wynchestre, sent this wenefride to Rome with his
letters of commendacyon for his manfulnesse there showed. Johannes Capgraue. et
Georgius Vuicelius in Hagiologo de sanctis ecclesie.

The great Apostle of all Germanye.
THe Pope after certain conmunycacyons, perceiving him in all points fytt for
his purpose, apostle of Germanye.
sent him anon into Germanye with his fulle autoryte (as before is specyfyed) to
do his false feats there, and to bring that styffe necked people under his
wicked obedyence, whom they call the holy Christen believe. I think sens
Christ's incarnacyon was there never non that more lyuelye wrought the
Propertees of the other Beast in Saint Iohans Apocalypse, Alia Bestia Apo. 13.
which rise out of the earth having.ij. horns like the lamb, if ye mark
if well. Apocal. in the.13. chapter. For he was next in autoryte to the Pope,
by the Popes own witness, soche time as he came with the high legacye from
his own right side, into all the quarters and Prouynces of the said Germanye.
(...) him concerning vowed chastyte, rellyques, Images, the Popes prymacye,
Kings deposycyons, oaths breaking, and soche like errors. errors
Look the works of Nauclerus, Vuicelius, Bernardus Lutzenburg, and Alphonsus
de castro.

Doctrine of Bonyface, with sale of whores.
MOst dampnable was the doctrine of this Bonyface, Doctrine.
concerning the Pope. In a serte^ Epistle of his we find this most execrable
sentence. That in case the said Pope were of most filthy lynynge, and so
forgetful of him self and of the whole christente, that he led with him to
hell innumerable sowles, yet ought no man to rebuke his ill doing. For he (he
says) has power to judge all men, and ought of no man to be judged again.
This have the Canonystes regestred in the popes decrees for a perpetual law,
Canonystes.
and for a necessary article of Christen believe. Did. xl Ca. Si Papa. Yet
wrote he at another time to Pope Zacharye, to se the manifest abusyons of Rome
reformed, Rome.
specyallye their maskynges in the night after the paganes manner, Open sale of
whores.
and their open selling of whores in the markett there. For they were (he
said) sore impedymentes to his preachynges. For they that had seane those
reuelynges there, mystrusted much that faith. He wrote also unto king
Ethelbalde and other great me^ in England, Ethelbaldus.
requyrynge them to leave the aduouterouse occupyenge of no^nes, least soche a
plage fell on the^, as chanced upon king Colfrede and king Ofrede for like
doings. Colfredus. Osredus.
And though this Bonyface allowed not christian matrymonye in prestes but hated
yt, yet after that one Geraldus a married bishop was slain in Thuringia in
time of the wars there, geraldus
he permytted his son Geilepus to succeed him in that office. geilepus
Helina^dus monachus, Vince^cius, Antoninus, Capgraue. etc.

The monasteryes of fulda and floryake.
HE builded the great monastery of Fulda in Germanye, Fulda.
in the year from Christ's incarnacyon.DCC. and.xliiij. 744.
Into the which no women might enter, but only Lieba and Tecla.ij Englysh
nonnes his best beloues. Lieba.
The body of the said Lieba, he commanded by his life, of most te^dre love,
to be buried in one grave with his own precyouse body. Monasterium fulde^se.
So rytche was that monasterye within few years after, that yt was able to
find the e^prour in his wars.lx. thousa^de me^. For the which the abbot had
always this pryuylege, to sit upon the right hand of the said emproure at the
high feasts. An other abbeye was buylden before that at floriake in france,
Floriacus.
and not far from orlyaunce, in the year of our lord.DC.li. 651.
These.ij. monasteryes floriake and fulda with their old inhabytauntes, would
I counsel all Chronycle readers to mark, as they fall in their way, for
wonders which has comen from thens, as will apere after. A custom the holy
fathers had in those days, To ease their vows.
to lead nonnes about with the^ in strange lands where they went. As we
read of walburga, Hadeloga, Lieba and soche other. I think yt was to help
the^ to bear their chastyte, whose carryage was sumtyme very comberouse unto
them, and they found not than in all contreyes soche plentye of Nondryes as
has been sens. Sigebertus, Capgraue, Tritemius, Nauclerus, Vuicelius.

Oxforde shurned. And Aleuinus monks.
AShamed are not these prestygyouse Papystes, to utter yt in their stories and
read yt in their Saints legendes, in contempt of their christian governors,
that no king may enter the town of oxforde without a myschefe, Oxforde
because one Algar a Prince about this age would have had Saint frideswyde to
wife. Frideswyde.
As though to be a king were a far vyler or vnworthyer office, than to be a
pylde shytten Nonne. O blind bludderynge Balaamytes, without all judgments
godly. Of God only is the worthy office of a King. A King.
Prouer. 8. where as your fystynge No^nes, were of Antichrist and the devil.
Capgraue, Fabiane, Polidorus. About the same time, was Alcuinus a doctor of
England, made abbot of Turonia in France by the gift of Charles the great,
Alcuinus.
which on a night found all his monks dead in the dorter, by the soden stroke
of God for their Sodometrye, one only excepted. Odo cluniacensis, Guilhelmus
Malmesburye Vincencius, Antoninus, Ranulphus, and Capgraue post uitam Ythamari.
Autours.
A great matter had yt been in the popes books, if these men had had wives. For
tha^ he coud not have sent them to the devil so fast, according to general
commyssyo^, which he had of Satan his great mastre; in that vycarshypp of his.

English men ponnyshed at Rome.
AFter King Ethelwolphe being subdeacon, Ethelwolphus
through wanton occupyenge had had a bastard, by the popes dyspensacyo^ he
married Osburga his butlers daughter, and had by her iiij. sons, which all
succeeded Kings after him. Guilhelmus Malmesburye, and Ioannes Harding. As this
King on a time chanced to be at Rome, he se many Englysh men there wearynge
fetters and gyues (...) delivered of child without mydwyfe and so dyed. Wherein
God declared manyfestlye to the world, that their glytie ring church was
altogyther an whore, An whore.
to make good that was written in the reuelacyon of Saint Johan. Apo. 17. Oh he
that had seane the countenance of the prelates than, should have beholden a
great change.

Popes chosen from thens fourth by their. N.
SEns that time has popes always been chosen, Popes chosen by their stones
as stoned horse are in a colte feyer, by their dontye dymyceryes, that they
can no more be deceived that way. For at the solemn stallynge of them, the
last deacon Cardynall does grope them brechelesse, at an hole made in the seat
for that ghostlye purpose, and than cries yt out before all the multitude,
that he has ware suffycyent to prove him no woman. More over the street where
she was delivered, has ever sens been shurned in all general processyons, for
fear of ill happes. An example.
As is of women a sexten bridge in a Scottyshe I Will called Leuissa, where as if
but one woman should pass over (they say) there are no salmons seane in that
river, all the year after. Hector Boethius in Scotici regni descriptione. For
the hystorye before reherced of this woman Pope, was yt partlye my desire that
ye should mark that monasterye of fulda. Fulda
For she was one chaste fruit of our English clergy, yssuynge from thens, ye
may chance after this yet to hear of more. Soche an enemy to prestes
marryage was not in his time, as was that Boniface, which was thereof the first
buylder. For every where ded he, in all his general Synodes, Matrimonye
condemned.
condemn if for aduouterye by the popes canon laws, For the scripturs would
not serve him. The life of this female pope shows more at large, Iacobus
Bergomas in li. De claris mulieribus, Platina, Sabellicus, Martinus Carsulanus,
Volateranus, Nauclerus, Mantuanus, Johannes Stella, Ioannes textor, and
Robertus Barnes in uitis Romanorum Pontificum.

Holy water, with a book against marryage.
IN the year of our Lord.DCCC. LVIII. 858
as a serten daydeuyll at the foresaid Maguncia was hunted of the prestes with
processyon and holy water, A pressed.
for dyuerslye vexynge the city, he hyd him self for fear (they say) under
one of the prestes copes* saying. He might well be bold there, considering he
had by him the fleshlye occupyenge of the general proctours daughter there.
This relygyouse example of holy church shows Sigebertus, Vincencius,
Antoninus, (...) Capgraue in uita Etheldrede. Ethelstanus a monk, Ethelstanus
a monk married
at one time taking presthode with Dunstane and Ethelwolde, within a while
after left all his orders and took him to a wife. Wherefore they prophesied of
him that his end should be miserable. And because they would apere no false
Prophets, they inchaunted him, charmed him, and changed him in to an ele, A
miracle.
and so he lived in the water ever after with a great sort more of his
company. Whereupon (they say) that monasterye and town has ever sens been
called Elye. Elye.
Guilhelmus Malmesburye et Ioannes Capgraue. A young infant called Brithgina,
Brithgina.
being no more than one day old, professed Elphegus into the monasterye of
wylton about the same time. So ded he also an other called Wilfhilda, into the
nondrye of Wynchestre, so sone as she was weaned from suck. Whom afterward
king Edgare claymed in marryage, Wilfhilda.
but she was to famylyer with Ethelwolde a monk and a bishop, to grant
thereunto. When he came to the house where she was afterward abbasse, there was
no small fyllynge in of cups, Ioannes Capgraue.

Miracles and wonders wrought.
When Odo the Bishop of Salysburye ^as elected Archebyshopp of Caunterburye
in the year of our lord.DCCCC. and.xlvi. Odo.
he would in no case be consecrated, 946.
till he was by the abbot of Floriake professed a monk. Floriacus.
Partlye because all his predecessors in that seat to the nombre of.xxi. had
been monks, and partlye for that the prestes in those days were in hate of
the people for their marryage at the monks suggestyons. And after he had
received his palle with Antichrists autoryte from Rome, the kings concubines
he wexed so frantyck upon the kings concubynes, that some of them he sealed
in the faces with hot burning Irons most shamefullye, and some of them he
bannyshed into Irelande for ever, but unto his own store he was gentle
enough. For most haynouse heresye held he than the christen marryage of
prestes, and made synodall constytucyons against yt, to enryche the monks
through that craftye color with their great possessions. Constytucyo^s.
His neuye Oswalde found he to scole at floryake the welsprynge of
Necromancye, Oswalde.
to learn there all craftye seyences. Floriacus.
In his time was a strife among the clergy at Caunterburye, for Christ's
flesh and blood in the Sacrament, the prestes most ernestly affyrmynge yt to
remain still bread (...) an only figure of Christ's body, The sacrament.
and the monks to be Christ's essencyall body, yea Christ himself. But wha^
scripturs failed ones upon the monks side* they were driven to false miracles
o^ plain experymentes of sorcerye. For Odo by a cast of legerdemayne, showed
unto the people a broken host bledynge, Miracles.
as a popish pressed called sir Nicolas Gerues ded a. ij. years a go in Surreye,
by pryckynge his fyngar with a pynnne.

Monkerye augmented by Dunstane.
Saint Dunstane here in England being taught of Iryshe monks at
Glastenburye, Dunstanus magnus.
was found very conning in wa^ton musyck, in sorcerye, and in Image making
out of all manner metals, stone, and kinds of wode. By these and soche like
occupyenges, he found the means to augme^t and enryche the monasteryes of
monks and nonnes every where whithin England, not withstanding he had often
times much a do with deuyls and with women. Yet had he at length these
pryuyleges than above all other spirytuall doers. He wanne by his musyck and
fair speech, musyck
the good fauer of diverse women, yea, of some which had been the kings
co^cubynes, as Alfgyne, wilfrith and soche other, though he before had put them
to pains. By his sorceryes, sorcerye
he always made the kings fytt for his ghostlye purpose, as will apere
herafter, specyallye by king Edmonde that was Ethelstanes brother, whom by his
necromancye he brought to the point, inuysysyblye to have been torn in pieces.
What he got by his Image making, Caruynge.
the scripture shows plain, which curses both the hand and the instrument
of the Image maker. Sapi. 14. and Deutro. 27. This storye declares more at
large Osbertus monachus in uita Dunstani, Vincencius. li. 24. Ca. 74. Antoninus
par. 2. autours
^i. 16. Ca. 6. Martanus Scotus, Guilhelmus Malmesburiensis, Ranulphus
Cestrensis li. 6. Cap. 10. Volateranus, Bergomas, Nauclerus, Johan Capgraue,
Johan hardynge Vuyllyam Caxton, Johan 1. yd gate, and Robert Fabyane.

The relygyouse Occupyenge of Dunstane.
AS Dunstane in the house of a wydowe was fashyonynge a prestes stool, his
harp hanging upon the wall without towchynge sownded the note of Gaudent in
celis. A cast or feate.
Whereupon the wenches astoyned, went out of the house with the wydowe and all
her howsholde, proclamynge yt a broad, that he had much more learning tha^ was
good. For this and soche like feats, serten men told (...) I think this
play sumwhat passed course legerdemayne. After that was Du^stane the high
steward of his house, and had over all the realm a iurysdycyon. Of
Glastenburye was he put in perpetual possessyon, Glaste^burye.
to make thereof what he would. And so bycame yt first of all Saint Benettes
patrymonye. Antedicti Autores. Let all the Popes army stand up here, and
allow this still for a miracle, as they have done hitherto in his legende, yet
do not I doubt to prove yt against them all, abhomynable knauerye by the
scripturs.

He vexes king Edwyne, retaynynge his concubyne.
AS king Edwyne upon the day of his coronacyon occupied Alfgina his
concubyne, having tha^ non other wife, Edwinus. alfgina
Dunstane being at that time but a monk and abbot of Glastenburye, plucked
them both vyolentlye from the bed, and brought their before the Archebyshopp
Odo, Odo ca^tuariensis.
threttenynge the woman suspensyon, ye may call yt hanging if ye will. For
the which the king after that exyled the said Du^stane into Flanders, and
wrought the monks many other dyspleasurs, till they found the means to
depose him, by the virtue of ear confession. Confession.
Voleteranus. li. 3 Geographic, Osbertus, Vincencius, Antoninus, Guilhelmus
Ranulphus and Ioannes Capgraue. Yet in the conclusyon (they say) he delivered
King Edwynes soul, after he was dead, from hell (I pray God he killed him
not before) and vanquyshed all the deuyls there by virtue of a Requiem mass,
Mass of requiem.
so bringing him into their purgatory. This was (I trow) no badde ware. As a
serten noble woman called Alfgina (the Kings former concubine I fear me)
possessynge great substance, alfgina loves.
had ones commoned with Dunstane, she so delyghted in his fair words (for his
advantage) that she would never after from him, but dwell with him still for
term of life. Strong love.
She left her own house and builded her an habytacyon by the church,
louynglye intertaynynge men of holy orders. In conclusyon when she departed
the world, she left her great coffers and treasure bags with Du^stane to
dyspose for her soul (she had heard of King Edwyne) with the which he after
that builded fine monasteryes. Joan. Cap. in Cat. sa^c. An.

Dunstane keeps the Kings of England under.
DVnstane was excedyngly beloved with Cadina King Eldredes mother (these are
the plain words, Cadina loves.
of the hystory) and he loved her excedynglye again. And wha^ he ones became
(...) like unto the tyranny of these spiritual Antichrists, thus cruellye
handelynge, a man that is dead. This shows more at large, Liuthprandus
Ticinensis* li. 2. Capi. 13. autours
ac li. 3 Cap, 12. rerum Europicarum. Blondus Flauius, Baptista Platina,
Ioannes Stella, Abbas Vrspergensis, Ptolomeus Lucensis, Vincencius, Antoninus,
Bergomas and alij.

The chastyte of holy church there.
THeodora a most execrable whore, Theora cum filiabus
and aduonterouse mother to the foresaid Marozia and theodora the yongar (both
unshamefast whores also) so burned in concupiscens of the bewtye of one Johan
Rauennas a pressed, Ioa^nes Rauennas,
than sent in massage to the pope by Peter the Archebyshop of Rauenna, that she
not only moved him, but also compelled him to lie with her, and so become her
peramoure dear. This whore for his lecherouse occupyenge of her, made him first
Bishop of Bononye, than Archebyshop of his own natyue city Raue^na, and
fynallye Saint Peter's vycar in Rome, called Johan the.x. Joan the.x
pope of that name, that she might at all times have his company nygher home.
This was done in the year of our Lord. DCCCC. and. xv. 915
and he governed the papacye there.xiij. years and more. Liuthprandus
Ticinensis li. 2. Dap. 13. rerum per Europam gestarum. It is easy to se by
this open experiment, that she and her.ij. daughters might do much in the
holy college of cardynalles. whores rule all.
He that judges not that church to be whoryshe, which was so depelye under
the rule of whores, that they at their pleasure might appoint thereunto what
head rulers they would, has little good judgment in him, I think.

A popes bastard is made pope
GVido the marquis of Thuscia, Guido and Mazozia.
at the lattre married Pope Sergius whore Marozia. Which willing to prefer
unto Saint Peter's seat, the bastard whom she had by the said Pope, caused him
to enpryson her mothers dear peramoure Johan the.x. and to stop up his
breathe with a pyllowe. Immedyatlye after, which was the year of our
Lord.DCCCC. and xxix. 929
was he constytute pope, and called Ioha^ the xi. Ioa^. xi
but the same self year he was deposed again. Whereupon she clerly left all
spirytuall occupyenge, and in displeasure of the prelates, married her self
love after her husbands death to one hugh the King of Italye, Hugo rex
Italy.
which was her other husbands brother by the mothers side, and made him the
monarke of Rome to recover again this lost dignyte for her bastard. Thus
showed she her self to be a plain Herodias, besides her other unshamefast
whoredoms in the spity^^^ (...) This holy successor of Peter and vy^car of
Christ (as they call popes) was accused of his Cardynalles and Bishops unto
the Emprour Otho in the general Synod at Rome, that he would say no service,
Synodus Rome.
he massed without consecracyon, he gave holy orders in his stable, he made
boys Bishops for money, he would never bless himself, he forced not to be
perjured, and made the holy palace of Laternense a very stews. For he kept
therein Raynerathe wife of him that was knight for his own body, rainera
and gave her great possessions, with benefyces, golden chalyces, and crosses.
He held also Stephana and her systre, Stephana
(which had been his fathers concubyne) and had by her a bastard not long
before. He occupied at his pleasure Anna a fresh wydowe, Anna
her daughter also and daughters daughter. He spared neither high nor low,
old nor young, poor nor rytche, fair nor foul (they said) so that no women
durst come unto Rome on pilgrimage in his time. Rome sacryfyce.
Neither reverenced he any place, but would do yt every where, yea, upon
their very aulters. He would hawke, hunte, dance,, leap, dyce, swear,
fight, riot, roune, straye abroad in the night breaking up doors and
wyndowes, and burn many mennys howses, One of his Cardynalles he gelded, He
might be chaste
he put out an others eyes which had been his godfather. Of some he borrowed an
hand, of some a tunge, a finger, a nose, an ear. In his dyce playnge would he
call upon ill spretes, and drink to the devil for love. Thus was he in the
end deposed, Their spirytuall father.
till his dear dyamo^des set hands unto yt (for they ruled all) and caused
the Romans to set him in again.

Dunstanes autoryte against married prestes.
THe papacye held this Ioha^ the.xij. Ioa^. xij.
for the space of.ix. years.iij. months, and.v. days, and was s^^ke^ of the
devil (they say) as he was lyenge in bed with a mannys wife, and so dyed
within.viij. days after without howsell or shrift, they say. All this writes
of him the foreseyd Liuthprandus Liuthpra^dus.
li. 6. Ca. 6. and so fourth.v. chapters more to the end almost of his book,
which at the same self time dwelt at Ticina in Italye. This is he of whom
the byworde rise, As myrye as Pope Johan. By word.
Unto this holy vycar of Satan and successor of Simon Magus, went Dunstane
out of England in the year of our lord. DCCCC. and.lx. 960.
to be co^fyrmed archebyshop of Caunterburye. Dunstanus.
And there received therewith for a great sum of money, autoryte and power of
the Beast, Apoca. 13. utterly to dyssolue prestes marriage, that his monks by
that means, might possess the cathedral churches of England, as within a
while after they ded. This Dunstane (as witnesses Ioha^ Capgraue) was the
first that in this realm compelled men and women to vow chastyte and to keep
claustrale obedyence, the first compulsyon.
against the fre doctrine of Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 7. et Gala. 5. Forbyddynge
marryage instytuted of God, which is the very doctrine of devils. Foundacyon
of chastyte
1. Timoth. 4 This is the worthy orygynall and first foundacyon of monks and
prestes professed chastyte in England. mark yt with the sequel, and tell me
herafter, whether yt be of the devil or nay.

Dunstane executes his deuylyshe commyssyon.
This craftye merchaunde Du^stane, The deuyls co^myssyoner.
as he was returned again into England, by autoryte of this most execrable
monstre and wicked Antichrist, gave a straight commandment that prestes out
of hand should put away their lawful wives (who^ that bre^t consepenced
hypocryte called the vessels of fornycacyon) else would he (he said) according
to his commyssyon, A thief
put them both from benefyce and living. And where as he perceived the
benefyces most welthye, there was he most gredye upon them, and showed most
vyolence and tyranny. For when the high deanes of cathedral churches, A
tyrant.
masters of colleges, prebendes, persons, and vycars would not at so beastly a
commandment, leave their wives and children so desolate without all natural
order, he got unto him the great power of king Edgare, King Edgare
to assyst that creull commyssyon of his, procured for money of the former
Antichrist of Rome, and by force thereof in many places most tyrannouslye
expelled them. Ioa^nes Capgraue in Catalogo sanctorum Anglie. Read all the
Bible and Chronycles over, of Nemroth, Pharao, Antiochus, Nero, Decius,
Traianus, with other like, Tyranny spirytuall.
and I think, ye shall not find a more tyrannouse example. No, not in cruel
Herod his self. For though he slew the innocent babes, yet demynyshed he not
the living of the fathers and mothers, but this tyrant took all with him. If
he had sought a Godly reformacyon where marryage was abused, yt had been
sumwhat commendable. But his hunting was to destroy yt all together, Marriage
conde^pned.
as an horrible vice in prestes, and in place thereof to set up Sodom and
Gomor by a sort of Hypocryte monks, so changynge all godly order.

King Edgare is brought under thereby.
THus bycame the face, first of the Brytonysh and than of the Englysh church
sore changed, Facies ecclesiarum.
blemyshed, and by whorysh commyssyons from the whorysh bishops of the
whorysh Synagoge of Rome, was made all together whoryshe. Prove me herin a liar
and an heretyke if ye can, for I will, by the help of God, stand by that I
write here to the end of my life. If ye can not (I speak only to you
papystycall bishops and prestes) grant your selves to be the most thieves,
heretykes, Heretykes and thieves.
and seducers of the people, that ever yet reigned upon the earth, for
maynteynynge for holiness so deuylysh a knauerye. Immedyatlye after this be
fell a sore chance, as God walde. King Edgare which was ever a great whore
mastre and a tyraunte (as the Chronycles report him) had a do with a young
maid called wilfrith, wilfrith
brought up in the nondrye of wylton (parauenture to their use) whereupon by
force of the former commyssyon, he was condemned of Dunstane to.vij. years
penance, and might in no wise be dyspensed with, Penance.
till he had builded for their commodyte the great nondrye of Shaftesburye
with.xij. other monasteryes besides. Specyallye till he had fullye granted to
the utter condempnacyon of prestes marriage through out all his realm, and
fyrmelye promised to put the monks in their rowmes in the great cathedral
churches, An apyshe liaue
writynge to the pope for the same. For as witnesses both Vuyllyam of
Malmesburye, Ranulph of Chestre, Guido de columna, and Robert sabyane, he was
not crowned till the.xij. year of his reign.

Dunstane fashyoneth the king to his purpose.
IN the end, this aduoutrye of the king made greatly for their purpose. For
when yt was ones openly known, Dunstane with his Bulle went by and by unto
him, and by force thereof denounced him accursed. The beasts autoryte.
The king of gentylnesse, as he was coming toward him, arose out of his
regal seat to take him by the hand and give him place. The hystorye says,
that he than dysdayned to give him his hand. And lokynge upon him with bend
brows and most spyghtfull countenaunte, he said thus unto him. Thu that have
not feared to corrupt a vyrgyne made handefast to Christ, A proud knave
presumest to towche (a knave) the consecrate hands of a bishop? Thu have
defiled the spowse of thy maker (a monks wanton) and thynkest by flattering
service, to pacyfye (a (...) But what matter makes yt which of them yt was,
when all they are allowed now for canonysed Saints in the popes whoryshe
church. All saints
Yea, the whoremonger, the whore, the whoryshe bastard and all, to set
whoryshnesse forewarde and make yt apere holy, where marryage is thought
unholy. And as for the mother of Edward, The mother.
Johan Hardynge names her Elflede, Polydorus Elfrede, Wyllyam of Malmesburye,
Ranulphe, and Fabyane calls her whyght Egelflede, and Caxton dare give her no
name, and therefore the matter is doubtful. Dunstane.
As Dunstane was on a time hallowynge of a church in the honor of Saint
devil, saint Deuys I should say, he beheld the right thombe of the foreseyd
Edithe, Editha.
tha^ being abbess of wylton, as she was crossynge and blessing her forhead.
And much delyghtynge therein, he took yt in his hand, and said. Never might
this thombe peryshe. Immedyatlye after he being at Mass and dolouroussye
weeping, said unto the deacon that served him. Alas this floryshynge flower
will fade, Great love showed.
this redole^t rose will be gone, this dayntye Dyamonde will peryshe, this
sweet bird will away for ever. And after her death he found all her body
resolved into ashes, except that thombe and the secret part under her bellye,
for those.ij. parts of her, he had blessed before. In deed he was very homelye
to search so far. A narrow sercher.
But the cause of this (they say) she afterward declared unto him in a
secret vysyon. This storye shows Vuillya^ of Malmesburye. li. 2. de
pontificibus. Ranulphus in polychronico, li. 6. Ca. 9. Vincencius, li. 25. Ca.
33. Antoninus. par. 2. ti. 16. Ca. 8 Johannes Capgraue in uita Edithe.

Kings become th Beasts Images.
When King Edgare had ones performed his.vij. Edgare
years penance for his aduowterye with fair Wilfrith (whom Du^stane
paraue^ture prepared for his own store) he became altogyther the dumme Image
of the Beast, Imago Bestie.
and might not utter from thens fourth, but as they gave him sprete. Apo. i^.
Than caused they him to call a general counsel (at London some say) in the
year of our lord Synodus.
.DCCCC. and.lxix. 969
by the ungracious autoryte of the aforeseyd pope Johan. And there was yt
fullye enacted, and establyshed for a law ever to endure, that all canons of
cathedral churches, collygeners, persons, curates, vycars, prestes, deacons,
An Act for sodom.
and subdeacons should either live chaste, that is to say, become Sodomytes (for
that has been their chastyte ever sens) or else be suspended from all
spirytuall iurysdyccyon. This more than Pharaonycall constytucyo^, Tyranny.
was the king sworn to aid, maynteyne, and defend with the materyall
sword, by the popes antoryte. Tha^ were there chosen out.ij. pryncypall
vysytours, Ethelwolde the Bishop of Wynchestre (that nest is ever ungracious)
and Oswalde the Bishop of Worcestre, both monks, to se this through out the
whole realm executed. Vysytours.
Vincencius li. 24. Cap. 83. Antoninus par. 2. li. 16. Cap. 6., Guilhelmus
Malmesburye, Ranulphus, Guido de columna, Joan Capgraue. et opus nouum De
utraque potestate. fo. 57.

Dunstane is accused of ill rule.
IN this counsel were some wise men (as all these writers witness, though yt
be sumwhat fayntly) which laid for their marryage the scripturs, For marriage.
and substancyallye proved themselves the maynteyners of virtue therein, and not
of aduouterye as they were there vncharytablye noted. But that would not serve
the^. The holy Ghost might in no wise prevail, Bulls
the popes bawdye bulls being in place, but they must needs have the
preferment, no remedy. An other sort were there which accused Dunstane of ill
rule in the dark. Dunstane accused
For Petrus Equilinus says in Catalogo Sanctorum li. 8. Ca. 49. that he was
put to his purgacyon of many things there laid against him. Of a lyekelyhode
therefore they had smelled out sumwhat that was not all to his spirytuall
honestye. Neither would these accusacyons help, the popes Power ones so
largelye publyshed. The king durst utter nothing that was against him, Edgare
for fear of new penance, and for as much as yt was well known that in the
time of his old penance he had occupied one mynyon at Wynchestre, an other at
Andouer, alfreda.
besides alfrede who^ he at the lattre got to wife by the craftye mourther of
her husband Ethelwolde an earl.

The king defends Dunstane and destroys wolves.
But to pacyfye and please this Dunstane, Oration ad cleru^
king Edgare in his oracyon there to the clergy, rebuked the prestes very
sore, for banketynge with their wives, for slacknesse of their mass saynges,
for pretermyttynge their canonycall hours, for their crowns shauynges with
their vnprestlye aparellynges, and soche other like. More over he alleged unto
the^ in the said oracyon the lamentable complayntes (good knauerye I wara^de
you) of his fathers soul aperynge to Dunstane, Knauerye.
and reprouynge the wanto^ behauer of the prestes with their wives. He also
told them, in repressynge their former accusementes, that (...) by his
peramoure Stephana) of his breames and vysyons for the time of his progress,
Stephana
desyeryng his power against the prestes also, with many other wonders.
Ioha^nes Capgraue in Catal. Guilhelmus Malmesburye, Vincencius, Antoninus,
Ranulphus, Guido de columna* et Polydorus.

Oswalde with his Beastlye autoryte.
ON the other side went Oswalde with his autoryte from that wicked counsel,
Oswaldus magus.
which had stodyed necromancye with other vnpure scye^ces at floryake besides
Orleaunce in france, where he was first made monk, and afterward in England
bycame bishop of Worcestre. Floria^us.
This fellawe so well armed with deceytes as ever were Pharaoes sorcerers, was
thought a man mete to deceive with lyenge signs the common sort. So trudged he
fourth with his craftye ca^kynges, and first expelled the Canons of the
cathedral church of worcestre with their careful wives and children, Prestes
expelled
and out of.vij. other churches more within that his dyoces, and there placed
for them the laysye lean locustes, which not long before had leaped out of the
bottomless pytt. Apoca. 9. Apoc. 9
the monks which at that time were bare and nedye. Tha^ went he farther
abroad, and wrought there like masteryes, whereof England hathdepelye felt ever
sens. His suggestyons were like the other, a color
as that the prestes lived wantonlye, and would not mass in due form. For his
travail in this, was he made archebyshop of York by the labor of Dunstane.
To tell his other feats yt would axe to much time, and therefore I pass yt
over. iij. false knaves.
These.ij. promoted the said Du^stane above all other, as men having most
wylye crafts, to assyst him in his business. These.iij. Monks brought the
Kings so under, that they had than all the realm at their pleasures. Ioannes
Capgraue, Malmesburye, Vincencius, Antoninus, Ranulphus, Guido de Columna, et
Polydorus.

Dunstane makes a King at his pleasure.
AFter the decease of King Edgare, in the year of our lord. DCCCC. and.lxxv.
975.
was a wonderful varyete and scysme through out the whole realm, Scisma
partlye for him that next should succeed King, and partlye for the great
iniurye done to the married prestes. Alpherus.
The queen Alfrede with Alpherus the duke of Mercia and other great lords
fauorynge her quarrel world needs have Ethelrede King which was her son by
Edgare, Ethelredus.
on the one side. Dunstane and his mo^kyshe bishops with the earl and
Eastsexe and serten other lords (...) part both of the nobles and commons,
judged the prestes to have great wrong, and sought every where by all means
possible, Ba^kare, sir monk.
to bring them again to their old possessyo^s and dygnytees. Yea, sum where
with good ernest blows and buffettes. Robertus Fabyane cum antedictis
Autoribus.

Dunstane makes an Idol to speak.
This caused Dunstane in the year of our lord.DCCCC. and lxxv. 975.
to call an other solemn counsel. Synodus.
But that was where they thought themselves most strong, and might best do
their feats, at Wynchestre. Where after great words had between the duke of
March and the earl of Eastsexe (which were than appointed as arbyters)
Dunstane perceiving all to go with the prestes, brought fourth his former
commyssyo^, Co^myssyon.
thinking thereby to stop their mouths. And when that would not serve, they
sought out a practyse of the old Idolatrouse prestes, which were wont to make
their Idolles to speak, by the art of Necromancye, wherein the monks were in
those days expert. A roode there was upon the frayter wall in the monasterye
where the counsel was holde^, Aroode
and (as Vynce^t and Antoninus testyfyeth) Dunstane required the^ all to pray
thereunto, which was not tha^ ignoraunte of that spirytuall prouysyon. Knauerye.
In the mids of their prayer, the roode spoke these words, or else a knave
monk behind him in a truncke through the wall, as Bonyface ded after for the
papacye of Celestyne. God forbid (says he) ye should change this order taken.
The roode speaks.
Ye should not do well, now to alter yt. Take Dunstanes ways unto ye, for they
are the best. At this work of the devil all they were astoyned, that knew
not thereof the craftye co^ueyaunce. If this were not clean legerdemayne, tell
me. Oh, that there was not a Ioha^ Boanerges at that time, to prove the spretes
of that workema^shyp. 1. Joan. 4. 1. Ioa^. 4
If there had been but one Thomas Cromwell, Thomas cro^well.
they had not so clerelye escaped with that knauerye. Polydorus Vergilius,
which allows the^ in many other lewd points, smelled out their bouerye in
this, and reports diverse other to do the same at the day.

That Idol is crowned King of England.
IN remembrance of this knauerye (miracle, they say) were afterward written
upon the wall under that roodes fete, Verses
these verses following.

Humano more, crux presens edidit ore,
Coelitus affata, que perspicis hic subarata,
Absit ut hoc fiat, et cetera tunc memorata.
With lie and all. Capgraue.
Whom Johan Capgraue reports that he se there more tha^ CCCC. years after,
the roode translated from thens into the church for his miracles sake. About
the year of our lord a. M. and.xxxvi. 1036.
as king Canutus being at Southampton was boasted of one of his knights to
be the great lord of the sea, Canutus
he thought to prove yt by a commandment of obedyence. And as he well
perceived that yt would obey him in no point, The crown.
he took the crown from his own head, acknowlegynge that there was a lord
much higher and of more power tha^ himself was. And therefore he promised never
more to wear yt, but to render yt up unto him for ever. With that, Egelnothus.
Egelnothus than archebyshopp of Caunterburye, infourmed him of this roode
which had dysolued prestes matrymonye and done many other great miracles.
Which provoked him anon after to go to Wynchestre, and to resign unto him his
regal crown, co^stytutynge him than king of this real me. An Idol made king.
Was not this (think you) good wholesome counsel of this Idolouse bishop.
Zacha. 11. if a man had need of yt? A plain token is yt that they were tha^
the Images of the Beast. Image of the Beast.
Apoca. 13. and no godly governors, yea, very Idolles (...) no kings, that
were under soche ghostly fathers. Henricus Huntyngtonensis Archidia conus. li.
6. Ranulphus li. 6. Ca. 20. Fabianus. li. 1. Ca. 206. et Polydorus li. 7. with
other autours more.

An example of Claustrall virgynyte.
MArianus Scotus and serten other writers besides, do testyfye in their
Chronycles, that when this Canutus could have no fruit by his wife Elgyne of
hampton, Canutus Elgius.
and was not througlye contented therewith. She fearing that he should either
cast her up, or else resort to some other, got her among relygyouse chaste
women, to know what good chere was among them. And anon she found one to her
mind, Clanstrall chastyte
which was bygge with child by a monk, not withstanding the great chastyte
that was boasted afort. But Marianus says, she was a presbyteresse or a
prestes ^e^^an, to save the honor of that order, because he was a monk his
self. Algyne bad this nonne be of good chere, and if she would agree unto her,
yt should be to her great honor. A monks bastard.
But yt must (she said) be kept wonderfully close. Immedyatlye after the queen
feigned herself to be great with child, and by the conueyaunce of a mother. B.
going betwixt them both, as the time appointed of labourynge, she was
delivered of the nonnes child, making the king to be leave yt was his, to no
small rejoice of them both. Sweno
This child was called Sweno, and the year before Canutus dyed, was constytute
king of Norweye. Some writers have thought that Heraldus the first (which
after succeeded king of England) to come fourth also the same way, Heraldus.
and his own brother hard Canutus report yt not far otherwise. Ranulphus
li 6. Ca. 20. cum ceteris autoribus.

Dunstane dysputeth with sorcerye and murder.
NOw let us return unto Du^stane again. Dunstanus.
Though the aforesaid controuersye between the prestes and the mo^nkes ceased
for a time, by reason of their legerdemayne in the roode, Knauerye.
yet was yt not all fynyshed. For some men of wisdom there were in those
days, which smelled somewhat (as Polydorus reports) judging yt to be as yt
was in deed, very subtyle knauerye. And playnelye Ranulphus says, that the
spech came from the wall. Mark yt bardelye. Whereupon Alpherus the duke of
March with his company, Alpherus.
in the year following (which was from Christ's incarnacyon.DCCCC.
and.lxxvi.) 976.
sent into Scotland for a certain learned Bishop, a learned bishop.
which was known both eloquent and wytty, to dys^^^te the matter with the^.
Than was the place appointed in a street or vyllage of the Kings, called
Calua, for they trusted no more close howses in the monasteryes. And when the
Bishop had laid for the married prestes soche invyncyble scripturs, Dunstane
an ass.
reasone, and arguments as Dunstane and his dodypoll monks were not albe to
avoid, the blind ass had non other shyft but to lay these faynte excuses
for himself. As that he was an aged man, sore broken in the labors of holy
church, and that he had at that time given over all stodye, A blind beast
and only addycted himself unto prayer. But for as much (he said) as they
would not leave the dysquyetynge of him, but still vex him with old
quarellynges, they might well seem to have the vyctorye, yet should they not
have their minds. And with that he arose in a great furye, for a color
committing his cause unto Christ, A lymme of the devil.
but he set the Devil by his necromancye to work. For so sone as he was
gone, with soche as yt pleased his pontyfycall pleasure to call with him,
suddenly (says Fabyane, Antonyne, Vyncent, and Johan Capgraue) the ioystes of
the loft failed, and they that were under yt, peryshed there.

Dunstanes prouysyon in England for Satan.
THus have this most cruel and wicked generacyon contynuallye builded their
synnefull Syon in blood. Michee. 3. Mich. 3
and are not yet ashamed of these their manifest knaueryes. For these belly
founders, thieves, and mourtherers of theirs yet advance they for their
princypall Saints. saints
And wha^ their feastfull days come, they are yet in the papystych churches of
England with no small sole^pnyte, mattensed, ^assed, candeled, lyghted,
processyoned, sense^, smoked, perfumed, and worshypped, the people brought in
believe, that the latyne reading of their wretched acts there in their
legendes, is Gods dyuyne service, Gods service.
being without fail the most dampnable service of the devil. Like as holy
Johan Baptyst by preaching repentance, prepared a plain pathwaye, to Christ
and his kyngedome, Luce. 3. So ded this unholy Dunstane by sowynge of all
superstycyons, Precursor Antichristi.
make redye the way to Satan and his filthy kyngedome against his coming
fourth from the bottomless pytt, after the full thousand of years from
Christ's incarnacyon. Apoca. 20. Apo. 20 Miracles.
which is the sprete of Antichrist, He raised up in England the pestylent
order of monks, he builded them monasteryes, he procured them substance
innumerable, finally he brought into their hands the cathedral churches with
the free eleccyon of bishops, that nothing should there be done within that
realm, but after their lust and pleasure. Tha^ was Christ's kyngedome clerelye
put a side, and his immaculate spouse, or church upon his word only
dependynge, The church Apo. 12.
compelled to flee into the desert. Apoca. 12. Men and women that ryghtlye
believed, durst not than confess their faith, but kept all close within them.
For than was Satan abroad, Satan
these monks every where assystynge him in the fournyshynge out of that
proud painted church of Antichrist. Superstycyon, hypocresye, and vain
glory, were before that time soche vices as men were glad to hyde, Vices.
but now in their gaudyshe ceremonies, they were taken for Gods dyuyne service.

Signs and plages following these myschefes.
But now se what followed of these before rehearsed myscheues. In the year of our
lord.DCCCC. and lxxxviij. 988
(which was the.xij. year before that full thousand) departed this Dunstane,
a swarm of deuyls freque^tynge his tumbe, Deuyls.
as I shall in the next book she we more playnelye. Within the same year
appeared a bloodye cloud in the sky, A bloodye cloud.
which covered all England, as witnesses Ioha^ Hardinge with diverse other
Chronyclers, and yt rayned blood over all the land. Danes.
After that entered the Danes so fast (says Ranulphe) at every port, that no
where was the English nacyon able to withstand them. And the monks to help
the matter well forewarde, by counsel of their Archebyshop Siricius, Siricius.
gave them.x. thousand pound to begin with, that they might live in rest and
not be hyndered. For little cared they what became of the reest, so their
precyouse bodies were safe. After this by diverse compulsyons they augmented
that sum, from.x. to.xvi. to.xx. to.xxiiij. to.xxx. and so fourth till they
came to the sharp payment of.xl. thousand pound, Monks were Englandes
destruccyon.
and till they had no more money to give. The Danes stregthned.
For the more the Danes had, the more couetouse and cruel they were evermore.
Thus ded they to the land innumerable harm, in seeking their own pryuate
commodyte, and so brought their own natyue people in most miserable thraldom.
For by that means were the Danes made strong, and the English nacyon bycame
feeble and weak, yea, so wretched at the last, that they were feign to call
every vile slave among the seyde Danes, Lord Dane.
their good lord. But now mark the end concerning these monks. In the
year of our lord a thousand and.xij which was the.xxiiij. 1012.
year from Dunstanes departing. and the.xij. from the deuyls going fourth,
the Danes after many great vyctoryes within the realm, Cao^terburye.
fyered the city of Caunterburye and enprisoned the Archebyshopp than
Elphegus. Elphegus.
And as he and his monks were able to give no more money, they tythed the^
after this sort. They slew always.ix. and reserved the tenth to perpetual
sorrow and seruytude, till they had mourthered of them to the no^bre of more
tha^ ix. Tythynges.
hundred, there and in other quarters abroad. And the most part of them they
hynge up by the members, A just Plage.
which was a plain sygnyfycacyon, that plage to come than upon them for their
Sodometrye and most vyolent contempt of christen marryage. Ranulphus Cestrensis
li. 6. Ca. 13. et. 15. Fabianus Par. 1. Cap. 199.

The Conclusyon of this first book.
HEre have I painted out before your eyes (most derelye beloved contreye me^)
the chaste, Extent of this book
holy, consecrate, and spiritual acts of your English votaryes, prestes,
Monks, and Bishops, from the worlds beginning, to a full complete
thousand years sens Christ's incarnacyon. Not all have I here rehearsed, for
that were a labor without end, they being so innumerable, but a serten of
them for every age, that ye may by them perceive what the rest has been. The
other book.
In the next part or book, which shall begin at Satan's going fourth at
large, after his thousand years tyenge up. Apoca. 20. and so continue to this
year of our Lord a.MD. and.xlvi. 1546.
that ye may know what chere has been among them, what occupyenge they have
had, what masteryes they have played, and what miracles they have done, for
that time and space also. I think yt will apere an other manner of thing, than
that which has gone before. Satan at large
For so much as Satan their ghostlye gouernoure has for that time wrought
most strongelye. No More will I be ashamed to rehearse their filthy factes (let
them trust upon yt) than they have been to do them in effect, and to set them
fourth for holy, spirytuall, consecrate, chaste, honorable, Good works
and ghostlye good works, being abhomynable and most stynkynge knaueryes.

The world shall well know what Sodomytes and Deuyls they are, Sodomites.
that have all this time contempned christen marryage instytuted of God, and do
not yet repent their most dampnable doings in that behalf, but continue still
the saint, leadynge their lives in unspeakable fleshlye fylthynesse. Christ
promised ones to all soche as they are, that all their hydden myscheues should
come to light, if they would not at the call of his most holy Gospel, repent.
Nothing (says he) is so closelye hydden among those spirytual murderers,
but will be clearly opened, neither yet so secretlye covered, but shall apere
manifest and be known to the world. Math. 10. Mat. 10
Marci. 4. Mar. 4.
Luce. 12. Christ suffered very long the Pharysees and Bishops, Luc. 12*
the lewd predecessors of our proud spirytualte. But when he ones perceived
non other in the^ but contempt of his veryte with wylfull resystaunce of the
holy Ghost, Christ rebukes.
he went fearcelye upon them with woe upon woe, calling them all that naught
was. As hypocrytes, dyssemblers, dodypolles, fools, blind beasts,
bellygoddes, scorners, false prophets, periures, vypers, serpents, deuourers,
rauenours, brybers, thieves, tyrauntes, murderers, and fire brandes of hell.

Look the.xxiij. chapter of Matthew, Mat. 23
and ye shall find that he poured all this upon them, and doubled yt in the
captyuyte of Jerusalem, when the great vengeance of all innocent blood light
greuouslye upon them. For in the syege of that city were slain by vespasianus
and Titus, Vespasianus et Titus
to the nombre of.x. hundred thousands of Iues. Not only of the inhabytauntes
of that regyon there, but from all quarters of the world about, which at that
time came thydre to their Eastre celebracyon. Besides there, were there led
fourth from thens captyue.xcvij. thousand, Captyues.
of whom some were sold to the Romans to become their contynuall servants
and slaves, and the resydue given unto the Lions and wild beasts, that they
should daily devour them and be fed with their flesh. All this witnesses
Egesippus Iudeus, li. 5. Ca. 49. De Hierosolimorum excidio. Example
And now after his most manifest example, Christ wylleth us also extremelye to
rebuke these cruel corrupters of the christyanyte, for their most spyghtfull
contempt of his wholesome warnynges, the Christen magistrates hereafter,
Magystrates.
or else some other enemy of theirs, following with double vengeance upon the
heads of them. Apoca. 18. This plage, when yt shall fall, as yt is not far
of, will be the most ryghtouse hand of God, upon the malygnaunte generacyon.

Great wondre will yt be unto many (I know yt well) to behold their chief
English saints thus rebuked. englysh Saints.
And paraue^ture they will think, that I might as well speak against Peter
and Johan, Paul and James, with the other Saints, Apostles and Martyrs of the
prymatyue church, as against these ungodly hypocrytes of theirs. But I tell
those men before hand, The Autour.
that they are wretchedlye blind, for want of lyuelye knowledge in the sacred
scripturs. They have no true judgment in them to dyscerne the fallen star,
stars.
from the star so fyermelye fixed in the fyrmame^t as never could be yet from
the^s removed. Never shall he that declyueth to mennys inuencyons, be all one
with him which only folowethe the pure word of God.

But undoubtedly of no small time, (...) great honor will yt now be to you
(yea, rather much greatter) to flee the sede of the Serpent by the word of
God, as ever yt was to Saint George that noble captain, Saint George
to slay the great hydre or Dragon at Silena, as Baptista Mantuanus specyfyeth.
I speak not this for that I would ye to fall upon that sort with materyall
weapon, but with the mighty strong word of the Lord. For as Esaye, Daniel,
and Paul reports, they shall be destroyed without hands. Esa. 11. Dani. 8.
et. 2. These. 2. Only is yt Gods true knowledge, What makes noble.
that nobleth you before him, be therefore no longar neglygent. An vnrecurable
dyshonoure were yt unto you, from hens fourth to be led blind field of these
bushardes in the dark. The most of you are all redye very plentuouslye
entered (that lord be praised) think him only blessed which perseuereth to
the end. Having the governance of Christ's dear heritage, Laws.
draw not your laws out of Antichrists rules now that ye know Christ's
wholesome doctrine. Doctrine.
Neither yet fatche the bread that ye shall feade your commons with, out of
his bawdye beggerlye bowgettes, but let them have the pure purueaunce of God
out of the undefiled scripturs. Be ones so merciful to that christen flock,
that ye clerelye deliver them from that vile generacyon, Let them no longer
worship deuyls as they have done, in these dead monks and thieves, deuyls.
but let the^ look frelye toward their eternal and living God, both to
their sowles health and yours. Amen.

Thus ends the first part of this work, called. The Acts of English
votaryes. Collected by Johan Bale. Anno. 1546.
The Autours names both English and other, out of whom this present Book is
collected.
Abbas Vrspergensis. Achilles Pyrminius. Alphonsus de Castro.
Alphredusbeu^rlace^sis Amandus Zierixensis. Antoninus Flore^tinus. Baptista
Platina. Baptista Mantuanus. Bartholomeus Anglus. Bedas Girnuinus. Bernardus
Lutze^burg Berosus Chaldeus. Biblia Sacra. Blondus Flauius. Caius Julius.
Christianus Masseus. Cleme^s Alexandrinus. Colfridus Abbas. Conradus Gesnerus.
Cornelius Tacitus. De utraque Potestate. Diodorus Siculus. Edgari Oration.
Egesippus Iudeus. Epiphanius Cyprius. Eusebius Cesariensis. Festiuale
Sacerdotum. Flores Historiarum. Franciscus La^bertus. Freculphus lexouie^sis.
Galfredus Monemutensis. Ge^nadius Massilie^sis. Georgius Joy. Gorgius
Vuicelius. Gildas Britannus. Giraldus Cambrensis. Guido de Columna. Guilhelmus
Malmesburiensis. Guilhelmus Caxton. Guilhelmus Tyndale. Guilhelmus Turner.
Hartmannus Shedel. Hector Boethius. Helina^dus Monachus. Henricus
Huntyngtonensis. Hema^nus Contractus. Herma^nus Torre^tinus Honorius
Augustudunensis. Iacobus Vorago. Iacobus Bergomas. Iacobus Zieglerus. Iodocus
Badius. Ioannes Capgraue. Ioannes Hardyng. Ioannes Stella. Ioannes de Molinis.
Ioannes Annius. Ioannes Nauclerus. Ioannes Lydgate. Ioannes Textor. Ioannes
Tritemius. Ioannes Pomeranus. Ioannes Carrion. Ioannes Mayor. Ioannes Lelandus.
Isidorus hispalensis. Legendariu^ Ecclesie. Liuthprandus Ticine^sis. Marcus
Sabellicus. Marianus Scotus. Martinus Carsulanus. Martinus Lutherus. Matheus
Palmarius. Merlinus Ambrosius. Michael Ricius. Nauclerus, Ioannes. Nennius
Britannus. Odo Cluniacensis. Osbertus Ca^tuarie^sis. Osuualdus Myconius. Otto
Phrisingensis. Paulus Orosius. Paulus Aemilius. Paulus Constantinus. Petrus
Equilinus. Philippus Mela^chton. Plinius Secundus. Polycrates Ephesius.
Polydorus Vergilius. Pomponius Mela. Prosper Aquitannus. Ptolomeus Lucensis.
Ranulphus Cestrensis. Raphael Volateranus Robertus Fabyane. Robertus Barnes.
Sigebertus Ge^blace^sis. Strabo Cretensis. Thomas Braduuardin Thomas Vualden.
Thomas Scrop. Vince^cius Beluace^sis. Vtraque potestas. VVernerus Cartusiensis.
VVilibaldus Anglus.
Finis.
The holy Ghost shall rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghtousnesse, and of
judgment.

Joan. 16. Into the new Jerusalem shall enter no unclean thing, neither
that which works abhomynacyon, nor yet what makes lies. But they only which
are written in the lambs book of life.

Apoca. 21. The man of sin shall be opened, before the Lords coming, even
the son of perdycyon, which is an aduersarye, and is exalted above all that
is called God, whom he shall consume with the sprete of his mouth.

2. These. 2. Printed at Wesel In the Year Of our Lord God. 1. 5. 4. 6.


